MAN IS KILLED IN MYSTERIOUS EXPLOSION IN VILLAGE
LEAD: A 35-year-old garage mechanic was killed last night in a mysterious explosion and fire in a taxi cab repair shop in Greenwich Village, the police said.


MONTANA AIRCRAFT CRASHES IN CANYON
LEAD: A small plane crashed in a canyon today while searching for another plane that went down Sunday with a Dallas bank president and three other Texans aboard, a state aviation official said.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Mobil Corporation is offering $200 million of 8 5/8 percent notes, due in 1994, at a price of 99.209 to yield 8.712 percent, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Revolution 1987, Soviet Style
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev means to make a new revolution in the Soviet Union.
There should be no doubt about that now.
Last week he announced plans to partially dismantle central planning and radically reform the subsidized pricing system.
These have been at the heart of the Stalinist command economy.
If pursued with vigor, these goals will entail a political turning inward, perhaps away from distracting additional challenges to Western interests.


Factory Orders Unchanged
LEAD: Orders for factory goods were unchanged in May despite strength in civilian categories, the Commerce Department reported today.


New Leadership Begins For Moseley Securities
LEAD: The Moseley Securities Corporation is getting new leadership amid conflicting reports of disagreement among top executives over what direction the firm should take.


GARBAGE STRIKE AVERTED WHEN PACT IS EXTENDED
LEAD: A strike by the International Brotherhood of Teamsters against 135 garbage collection companies in 13 of New Jersey's 21 counties was averted today by an agreement to extend an existing contract on a day-to-day basis.


Pessimism Sends Dow Down 28.38
LEAD: The stock market gave in to growing pessimism yesterday and retreated sharply.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 28.38 points, to 2,418.53.


U.S. Again Bars Rail Merger
LEAD: The Government refused yesterday to allow a merger of the Santa Fe and Southern Pacific railroads, ending a tortured chapter in takeover history.


MOSQUITOES CAN CARRY AIDS VIRUS BUT NOT PASS IT ON, STUDY SAYS
LEAD: A study by scientists collaborating with the National Cancer Institute has found that mosquitoes can retain the AIDS virus in their bodies for two or three days after ingesting infected blood, according to an insect expert associated with the study.


Technologies Gets Bids on Essex Unit
LEAD: The United Technologies Corporation said yesterday that it was evaluating offers for some of the operations of its Essex International Inc. subsidiary.


Crowd of 40 Seizes Rape Suspect
LEAD: A suspected rapist armed with a hunting knife was chased down, encircled and captured by 40 residents of the Inwood section of Manhattan late last night after he attacked a woman in an elevator, the police said.


SHIITES SAY 2 LIVE U.S. HOSTAGES HAVE BEEN SENT TO IRAN FOR TRIAL
LEAD: Shiite Moslems here say that two American hostages have been shipped to Iran, apparently to face a revolutionary court.


FILM: 'BABY-SITTING'
LEAD: IMAGINE the terrors that await nice kids from an affluent suburb when a series of mishaps forces them to visit downtown Chicago at night, with no better chaperone than their feisty blond baby sitter.
This is what ''Adventures in Baby-Sitting,'' which opens today at the Baronet and other theaters, asks its audience to do.


PICK AN ANSWER
LEAD: As part of their pursuit of fame, recognition and corporate contributions, Washington-based research organizations, i.e. think tanks, urge their scholars to stand ready to comment on major events.
But it appears that no commentators for the American Enterprise Institute were quoted, presumably because they were not available, on June 2 when Paul Volcker said he would be leaving his post as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and Alan


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.63
6.68
6.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.67
5.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.89
6.02
5.96
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.23
8.19
7.32
30-YR.


OFFER CITED IN 'PHANTOM' CAST DISPUTE
LEAD: Negotiations between the Actors' Equity Association and the producers of ''Phantom of the Opera'' continued yesterday following a meeting of the union's governing council.
The council authorized Alan Eisenberg, executive secretary of the union, to offer the producers terms under which Sarah Brightman, a British actress, would be allowed to re-create her role in the musical on Broadway in the fall, according to a source close to the meeting.


FETAL TISSUE IMPLANTS IN BRAIN SEEN
LEAD: Scientists at a conference here today said that they expected to experiment soon with transplanting fetal tissue, either animal or human, into patients' brains to replace the destroyed cells that account for Parkinson's disease.


N.C.A.A. SESSION REBUFFS PRESIDENTS
LEAD: College sports officials who oppose major changes in their programs showed their strength here today, defeating or deferring action on virtually every significant measure sought by a group of university presidents.


Bus Line Maligned
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


WASHINGTON TALK: THE SENATE
LEAD: It may be an unlikely issue for one of the few Senators who is not a parent.
But Christopher J. Dodd is emerging as a leading spokesman in Congress on families and children.


Oil Trading Is Jittery Over Mideast Concerns
LEAD: Oil futures fluttered nervously yesterday on concerns about deepening United States involvement in the Middle East.


DAVILA ENTERS PROTEST
LEAD: Albert Davila was ahead on points on all three scorecards before he lost his bid for the North American Boxing Federation and California state bantamweight titles last Saturday because of a cut that he said came from a head butt by his opponent.
Now he has officially protested the decision that declared Frankie


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A report in the Finance/New Issues column of Business Day yesterday, about new bonds sold by the Centel Corporation, misstated their maturity.
It is 31 years.


C.O.M.B. Plans Merger
LEAD: The C.O.M.B.
Company and the Cable Value Network video shopping concern announced a definitive agreement to merge.
C.O.M.B., which owns 50 percent of the network, would acquire the remaining interest in exchange for warrants to buy C.O.M.B. stock worth $289 million.
The merged company will be called CVN Companies.


CONCERT: CHAMBER MUSIC
LEAD: IN contrast to the ordered predictabilities of so many concerts like it, For the Love of Music's afternoon of chamber music at Merkin Concert Hall on Sunday came across as a kind of vivid urban sprawl.
There were both the unexpected pleasures and the descents into junkiness one expects in such a neighborhood.


ARTISTRY, SPUN OF SUGAR AND GREAT LOVE
LEAD: ONCE, Serge Georges Sender made a birthday cake for Margot Fonteyn that had the ballerina at its center, sitting in a chariot surrounded by sugar swans and marzipan flowers.
He has reproduced a life-size Balenciaga evening dress, in sugar, right down to the lace trimming.


Senate Backs Import Ban in Soviet Trade Deal
LEAD: The Senate overwhelmingly approved import penalties tonight for the Japanese and Norwegian companies that diverted sophisticated propeller-milling equipment to the Soviet Union, enabling the Russians to make quieter submarines.


House Resists Razing Of Embassy in Moscow
LEAD: The House today rejected a Senate call to tear down the United States Embassy in Moscow, instead freezing the project until November while an alternative plan is developed for the electronically bugged diplomatic post.


TURMOIL AT WORLD BANK
LEAD: Whatever popularity former Representative Barber Conable Jr., a Republican from New York, brought to the presidency of the World Bank seems to be eroding by the day.
Mr.Conable is well along with his cost-saving plan to release 10 percent of the bank's staff of 6,000, and, predictably, some of those 10 percent look unkindly toward Mr.


SOUTH KOREAN CHIEF AGREES TO DIRECT PRESIDENTIAL VOTE AND A DEMOCRATIC 'NEW ERA'
LEAD: President Chun Doo Hwan approved sweeping democratic changes today, including direct presidential elections, and said he hopes they would usher in ''a new era of democratic development and mature politics.''


FILM: 'INNERSPACE,' A COMIC FANTASY
LEAD: WHEN Mel Brooks, in his current ''Spaceballs,'' refers to a planned sequel called ''Spaceballs II: The Search for More Money,'' he is more or less joking.
When the makers of ''Innerspace'' leave their film without a real ending, and instead with a plug for the sequel that has apparently been planned, they are not.


OF BIKES AND SELLING STAMPS AND CALORIES AND KINGS
LEAD: Several times a week, as dusk approaches, a startling apparition emerges from the royal palace on a blue bicycle with an extra-wide seat.


THEATER: 'PERFECT CRIME'
LEAD: WARREN MANZI has the makings of a crackling thriller in ''Perfect Crime,'' playing at the Courtyard Theater.
Its tension holds tight even while it ridicules conventions of the genre.


Farmers' Prices Up
LEAD: The prices that farmers received for raw products in June rose 1.6 percent from May and averaged 8.3 percent more than a year ago, the Agriculture Department said today.


Columbia Arts School Selects a New Dean
LEAD: The Columbia University School of the Arts has named Peter Smith to succeed Schuyler G. Chapin as its dean.
Mr.
Smith, director for 12 years of the Hopkins Center for the Creative and Performing Arts at Dartmouth College, will assume his duties on Sept. 1.


Chrysler Incentives
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation has extended indefinitely its program of buyer incentives, adding several new models but dropping conventionally sized pickup trucks.
The same schedule of low-rate financing will apply, a spokesman said, with the lowest rate of 3.7 percent for a loan of 24 months.
But the alternative cash rebate incentives range up to $750, compared with a maximum of $1,000 previously.


RECORD FIELD READY AT HENLEY
LEAD: The 143d rowing of the Henley Royal Regatta, which was first raced on this idyllic stretch of the Thames in 1839, begins Wednesday with a record entry of 371 crews, including a record 60 contenders from overseas.


EUROPEAN PARLEY BREAKS UP OVER FARM SUBSIDIES
LEAD: A meeting of Western European leaders broke up in disagreement tonight over plans to curb spending on farm subsidies, which are piling up huge surpluses of unwanted food.


COMINGS AND GOINGS
LEAD: Derrick Fenner of North Carolina, the leading rusher in the Atlantic Coast Conference last season, has been indicted by a grand jury in Prince George's County, Md., on murder and other charges connected to a killing May 23 believed to be part of a drug-sale conflict. . . .
Tom Shupe, associate athletic director at West Virginia the last five years, will be named athletic director at Wichita State today.


CITY COUNCIL ENDORSES BILL ON CORRUPTION
LEAD: An anti-corruption bill that would revoke the pensions of retired city officials convicted of crimes they committed while in office won unanimous endorsement yesterday by the New York City Council.


KOREA'S PRESS AWAITS THE PROMISED FREEDOM
LEAD: This country's tightly controlled newspaper editors thumbed their noses at their Government regulators the other day - they printed a picture of the opposition leader, Kim Dae Jung for the first time in more than two years.


BIRTHDAY JESTS AND GIBES FROM A MERRY M.F.K.
LEAD: THIS Friday, July 3, M. F. K. Fisher will celebrate her 79th birthday.
She is particularly happy about the date of her birth because, for one thing, it leads directly to one of her favorite stories.


GORBACHEV URGES EXPANSION OF FAMILY FARMS
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev has called for a sharp increase in small-scale family farming to provide more meat, vegetables and other food.
The move is seen here as a bid by the Soviet leader to buy time to get his sweeping economic reorganization under way.


Enact Workfare That Works
LEAD: In this year of ''new consensus'' on welfare reform, the Reagan Administration offers an old proposal: Extend workfare requirements to every able-bodied adult recipient of welfare.
The principle accords nicely with the consensus, but the Administration plan fails in its details.
Another plan in Congress holds greater promise.


BROOKLYN BOY, 7, IS CRUSHED WHILE PLAYING IN AN ELEVATOR
LEAD: A 7-year-old Brooklyn boy was fatally crushed while playing an an elevator car last night in the apartment building where he lived, the police reported.


Correction
LEAD: The Food Notes column on June 17 gave incorrect prices for dried fruit at Zabar's.
The prices were for a pound, not a half-pound.


WOMEN AND CONDOMS
LEAD: To The Living Section Anna Quindlen's Life in the 30's column on women and condoms  [ June 17 ]  reminded me of the mid-1970's, when I was counseling women on birth-control techniques.
I always touted the virtues of condoms coupled with a spermicide as an unbeatable method for birth control.
As a bonus, this method offered protection against sexually transmitted diseases.


In the Party Politics of Italy, Little Is Big
LEAD: To the Editor:


CARDINAL VOLUNTEERS FOR AIDS WORK
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor blessing a new AIDS dental-care unit, the nation's first, at St.
Clare's Hospital's Spellman AIDS Center.
At the dedi cation, the Cardinal offered to work as a volunteer with AIDS patients ''He said he would volunteer to get to better know the patients,'' said Virginia Stuart, director of community relations at the hospital.


CHRISTMAS IN JULY FOR OLD-TIMERS
LEAD: A group of about 950 retired National Football League players who played all or most of their professional careers before 1959 are beginning to receive their first monthly benefit checks from a special owners program that will compensate them for the rest of their lives.


Transit Police Radios Have to Work in Subways
LEAD: To the Editor:


REVIVING EDUCATION SYSTEM: NEW PROGRAMS ARE SOUGHT
LEAD: The Commission on the Year 2000 singled out education as the ''most important service'' determining New York City's future and suggested radical ideas on reshaping the deteriorated system.


Advertising; Health Professionals Focus of Antidrug Ads
LEAD: The Partnership for a Drug-Free America, the advertising industry's huge effort to dry up the demand for cocaine and marijuana, showed a new facet of the battle yesterday: ads aimed at enlisting health care professionals in the war.


TOP REAGAN AIDES PUSH GULF POLICY
LEAD: Top Reagan Administration officials, seeking to overwhelm Congressional opposition to President Reagan's Persian Gulf policy, acknowledged the risk in escorting Kuwaiti vessels today, but argued that it is far more risky to do nothing.


HAGLER IN COURT
LEAD: Marvin Hagler, upset by Sugar Ray Leonard in the middleweight title fight April 6, will fight to save his marriage, Hagler's attorney, Morris Goldings, said after the boxer made a court appearance yesterday outside Boston.


Underground Water Used For Power
LEAD: FOR decades, electric utilities and oil companies that were lucky enough to find very hot geothermal reserves on their land have operated small power plants that generate electricity from steam produced by the earth's natural heat.
While the amount of power produced from such plants has been limited, it has enabled the companies to save millions of dollars in production costs.


STRIKERS WATCH NBC GO ON WITHOUT THEM
LEAD: It was hot - 91 degrees - and humid and for the dozens of members of the striking union who picketed outside NBC headquarters in Manhattan yesterday, the misery of the weather was compounded by the frustration of knowing the show would go on without them.


A DEBATABLE DEBATE
LEAD: On Wednesday night Washington's political professionals will be staying in.


Texas Instruments vs. Japan
LEAD: To survive in a world market increasingly dominated by the Japanese, such American semiconductor manufacturers as the Intel Corporation and Advanced Micro Devices Inc. have withdrawn to segments they think they can still defend.
Others, including Motorola Inc. and the Fairchild Semiconductor Corporation, are teaming up with their


Dollar Is Mostly Lower But Rises Against Yen
LEAD: The dollar drifted lower against major currencies except the Japanese yen yesterday, remaining within the narrow trading range it has held for several weeks.


HARVARD ON THE AIR
LEAD: For a close look at the Presidential contenders, Harvard University plans to put all 15 of the Democrats and Republicans on public television, one by one, an hour each, on Sunday afternoons starting in October and ending just before the Iowa caucuses in February.
Invitations went out only on Monday, so it is too early to say whether all will appear.


Bonds End Day Unchanged
LEAD: Bond prices, which showed gains early in the day, retreated before closing almost unchanged in light trading.


THE STAGE: EYEN'S 'POWER'
LEAD: IN the same week that the hit musical ''Dreamgirls,'' book and lyrics by Tom Eyen, returns to Broadway for a summer run, Mr.
Eyen's ''Power, Greed and Self-Destruction in America'' is concluding a brief reappearance at La Mama, where it was first produced in 1966.
It is an apt coincidence, since the early work, subtitled ''Give My Regards to Off Off


6 States Pick Michigan For Radioactive Waste
LEAD: Michigan was chosen today by six other Middle Western states to be the site of the region's first low-level radioactive waste dump.


If Seoul Is to Enjoy Democracy
LEAD: South Koreans and their friends around the world can breath a bit easier now that a political compromise seems to have been reached in Seoul.
But steady progress toward a more open political system and democratic rights is likely to be difficult.


CONNORS STAGES STIRRING REVIVAL
LEAD: There is only one reason why he plays, Jimmy Connors says, and that is for the final victory, the one that enables him to walk away with the winner's check.
But as he raised his arms in triumph on Centre Court today, reveling in the standing ovation given him by the usually reserved British crowd, there was a look on his face that suggested that after all these years,


ILLINOIS BACKS AIDS TRACING
LEAD: The Illinois House passed legislation today that would require the State Department of Public Health to trace the sexual partners of people infected with the AIDS virus.


GAS PRICE DROP REJECTED
LEAD: State utility regulators today denied a request by the state's Consumer Counsel, James Meehan, to reduce the rates of the Connecticut Natural Gas Company by $9.3 million, despite an 11 percent drop in the company's cost for gas since 1984.


Gore to the Fore
LEAD: With Senator Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee in the Presidential race, we now have nine announced candidates, seven ''leaners,'' six drop-outs, and 432 commentators who differ on who's likely to win.


Rio Bus Fare Increase Is Revoked After Riot
LEAD: Tens of thousands of people protesting an increase in bus fares rioted in downtown Rio today, battling police, looting stores and setting buses afire before the Government rescinded the increase late tonight.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: COMMANDER IN CHIEF: Franklin Delano Roosevelt, His Lieutenants and Their War.
By Eric Larrabee. 732 pages.
Harper &amp; Row. $25.


FLOODWATERS CALLED CAUSE OF BRIDGE COLLAPSE
LEAD: The collapse of a bridge on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway in April was caused by floodwaters of the Schoharie Creek that scoured gravel and silt from around the bridge's footings, the former chief engineer of the Thruway Authority told Federal investigators today.


Bank Curbs, Insurer Aid Approved by Conferees
LEAD: Dealing a sharp setback to the Reagan Administration's policy of financial deregulation, Congressional conferees agreed tonight on legislation to permanently ban any new limited-service banks, which offer only partial banking services.


Meese Remark on Standards For the Court Draws Laughs
LEAD: Hundreds of people laughed Monday when Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d said the Reagan Administration had no philosophical test for filling the Supreme Court vacancy created by the retirement of Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr.
After a speech on the Constitution to about 3,000 people at the Chautauqua Institution, Mr.


SENATOR CONCEDES AD IN TV DRIVE WAS FALSE
LEAD: United States Senator Robert Kasten Jr., a Wisconsin Republican, acknowledged today that a television commercial attacking a Democratic opponent last fall contained false information.


Brennan Tied To Inquiry
LEAD: First Jersey Securities and its once high-profile owner, Robert E. Brennan, are the primary targets of a grand jury investigation into charges of market manipulation and securities fraud.


Pepsico's Bottled Water Advertising
LEAD: REMEMBER in ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs'' how the little birdies help the heroine get ready for her day?
One of them even fluttered about carrying a ribbon for her hair?


Florida Sets a Bad Precedent
LEAD: Washington talks endlessly about balancing the budget.
Tallahassee and most other state capitals have no choice.
By law, they must cover current expenses each year.
Florida's solution to a looming $520 million deficit is a sweeping new sales tax on services that has other state treasurers envious and taxpayers furious coast to coast.


LAW COVERING GENERIC DRUGS GOES INTO EFFECT IN NEW YORK
LEAD: New York pharmacists will be required to fill prescriptions with lower-cost generic drugs unless physicians and dentists stipulate otherwise, under a state law that takes effect today.


In Freehold, More Than Just Homes
LEAD: FREEHOLD Township is one of the areas in central New Jersey that has seen its population balloon as home buyers in search of affordable housing pushed out from New York City and communities in northern New Jersey.


Charter Oak-Nike
LEAD: Charter Oak Partners, an investment partnership based in Westport, Conn., has purchased 6.1 percent of Nike Inc.'s nearly 23 million class B shares outstanding.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Charter said that it bought the shares of the Beaverton, Ore.-based athletic shoe and apparel concern for investment purposes.


Advertising; United Jewelers Goes To Hively Agency
LEAD: The Hively Agency of Houston, whose letterhead is adorned by a busy little bee, is now going to be doing the advertising for United Jewelers and Distributors, which will be spending $1.5 million.


KARL P. WEGENER
LEAD: Karl P. Wegener, owner for almost half a century of the Arbor Inn restaurant in Rockville Centre, L.I., died of lung cancer on Monday in Mercy Hospital there.
He was 82 years old and lived in Rockville Centre.


Go, Go, Guggenheim
LEAD: To the Editor:


DISCOVERIES
LEAD:  1.Handyman's Special With Executive Tools, you will never be left in the lurch without a hammer or a nail - or a screwdriver, pliers, a saw or a knife.
This handy miniature toolbox, only 4 by 4 1/2 inches, contains everything for quick repairs.
It costs $17.50 at Jenny B. Goode, 1194 Lexington Avenue (81st Street) and 11 East 10th Street.


Statistically, AIDS Poses Significant Risk
LEAD: To the Editor:


WITNESSES SAY THAT MAFIA CONTROLLED TOWER CONTRACTS
LEAD: Extensive testimony about the Mafia controlling construction of major buildings has come from witnesses at a racketeering trial in Manhattan.


The Dog Bites Big Red
LEAD: Trailways bus lines, which lost $14 million last year, is about to leave the driving to Greyhound.
For $80 million, Trailways will sell many of its buses and terminals to the larger company, which has promised to maintain service to all 1,200 Trailways destinations for at least one year.
After that, all bets are off.


'WE MUST TRY TO FORESTALL POVERTY'
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the conclusion of the report by the Commission on the Year 2000, which was appointed by Mayor Koch to study New York City's future:


MARKET FOR FRENCH FRIES IS PROMOTED IN FAR EAST
LEAD: After creating a world market for pizza, the Federal Government is now playing a major role in the international promotion of french-fried potatoes.
Its target is the Far East.


32 Arrested at an AIDS Rally in Manhattan
LEAD: Demonstrators holding hands during a moment of silence yesterday in Foley Square.
A march and rally sponsored by the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (Act Up) ended in a sit-in outside the United States Court House.
Police arrested 32 pro testers for disorderly conduct.
They were demanding in creased Government involvement in the fight against AIDS.


ON THE MARK
LEAD: Among the 10 female student-athletes named to the GTE Academic All-America team was Ilaria Rebay of Columbia, a mathematics major who ran on the cross-country and track teams.
Rebay is a pre-med student from Manhattan who received 11 A-plus marks while achieving a 4.04 grade-point average, and ran the mile on the Columbia medley relay team at the Penn Relays that set a school record of 9 minutes 28.5 seconds.


U.S. SPOKE SOFTLY FOR SEOUL CHANGE
LEAD: Reagan Administration officials today described a process of delicate maneuvering over the last few months to encourage the Seoul Government to accept a range of political initiatives.


IN TEXAS, THE TWAIN NOT ONLY MEET BUT MARRY
LEAD: It is 25 hot, dusty miles from Paducah to the ranch.
The road winds past brakes of cedar and clumps of lowing Brahman cows, turns into caliche and ends at a small white house behind a picket fence.
It is not the kind of place one expects to find a great-granddaughter of Baron Paul von Gontard of Berlin, one of the leading figures in the Daimler automobile company, and a great-great-granddaughter of Adolphus Busch, a co-founder of Anheuser


SOVIET GIVES CITIZENS POWER TO APPEAL CIVIL RIGHTS ABUSE
LEAD: The Supreme Soviet enacted a new law today giving citizens, for the first time, the right of legal appeal against actions of public officials in violation of their rights.


'SIX DAYS PLUS 20 YEARS'
LEAD: ISRAEL, an NBC News report says tonight, isn't really occupying the West Bank of the Jordan River; the West Bank is occupying Israel, and placing that small democracy's moral and political status in doubt. ''It all adds up,'' Tom Brokaw says, ''to an ominous future.'' The report, ''Six Days Plus 20 Years: a Dream Is Dying,'' will be seen tonight on


Resignation At Bank Leu
LEAD: Arthur Fuerer, chairman of Bank Leu, is resigning, the Swiss bank said today.
The bank has been linked to the scandal surrounding Guinness P.L.C., the British brewing company.


DANCE: CUBAN WINS GOLD MEDAL IN NEW YORK BALLET COMPETITION
LEAD: YOUNG dancers from Cuba, China and Argentina won top prizes in the second New York International Ballet Competition, which concluded Monday night with a gala performance at the City Center.
The competition, held every three years, attracted 46 dancers between the ages of 17 and 23, from 17 countries.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Track and Field  Record High Jump in Sweden: Patrik Sjoberg of Sweden broke the world high jump record yesterday by clearing 7 feet 11 1/4 inches on his third and final attempt at a Grand Prix track and field meet in Stockholm.
Igor Paklin of the Soviet Union had set the record of 7-10 3/4 at the World University Games in Kobe, Japan, on Sept.


Allegheny Debt
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc., the consumer products company, will trim its burdensome debts to less than $100 million by year-end and earn a profit in 1988, the chairman, Oliver S. Travers, said.
The company had a loss of $164 million last year and $38 million in the 1987 first quarter.
It ousted the former chairman, Robert J.


Tear Gas, and Plenty of It
LEAD: The national police confirmed with statistics today what every resident of Seoul and other big cities had already sensed: a tremendous amount of potent tear gas was fired at anti-Government protesters who took to the streets in the last few weeks.


INSIDE
LEAD: Rail Merger Is Upset  Washington turned down a merger of the Santa Fe and Southern Pacific Railroads, ending a four-year effort.


LIFE IMPRISONMENT ASKED FOR BARBIE
LEAD: The prosecutor said today that Klaus Barbie had committed ''particularly inhuman'' deeds as Gestapo chief in Lyons and deserved the maximum penalty, life imprisonment.


FILM DIRECTORS START STRIKE VOTE TODAY
LEAD: Negotiations between movie and television producers and the Directors Guild of America have come down to the wire.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:


Meese Did Not Follow Ethics Law In Blind Investment, Official Says
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d acted outside the law in investing $60,000 with a financial consultant linked to the Wedtech Corporation, the director of the Office of Government Ethics said in a letter released today.


GRAND OL' SOFTBALL
LEAD: Representative Jack F. Kemp's Supply-Sliders softball team trounced Senator Bob Dole's Oval Officers 8 to 2 Monday evening, but neither of the Republican contenders for President played.
Senator Dole's crew showed some improvement over the game last year, when the Kemp folk won 21 to 5.


Brazilian Debate: A President or a Premier?
LEAD: The impressive lineup of people who favor keeping a presidential system of government under Brazil's new constitution include President Jose Sarney, his senior military commanders, the head of the majority party and the country's main opposition leader.


MICROWAVE COOKING
LEAD: YOU have surely discovered by now that the microwave oven is useful for more than defrosting.
If not, try now, with mussels.


WALTER J. LUDOVICO
LEAD: Walter J. Ludovico, the city's longest-serving Councilman, died Monday at Crouse Memorial Hospital after suffering a heart attack.
He was 65 years old.


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Northwest Airlines, a unit of NWA Inc., to Kolesar &amp; Hartwell, St.
Paul, for travel agent, meeting and incentive, and cargo advertising.


Payroll Perplexity
LEAD: For working parents who hire a competent, trustworthy, full-time babysitter, the good news is that they can go off to work with less guilt.
The bad news is that becoming employers, even of a single employee, renders them vulnerable to new entanglements with the Internal Revenue Service.
Many try to avoid the bad news by paying the babysitter off the books.


FOR CEMENT SUNBATHERS, 91 DEGREES IS A BREEZE
LEAD: Peter Lavin, right, preparing to join Anne Solter and John Collins on a stretch of urban beach at Avenue C near 20th Street as the temperature climbed to a sticky 91 degrees yesterday.
Cloudy skies and cooler temperatures, in the low 80's, along with showers are expected for today. (NYT/Chester Higgins


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: SUMMER is the best of seasons for food preparation.
An abundance of herbs - fresh thyme, tarragon, chives, chervil - are ready for picking just outside my kitchen door.
And I find pleasure, too, in cleaning and firing up my much-used outdoor grills, of which I have two: one for wood and charcoal, the other heated by gas.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
June 26
June 19
June 27
1987
1987
1986
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
6.9
7.1
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.7
2.7
Gasoline stocks
230.4
230.4
228.0
Distillate stocks
102.5
101.9
104.5
Crude imports, daily
5.3
5.5
5.1
Product imports, daily
2.2
2.2
2.2
Crude stocks
325.6
324.1
323.9
Crude production, daily
8.4
8.4
8.6
Refinery utilization (%)
86.3
84.9
87.6


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: GIRL, 5 years old, to mother:


What's Wrong With the Big Bank Theory
LEAD: To the Editor:


REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: A PHOTO FINISH FOR ALBANY'S LEGISLATURE
LEAD: Here in the state's capital, the seasons have a peculiar rhythm.
Just when everyone else is planning the menu for the Fourth of July picnic, the Legislature is preparing to get down to business.


2 New York Stations Shifting Radio Formats
LEAD: Two New York radio stations are changing their formats today.
At 12:01 A.M.
WYNY (97.1 FM) switched from contemporary music to country music.
And at 3 P.M., WHN (1050 AM), plans to change from country music to sports news.


THE MEMOIRS OF PIGPEN HUNT
LEAD: Nobody in the spring of 1975 trained harder or weirder than Ron Hunt, who held the major league record for being hit by most pitches in one season, 50, in one career, 243, in one extra-inning game, 3, and for leading the league in being hit by pitches in consecutive seasons, 7.


3Com, Microsoft Planning Software
LEAD: The Microsoft Corporation and the 3Com Corporation said that they would jointly develop and market software to allow a new generation of personal computers to communicate with one another.


Panama's Legislature Votes To End State of Emergency
LEAD: Panama ended a 19-day state of emergency today and restored full constitutional freedoms.


HOLTZMAN SUES TO PREVENT JUROR DISCRIMINATION
LEAD: A civil suit intended to prevent defense lawyers from excluding prospective jurors because of their race was filed yesterday by the Brooklyn District Attorney, Elizabeth Holtzman.


ORIGINAL BOOS
LEAD: When Doug Sisk of the Mets complained earlier this season that he, Darryl Strawberry and Howard Johnson had been unfair targets of booing at Shea Stadium, they sounded like the latest victims in a phenomenon that started 26 seasons ago, at the beginning of the Mets' existence.
The first player to draw the wrath of the crowd was Jim Marshall, one of the 25 original Mets.


BIRTHDAY PARTY FOR WASHINGTON POST CHIEF ATTRACTS 'ALL THE BIG NAMES'
LEAD: By nightfall there was an elite traffic jam downtown of Rolls-Royces, Mercedes, Jaguars, Cadillac limousines, taxis and the Presidential motorcade.
Tourists stood by with cameras, knowing something was afoot but not quite sure what.


A JULY 4 TOAST TO FOODS THAT MADE AMERICA GREAT
LEAD: TRANSCONTINENTAL travelers have often remarked on the homogeneous nature of America's culinary landscape: Every town has its golden arches, surrounded by purveyors of fried chicken, tacos, pizza and fish nuggets.
Fortunately, even as the blandness of franchised fast-food outlets replaced the distinctiveness of local fare, the faithful hung on - loyal and appreciative audiences remained for those luncheonettes, diners and drugstore counters that continued preparing their specialties, like Pepe's Pizzeria in New Haven, famous for its white clam topping, and Central Grocery in New


A DA VINCI OF DOUGH CLOSES BAKERY ON THE WEST SIDE
LEAD: His relatives told him he needed a trade to emigrate from Hungary to America, so Louis Lichtman decided to become a baker.
His first cake, a spongecake, was an epiphany.


JUDAISM AFFIRMED IN CHURCH MILESTONE
LEAD: The United Church of Christ yesterday became the first major Protestant denomination in the United States to declare ''that Judaism has not been superseded by Christianity'' and that ''God has not rejected the Jewish people.''


North Gives Records to Investigative Panel
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North as he left his home to deliver sets of his personal records to the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair.
He is to answer questions today about his role.
Page A10. (NYT/Paul Hosefros)


HOUSE REJECTS OUTSIDE ETHICS PANEL
LEAD: The House has rejected a proposal by four conservative Republicans to create a special commission to investigate what they termed the ''pattern of corruption'' in the House.


Raja of Sri Lanka: A Prince Among Elephants
LEAD: Raja, the most celebrated elephant in Asia, lounged flat-out in the cool muddy river with the insouciance of Mae West between scenes, dawdling his trunk like a limp wrist in the hot afternoon.


U.S. Said to Endorse Soviet Ideas For Compromise on Missile Cuts
LEAD: The United States has responded favorably to an informal Soviet suggestion that could remove major barriers to a new accord on intermediate-range and short-range missiles, officials here said today.


10 Men Accused of Treason Are Released in South Africa
LEAD: A Supreme Court justice released on bail today 10 men who have been on trial since 1985 on treason and subversion charges relating to the outbreak of black township violence.


BROADWAY MUSICIANS ON BROADWAY APROVE A 3-YEAR PACT
LEAD: Broadway musicians have accepted a new contract that will allow producers to use highly sophisticated electronic synthesizers, called replicators, and curtail the practice of hiring nonworking players in exchange for guaranteed minimums in the size of orchestras in Broadway theaters for six years and increases in pay and benefits.


REDS WIN AND WIDEN LEAD
LEAD: Kurt Stillwell scored from second base on Tracy Jones's infield single in the bottom of the 10th inning tonight to give the Cincinnati Reds a 5-4 victory over the Houston Astros.


NEW DEAL FOR MCADOO
LEAD: Bob McAdoo, the 35-year-old former National Basketball Association scoring champion who said he planned to end his career in Italy, has mailed in a signed contract to Tracer of Milan to play his second season in Italy.
McAdoo, a 13-year player in the N.B.A. with seven teams, including the Knicks and the Nets, led Tracer to a rare triple triumph this past season in the Cup of Italy, the European Cup of Champions and the Italian league title.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''I clearly recognize the fact that regardless of the possible merits and demerits of a particular system, and irrespective of the preferences of any specific political parties, the general public has an ardent desire to choose the President directly.''  - President Chun Doo Hwan of South Korea.


Canada's New $1 Coin
LEAD: Thirty-five million new dollar coins became available for distribution today, the beginning of the end of Canada's $1 bill in a plan that the Canadian Government said would save millions in production costs.
The new coins will be distributed through banks and trust companies, said Michael Francis of the Royal Canadian Mint.


TOP MATCHES YESTERDAY
LEAD:  Ivan Lendl beat Johan Kriek, 6-3, 7-6, 6-2.
Mats Wilander beat Emilio Sanchez, 2-6, 7-6, 6-3, 7-5.
Stefan Edberg beat Jakob Hlasek, 6-3, 6-7, 6-1, 6-4.
Jimmy Connors beat Mikael Pernfors, 1-6, 1-6, 7-5, 6-4, 6-2.
Henri Leconte beat Andres Gomez, 7-5, 7-5, 7-5.
Pat Cash beat Guy Forget, 6-2, 6-3, 6-4.


BAKKERS LOOKING AT SITES FOR A NEW MINISTRY
LEAD: The Rev.
Jim Bakker and his wife, Tammy Faye, said today that they were looking at three locations for a new ministry while their lawyer battles for the PTL television ministry and its lucrative theme park, Heritage USA.


Murdoch Buys British Tabloid
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch added another newspaper to his international media empire today, buying Britain's financially troubled Today color tabloid for $60.8 million.


U.S. ENVOY'S FAREWELL TO NICARAGUA
LEAD: Like many American ambassadors, Harry E. Bergold keeps a large wall map in his office at the United States Embassy in Managua.


RACING'S REWARDS
LEAD: Two trainers, Leroy Jolley and Mack Miller, a jockey, Walter Blum, and two champion horses, Gallant Man and Real Delight, have been elected to thoroughbred racing's Hall of Fame in Saratoga, N.Y.
Jolley has trained two Kentucky Derby winners, Foolish Pleasure in 1975 and Genuine Risk in 1980.
Miller, who has trained 55 stakes winners since beginning his career in 1949, trained Assagai, Hawaii and Snow


Aiming 'Bullets' at Disease
LEAD: MONOCLONAL antibodies -the ''magic bullets'' that can deliver therapeutic or imaging substances directly to the site of a disease in the body - were hailed as one of the most promising developments in medicine when they were introduced a dozen years ago.


BLACKS' SUIT AGAINST U.S. ON VOTING RESTORED
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today reinstated a lawsuit that accused the Justice Department of conducting vote fraud investigations in order to discourage poor Alabama blacks from voting.


O'CONNOR APPOINTS A NEW VICAR GENERAL
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor yesterday named Msgr.
Patrick J. Sheridan the Vicar General of the Archdiocese of New York, succeeding Bishop Joseph T. O'Keefe, who was appointed the Bishop of Syracuse two weeks ago.


Dome Requests Extension on Debt
LEAD: Dome Petroleum Ltd., the Canadian oil and gas giant that is trying to avert bankruptcy, asked its major creditors to extend debt waivers for two months while it tries to win their approval for a takeover bid by the Amoco Corporation.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Mario Bauza's Music


BALLET: THE BOLSHOI, IN 'GOLDEN AGE'
LEAD: What is it about the Bol-shoi Ballet that makes it easy to extoll its virtues - to forgive its sins, in other words?
Very likely, the answer lies in this historic Moscow company's unsurpassed gift of communicating with its audience.


LOOKING FOR PLANET X: OLD CLUES, NEW THEORY
LEAD: The two Pioneer spacecraft traveling far beyond the known planets have failed to find any evidence to support speculation that a 10th planet is out there somewhere, but that does not necessarily settle the matter, a space scientist reported yesterday.


The U.N. Today: July 1, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


METS RECALL THE WAY TO RALLY
LEAD: Maybe it was the fact that Dwight Gooden pitched nine innings with nine strikeouts and won for the fifth time in six starts.
Or maybe it was just that the Mets found a way to keep their bullpen off the field, after all.


BUSH BACKERS RALLY AT CAPITOL IN ATTEMPT TO SHOW STRENGTH
LEAD: Vice President Bush attempted a show of political strength today, mounting the steps of the Capitol at noon with 57 Republican House members who have endorsed his candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination.


America's Role As Net Debtor
LEAD: LAST week the Commerce Department released what seems like an alarming statistic: The nation's foreign debt more than doubled last year, to $263 billion - well above the foreign debt of Brazil, Mexico and Argentina combined.
Furthermore, by 1992 the American debt will have risen to $900 billion, many economists estimate.


LAW IN MICHIGAN BARRING FUNDS FOR ABORTIONS IS RULED IN FORCE
LEAD: Payments by the State of Michigan for abortions for indigent women were halted today by a judge who agreed with an anti-abortion group's interpretation of a new state law.
The group had initiated the law with a petition.


Leading Indicators Rise 0.7%
LEAD: The Government index designed to forecast economic activity rose seven-tenths of 1 percent in May, the fourth consecutive monthly increase, the Commerce Department said today.


James S. Lay Jr., 75, Retired U.S. Official at C.I.A. and N.S.C.
LEAD: James S. Lay Jr., a retired Central Intelligence Agency official and former executive secretary of the National Security Council, died of Alzheimer's Disease Sunday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Perry Point, Md.
He was 75 years old and lived in Falls Church, Va.


MARYLAND ACTS TO LIMIT LAWSUITS BY THE POOR
LEAD: Maryland is instituting a policy tomorrow that legal aid lawyers say will severely restrict access to the courts for the poor as well as the mentally and physically handicapped.


Robert Hunsicker, Vicar of St. Paul's For 20 Years, Dies
LEAD: The Rev.
Robert C. Hunsicker, who served the parish of Trinity Church for 37 years, 20 of them as vicar of historic St.
Paul's Chapel, died of a heart attack Saturday in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old and a resident of Manhattan and Sandisfield, Mass.


Offering by Minnesota
LEAD: A $200 million competitive issue of Minnesota general obligation bonds drew reasonably good interest from institutional investors yesterday despite a municipal market that was lethargic.


Rulers' Takeover of Voting System Imperils Haiti's Democratic Trend
LEAD: After several months of progress toward democracy, the military Government in Haiti has seized control of the electoral process, provoking the most serious political crisis since the collapse of the Duvalier dictatorship 17 months ago.


THREE FREED WHALES TRACKED BY SATELLITE
LEAD: The research ship that released three pilot whales off the coast of Nantucket on Monday has lost radio contact with the animals, but a satellite is continuing to track them, the New England Aquarium said here today.


Cuba Is Mired in Angola, Top Defector Says
LEAD: The Cuban Air Force general who defected to the United States in late May has broken his silence in a series of interviews that detailed widespread disillusionment within the Cuban military over its involvement in Angola.


Guide to New York City's Future Recommends Sweeping Changes
LEAD: A commission created by Mayor Koch made sweeping recommendations yesterday to confront poverty, crime, overdevelopment, inadequate schools and other problems in New York City.


A SWIMMING POOL STOPS IN BROOKLYN 'LIKE A U.F.O.'
LEAD: Flap, flap, flap.
Here comes big Antoine McCrorey, 11 years old, flapping down the sidewalk in Bedford-Stuyvesant, wearing a swimming suit, goggles and swim fins - and looking for all the world like an escapee from the New York Aquarium, or maybe some other type of institution, the way people were looking at him.


WHITE HOUSE FLOATS A DOZEN NAMES FOR HIGH COURT
LEAD: The White House sent top-level officials to Capitol Hill today to float the names of possible Supreme Court nominees before the Democratic and Republican Senate leadership.


FINAL AGREEMENT REACHED IN ALBANY ON AN ETHICS BILL
LEAD: Ending one of the most bitter disputes here in memory, Governor Cuomo and the leaders of the State Legislature announced agreement tonight on a broader and stricter new ethics code governing the behavior of hundreds of thousands of state and local government officials and state employees.


Canada's Parliament Rejects Move to Restore Executions
LEAD: Parliament rejected by 21 votes today a motion to restore capital punishment in Canada.


WEDTECH: A PARADISE FOR BARGAIN HUNTERS
LEAD: It was auction day at the Wedtech Corporation in the Bronx yesterday, and hundreds of bidders hoped to profit from a Government scandal.


ON BRINK OF DEFEAT, SHRIVER FINDS TOUCH
LEAD: There was nothing left to do except play the point, Pam Shriver decided.
Her concession speech was committed to memory, the tension actually dissipating as she took a deep breath and prepared to serve against Sylvia Hanika of West Germany.


KEAN PROPOSES POWERFUL SHORE AGENCY
LEAD: Governor Kean announced a plan today to protect the rapidly developing coastal area by vesting broad powers over land use and environmental planning in a single state-dominated commission.


ONE WOMAN, TWO LIVES, MANY MEMORIES
LEAD: While Katharine Graham may love a party, the purpose of the glamorous affair held last night was to mark her 70th birthday, a milestone she says she would have preferred to pass with less attention.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Once Upon a Time


Bridge: Routine Fourth-Best Return Is Not Always Best Choice
LEAD: The fourth-best opening lead, now abandoned by many experts, has great antiquity.
It was described by Edmond Hoyle of England, the father of whist and its descendants, in his pioneering ''Short Treatise on the Game of Whist'' in 1742.
But the other side of the coin, the fourth-best return, has had little attention from theorists.


A.T.&amp;T. Expects Larger Earnings
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said that it expects to post higher earnings in the second quarter than previously expected.
Without being specific, A.T.&amp; T.'s chief financial officer, Robert M. Kavner, told a group of of security analysts in Philadelphia yesterday that the company's results through May continued ''to be better than anticipated'' and that ''the second quarter is likely to show an improvement over the first.


BOXER IN HOSPITAL
LEAD: Sherman Griffin, who won the United States Boxing Association cruiserweight championship from Jeff Lampkin on a split decision last Friday, was recovering today from gunshot wounds he received Saturday when, the police charge, he attempted to rob a couple at a motel.


FACES QUESTIONING TODAY
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North delivered sets of his personal records to the Congressional investigative committees today, a day before he was to be interrogated for the first time about his central role in the Iran-contra affair.


If Seen, Then Not Heard
LEAD: To The Living Section:


THE STATEMENT ON JUDAISM
LEAD: Following is the text of the declaration on Judaism adopted yesterday at the Cleveland convention of the United Church of Christ:


SEVERAL SITES IN JERSEY ARE WEIGHED BY NBC
LEAD: The National Broadcasting Company is considering additional sites in New Jersey for its headquarters, including a major project being developed on the Hudson River in Jersey City, a network official and developers said yesterday.


The Real Problem
LEAD: To the Editor:


YANKEES CHOOSE 1,000 BOX SEATS AS ALCOHOL-FREE
LEAD: A thousand seats will be set aside as a no-drinking section in Yankee Stadium, which seats 57,000 people, under an agreement announced jointly today by the Yankees and a state senator.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Out-of-Town Ice Creams


Terms for Dozier
LEAD: The Minnesota Vikings and their first-round draft pick, D. J. Dozier, the running back from Penn State, have agreed in principle to a multiyear contract.
Dozier, who led the Nittany Lions in rushing for four years, is the first No. 1 or No. 2 selection by any National Football League team to agree to terms.


CATCH OF LIFETIME
LEAD: For Bryan Spodek, life as a striped-bass fisherman may never be the same.
In only his third time out on a fishing boat, the 10-year-old boy from Dix Hills, L.I., with a little help from his father, hooked a 37-pounder in Cold Spring Harbor on Sunday.
The fish measured 44 inches in length, only 2 inches less than the boy's height.


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: THE last time my home was burglarized was more than 10 years ago, when I was living alone in a small apartment in a faintly ominous warehouse district.
The thieves took all of my jewelry.
Some of it had belonged to my mother and my grandmother, and I wept when I saw the little velvet-lined boxes open and empty.


E. Howard Molisani, Ex-I.L.G.W.U. Official
LEAD: E. Howard Molisani, a garment-union official in New York City for 40 years, died of a heart attack Friday at his home in Port Washington, L.I.
He was 76 years old.


Kentucky Bonds Sold to Sallie Mae
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, reported yesterday that it had bought $41.4 million of taxable secured limited-obligations bonds from the Kentucky State Property and Building Commission.


Federico Mompou, Spanish Composer, Dies
LEAD: Federico Mompou, whose miniature, atmospheric songs and piano pieces were championed by such notable performers as Arthur Rubinstein and Montserrat Caballe, died early yesterday morning at his home in Barcelona, Spain, his wife reported.
He was 94 years old.


DEAVER LOSES APPEAL TO DELAY PERJURY TRIAL SET FOR JULY 13
LEAD: Michael K. Deaver lost a request today to have his perjury trial delayed, and he then turned to Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist with his appeal.


Underwritings Shrank 8.7% in Second Quarter By JAMES STERNGOLD
LEAD: A sudden surge in interest rates and unstable bond prices cooled the market for new securities underwritings in the second quarter from the sizzling pace of the previous year.


Yeager's Mother Dies
LEAD: Susie M. Yeager, mother of the aviator Charles E. (Chuck) Yeager, died Sunday after a long illness.
She was 89 years old.
Mrs.
Yeager died in Putnam General Hospital at Hurricane, officials at Koontz Funeral Home in Hamlin said today.
Mr.
Yeager was a World War II hero and a test pilot who became the first man to break the sound barrier.


WINE TALK
LEAD: THOMAS JEFFERSON -wine collector, student of wine making and merchandising, grape grower and wine adviser to the first five Presidents (himself included) - pulled a decanter from his wooden traveling wine chest and poured us both an aperitif.
He had granted a wide-ranging interview about foreign and domestic wines, his first in 161 years.


POLLUTION RULE IS OVERTURNED
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today overturned a 1979 regulation by the Environmental Protection Agency that banned new factory construction without permits to allow discharge of pollution.


Chairman and Chief Is Named by GCA
LEAD: David R. S. Steadman has been named chairman and chief executive of the GCA Corporation.
The Andover, Mass., company, which makes machinery for semiconductor production lines, has just gone through a refinancing that has given it room to maneuver.


Bomb Scare at the Met Delays Ballet's Opening
LEAD: A bomb scare yesterday disrupted last night's opening of the Bolshoi Ballet's New York season, delaying the rise of the curtain by an hour and annoying thousands of balletgoers.


SHUTTLE TO GET ESCAPE HATCH AND OTHER SAFETY FEATURES
LEAD: The first space shuttle to be launched in the aftermath of the Challenger's explosion will have an escape hatch, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said today.
But it said no decision had been made on whether the craft would have the capacity to eject the crew safely in an emergency.


Bill to Keep Apartments Off Market Is Rejected
LEAD: A bill that would have kept 167,000 state-subsidized, moderate-income apartments from being transferred to the open market was rejected today by the State Senate's Republican leadership, virtually ending its chances for passage during the current legislative session.


Foes of Nuclear Plants Win Key Ally in House
LEAD: Opponents of nuclear power plants in Shoreham, L.I., and Seabrook, N.H., have won the backing of a key Congressional leader for legislation that would effectively block operating licenses for the reactors.


First Pacific Seeks Buyer for Hibernia
LEAD: The Hibernia Bancshares Corporation said its parent company, the Hong Kong-based First Pacific Holdings Ltd., is looking for a buyer for the Hibernia Bank.
Founded here 116 years ago, the Hibernia Bank was bought by First Pacific in December 1982 for $56 million.
It now has $1.5 billion in assets, 800 employees and 35 branches in Northern


MARATHON DELAY
LEAD: Because of sponsorship problems, the America's Marathon-Chicago, scheduled for Oct. 25, has been postponed until next spring, which is good news for the New York City Marathon and bad news for the Boston Marathon.


U.S. Eurobonds In Steep Dive
LEAD: THE prices of some $30 billion in Eurobonds issued under tax treaties with the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba plummeted yesterday as a result of Washington's decision to end those treaties.


Judge Removed From Bench
LEAD: A town justice from Franklin County was removed from the bench today by New York state's highest court and barred from holding judicial office.
The court, the Court of Appeals, removed the Burke Town Justice, Lee Vincent, for mishandling funds and failing to promptly dispose of cases.
He had held the part-time position since 1975.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Style page last Saturday about the American Craft Council fair in Springfield, Mass., misidentified a Connecticut crafts worker who made a series of baskets displayed at the fair.
She is Kari Lonning.


TOUR DE FRANCE: ANYONE'S RACE
LEAD: Sean Kelly, Stephen Roche and Laurent Fignon, three of the favorites in the Tour de France bicycle race, agree that at the start in West Berlin Wednesday there will really be no favorite.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, JULY 1, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-15


Metals Firm's Assets Frozen
LEAD: The American Metals Exchange Corporation, a commodities firm accused of securities violations, has agreed to stop doing business temporarily, freeze its assets and turn over its operations to a court-appointed receiver, according to Federal court documents filed today.


GUIDRY OVERPOWERS JAYS
LEAD: For one night, Ron Guidry reached back to his glory days.
He is older now, and wiser, but the fastball and the slider no longer seem to overpower hitters as they once did.
But Guidry had them again, just this one time, on a night when he tried to re-establish himself as a capable pitcher for the Yankees.


EXCERPTS FROM SPEECH BY SOUTH KOREA PRESIDENT
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the speech this morning by President Chun Doo Hwan:


CONCERT: AVE SOL, FROM RIGA
LEAD: AVE SOL, a chamber choir from Riga, in the Latvian Republic of the Soviet Union, came to Alice Tully Hall Sunday afternoon with a generous selection of Latvian music and a smattering of Western and Russian pieces ranging from the 16th century to ours.
The conductor, Imants Kokars, is also director of the Latvian State Conservatory, and he is an estimable program maker.


Oriental Fruit Flies Prompt A Quarantine in California
LEAD: The discovery of Oriental fruit flies in Hawaiian Gardens, a suburb here, will prompt the state to quarantine fruits and vegetables in parts of Los Angeles and Orange Counties, officials said today.


G.M. Layoffs Set
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it would lay off 3,000 hourly workers this week as it winds down production at two Detroit assembly plants scheduled to close Dec. 23.
A spokesman for the Cadillac division said the Fleetwood and Clark plants would eliminate the jobs when they resume production on a single shift after a two-week retooling for model change-over, which begins Wednesday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Judge Bork, widely regarded as the most prominent and intellectually powerful advocate of judicial restraint, shares my view that judges' personal preferences and values should not be part of their Constitutional interpretations.''  - President Reagan.  [ A23:1. ]


Conferees Agree on a Banking Bill
LEAD: House and Senate conferees today agreed on a bill that will inject $8.5 billion into the depleted thrift deposit insurance fund, ban the hybrid banking institution known as the limited-service bank, and place a nine-month moratorium on banks' engaging in new areas of securities underwriting.


Gleason Steps Down
LEAD: Teddy Gleason at a news conference yesterday at which he retired as president of the International Longshoremen's Association, declaring ''We got everything we fought for.'' Page B3. (NYT/Sara Krulwich)


Kemp Draws Fire
LEAD: Representative Jack F. Kemp, the upstate New Yorker who is a Republican Presidential aspirant, is drawing fire from his colleagues over a proposal to close the New York and Washington offices of the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Tin Ceilings Prized For Style and Utility
LEAD: ACCORDING to Mark Quitno, vice president of the W. F. Norman Corporation, tin ceilings were developed in the 1860's to cover up deteriorating plaster ceilings.
Because they were practical, decorative and easy to ship, install and maintain, tin ceilings rapidly became popular.


PUBLISHING: COLORING BOOK PHOTOS
LEAD: The practice of coloring black-and-white motion pictures has its counterpart in the book industry, where black-and-white photographs selected to appear on book jackets are tinted a variety of colors.
Sometimes even black-and-white photos within the body of the book are colored, as is the case with a dozen photographs in ''Spanning the Gate'' by Stephen Cassady (Squarebooks Inc.), a history of the building of the Golden Gate


HARTMARX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARTMARX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
248,289,000
245,446,000
Net inc
8,265,000
2,255,000
Share earns
.40
.11
Shares outst
20,665,000
20,701,000
6mo sales
530,976,000
535,757,000
Net inc
19,370,000
10,565,000
Share earns
.94
.51
Shares outst
20,628,000
20,651,000


Becor Might Get A Higher Offer
LEAD: Bear, Stearns &amp; Company said that it was studying whether to sweeten its $250 million bid for Becor Western Inc.
The New York investment firm's $15-a-share offer, made with the Chicago-based ICM Industries, was topped last week by the Lynch Corporation, which offered Becor shareholders $16.50 a share in cash, or bonds and stock with a face value of $27.25 in the new corporation.


5 Guilty in Fraud Involving Self-Chilling Can
LEAD: Five people were convicted on conspiracy charges today in a stock fraud involving a bogus company that said it had created a self-chilling beverage can.
The authorities said investors had been bilked of about $2.4 million.


Site of Killings to Be Sold
LEAD: The City Council has voted to sell the site of the killing of 21 people in 1984 in a McDonald's restaurant, despite pleas by relatives of the victims that the property be turned into a memorial park.
The Council decided Monday to sell the site, now a vacant lot, but to plan a a modest memorial to victims.


Shearson Seeks Inflation Hedge
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Brothers is seeking to make a significant investment in an oil company or other energy concern as a hedge against an expected rise in energy prices and inflation, the brokerage firm's chairman, Peter A. Cohen, said.


NELLIE OBENDORF
LEAD: Nellie Obendorf, who along with her husband, Orville, survived almost two weeks in a Kansas snowdrift last April, died Saturday in a nursing home.
She was 65 years old.


A MULTIFACETED CONSERVATIVE: ROBERT HERON BORK
LEAD: Judge Robert H. Bork is a multifaceted man with a powerful and restless intellect.
He is a committed conservative who has accused the Supreme Court of usurping the powers of elected officials in dozens of decisions, including those Court decisions that protect abortion rights.


PAPERS PLAY UP DENG'S IDEAS, SIGNALING CHANGES FOR CHINA
LEAD: A seven-year-old speech by China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, denouncing bureaucracy and ''feudal'' ideas within the Communist Party and calling for a measure of political change appeared on the front pages of newspapers today.


Falls 8.77; Volume Is Moderate
LEAD: The stock market continued to lose ground yesterday, and the Dow Jones industrial average fell 8.77 points, to 2,409.76.
On Tuesday the average fell 28.38 points.


SOUTHERN CO reports earnings for 12mo May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN CO (NYSE)
12mo May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,873,918,000
6,785,435,000
Net inc
893,672,000
834,312,000
Share earns
3.15
3.10
Shares outst
283,302,521
268,764,882


KNICK WHO SERVES AND WAITS
LEAD: On the fourth floor of Madison Square Garden, in the office where Brendan Malone has gone about his work, the board with the names of the highest choices in the recent National Basketball Association draft has been folded back into the wall.


LIMITED BANKS' GIANT HURDLE
LEAD: For a part of the financial services industry with only a tiny fraction of the nation's deposits, ''non-bank banks'' have certainly created a ruckus.


Talkng Deals; Small Buyouts Are Booming
LEAD: ON Wall Street, when the term leveraged buyout is bandied about, thoughts generally turn to such celebrated deals as the multibillion-dollar buyout of the Beatrice Companies or former Treasury Secretary William E. Simon's spectacular showing with Gibson Greetings Inc.


JORDAN LANDS ON THE FAIRWAY
LEAD: Michael Jordan, who evokes oohs and aahs for spectacular airborne manuevers on a basketball court, drew similar reactions last week at a totally different sports venue - a golf course.


T.W.A. PILOT HELD ON CHARGES OF BRINGING HEROIN INTO U.S.
LEAD: A veteran Trans World Airlines pilot was arrested at Kennedy International Airport yesterday and charged with smuggling heroin into the United States from India.


The Cause of Justice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sprint Operators
LEAD: The U S Sprint Communications Company said that it plans to offer 24-hour long-distance operator service to compete with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
U S Sprint said that its operators would provide a complete range of services including collect calls, person-to-person calls and call completion assistance, but at a discount.


A Computer Doesn't Need a New Tennis House
LEAD: To the Editor:


Markets Shut Tomorrow
LEAD: The nation's stock and commodity markets will be closed tomorrow in observance of the Fourth of July holiday.
Government offices will also be closed.
Banks and many businesses will be open.


NEWARK'S MAYOR TELLS RACE AND ETHNIC JOKE
LEAD: Sharpe James, who yesterday completed his first year as Mayor of Newark, New Jersey's most populous city, found himself defending an off-the-cuff joke he made that had racist and ethnic overtones.


STAGE: 'NEW MEXICAN RAINBOW FISHING'
LEAD: THREE needy people come together one weekend in a fishing cabin in Jerry Stubblefield's ''New Mexican Rainbow Fishing.'' Well stocked with fifths of Jim Beam and cases of Coors, the cabin has been home to Ferlin, a folksy good-for-not-much, for 17 years. ''I never asked for nothin' except to be left alone,'' he says.


IN THE NATIONTom Wicker; Judging Robert Bork
LEAD: Hundreds of people in an audience at Chautauqua, N.Y., laughed out loud when Attorney General Meese told them President Reagan would apply no ideological test in choosing a replacement for Justice Lewis Powell of the Supreme Court.


Trinova-Tenby Link
LEAD: The Trinova Corporation said today that its Sterling Engineered Products subsidiary had acquired the Fraser &amp; Glass division of Tenby Industries P.L.C. of Britain.
The price was not disclosed.
Fraser &amp; Glass produces injection molded plastic parts for the European automotive industry, particularly in Britain.


Crew Cuts Engines in Error, Sending Jetliner Toward Sea
LEAD: A Delta Air Lines jet carrying 205 people plunged to within 600 feet of the Pacific Ocean on Tuesday, and the crew told investigators today that they had inadvertently shut down both engines.


U.S. GRANTS UPSTATE A-PLANT A LICENSE TO RUN AT FULL POWER
LEAD: The Nuclear Regulatory Commission voted 4 to 0 today to grant a full-power operating license to a nuclear reactor in upstate New York that took 14 years to complete and is the most costly in the industry's history.


SUPER VALU STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUPER VALU STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 20
1987
1986
Sales
2,783,426,000
2,633,995,000
Net inc
34,191,000
29,426,000
Share earns
.46
.40
Shares outst
74,575,000
74,311,000


Family Ties: Dream House for 2, With the Children Nearby
LEAD: THREE years ago Jean and Clarence Paul Petersen Jr., who had lived in a large house in Larchmont, N.Y., for almost 30 years, started thinking about their retirement.
Their children were all married and they felt it was time to make some important changes.


Vacationing by Car, Children in Tow
LEAD: HERE it is summertime, and those signs of the season -the Mobil Travel Guide on the dashboard and the Ramada Inn Directory somewhere on the floor mats - herald that vast annual migration: the vacation excursion in the family automobile.


COMINGS AND GOINGS
LEAD: Kevin Williams of the Seattle SuperSonics was fined $400 and placed on a year's probation, and charges against his teammate Dale Ellis were dropped yesterday in connection with a nightclub altercation last May in Houston.
If Williams completes the terms of his probation, his record will be cleared.


Sliding Styles Clash
LEAD: Youngsters on the circular slide at the 67th Street playground in Central Park had different ideas on how best to negotiate the course.
The boy at rear used an aggressive headfirst plunge; the boy in front employed a more casual and, unfortunately, slower mode of descent. (The New York Times/William E.


AMERON INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
76,795,000
80,986,000
Net inc
b9,226,000
3,596,000
Share earns
1.90
.75
6mo sales
139,576,000
146,383,000
Net inc
b8,711,000
3,890,000
Share earns
1.79
.81


TOUGH STUFF
LEAD: It has nothing to do with dollar signs, yet its mandatory use is called for in Herschel Walker's contract, Joe Montana would not consider a return to the football field without it and Dave Poulin of the Philadelphia Flyers needed a lot of it leading his team into the Stanley Cup finals against Edmonton.


Dollar Up in Quiet Day While Gold Declines
LEAD: By The Associated Press


RAISED SPEED LIMIT VETOED IN MICHIGAN
LEAD: Gov.
James J. Blanchard today vetoed a bill that would have raised the speed limit to 65 miles an hour on rural stretches of interstate highway in Michigan.


DEMOCRATS HOLD PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE
LEAD: The seven Democratic candidates for President sparred gently here tonight in the first major debate of the 1988 campaign.
They fired salvo after salvo at President Reagan, but hardly a shot at each other.


Plane Crashes in Military Exercise, Narrowly Missing Spectators
LEAD: A C-130 cargo plane skimming a runway at Fort Bragg, N.C., yesterday, seconds before it crashed and burned, killing four crewmen as well as a soldier on the ground.
Two other crewmen were injured.


Kahane Ends Refusal Of Parliament's Oath
LEAD: Rabbi Meir Kahane took an oath of allegiance to Parliament today and thus restored his right to take part in parliamentary deliberations.


Everyone Under Oath?
LEAD: Representative Paul E. Kanjorski, Democrat of Pennsylvania, was offended by admissions by Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams that he had misled Congress about secret operations to aid the Nicaraguan rebels.
And so the Congressman is preparing a bill that would require all House testimony to be sworn, abolishing the discretion that committees now have on whether to require withnesses to testify under oath.


CLINTON IS POSED TO ENDER '88 RACE
LEAD: Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who has been pondering a race for the Democratic Presidential nomination for months, is close to entering the crowded field, political associates said today.


3COM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*3COM CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
31,602,000
19,335,000
Net inc
3,185,000
2,119,000
Share earns
.20
.15
Shares outst
15,794,000
14,041,000
Yr sales
110,377,000
63,992,000
Net inc
11,146,000
6,681,000
Share earns
.76
.48
Shares outst
14,646,000
13,906,000


U.S. GESTURE TO SYRIA LINKED TO MOVE AGAINST ABU NIDAL
LEAD: President Reagan's decision to send a special envoy to Damascus to explore improvement of relations was a response to Syria's closing of offices of the Abu Nidal Palestinian terrorist group, senior Administration officials said today.


Why U.S. Seafaring Fades Into Memory
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q &amp; A
LEAD:  Q. During the last water shortage I was a good citizen and did not flush the toilet after every use.
But the bowl is now yellow and I cannot get it clean, even with vinegar or bleach.
What can you suggest?
A.
The discoloration should come out with bleach or a good detergent, or a combination of the two.


Design for Storm Cellar Is Offered
LEAD: An architect who remembered the root cellars where farm families used to take shelter from storms has designed a tornado-shelter kit for people who live in mobile homes.


JUDGE WARNS YONKERS OF BIG FINES IF HOUSING INTEGRATION IS DELAYED
LEAD: A Federal judge threatened yesterday to hold the city of Yonkers in contempt and to impose severe daily fines if it failed to submit a housing integration plan by mid-July.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, JULY 2, 1987
LEAD:  International


NOVELIST'S PATH TO 'CROOKED HEARTS'
LEAD: The Warren family that lived in the mind of Robert Boswell - and now lives in the minds of those who have read his first novel, ''Crooked Hearts'' - is a strange but compelling one.


Walter O. Heinze, 83; Former STP Chairman
LEAD: Walter O. Heinze, former president of the International Latex Corporation and past chairman of the board of the STP Corporation, died of cancer Monday at his home in Green Valley, Ariz.
He was 83 years old.
Mr.
Heinze was chairman of the board of Control Fluidics Inc., a research and development company and industrial-filter company, at the time of his death.


Advertising; Army's Special Ad For July 4
LEAD: THE only Army recruiting TV spot you'll be seeing this summer will be the commercial that Young &amp; Rubicam created as part of its presentation to win the account, which it did on Jan. 27.


POLITICAL PRISONERS STILL A CONTENTIOUS ISSUE IN SEOUL
LEAD: Now that President Chun Doo Hwan has agreed to sweeping democratic changes, Lee Kyong Eun wants her husband back.


NORMAN OUT IN CANADA GOLF
LEAD: Greg Norman withdrew Monday from the Canadian Open, which begins Thursday at the Glen Abbey Golf Club, and Dan Forsman, who wanted to play, failed to submit his entry in time.
Forsman, the winner of the Hertz Bay Hill Classic last year, played very well last week to finish tied for second, a stroke behind Paul Azinger, in the Hartford Open.


WHEN BRITISH PUSH COMES TO BROADWAY SHOVE
LEAD: NOW that the dust is beginning to settle on the great ''Phantom of the Opera'' controversy pitting Actors' Equity against the English performer Sarah Brightman, one can't be blamed for asking what all the shouting was about.
Several things were at stake, but ''Phantom of the Opera'' and Sarah Brightman, the nominal pawns in the struggle, were not particularly crucial among them.


NEW GUGGENHEIM PLAN DEBATED AT CITY HEARING
LEAD: Critics and proponents of a revised expansion plan for the Guggenheim Museum debated Tuesday night whether the new scheme had gone far enough to limit its esthetic impact upon the distinctive spiral rotunda of the museum designed by Frank Lloyd Wright.


Vocational Training Course for Gardeners
LEAD: For many people, gardening is a labor of love, and for those who want to make it a full-time vocation instead of a part-time avocation, Longwood Gardens in Kennett Square, Pa., offers a two-year course.


ISRAEL AND U.S. DISCUSS PLANE
LEAD: Israel's Defense Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, met with Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and Secretary of State George P. Shultz today to discuss what assistance the United States might provide to Israel if the Lavi jet-fighter project is canceled.


Advertising; Avrett, Free Adds Renu Lens Cleanser
LEAD: Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, already the agency for Bausch &amp; Lomb contact lenses, has now been named to handle Renu, an enzymatic cleanser that removes protein from soft contact lenses.


HAITI LEADER MEETS WITH ELECTORAL PANEL ON CRISIS
LEAD: Haiti remained in the grip of a political crisis today, but the drama shifted from the streets to a series of meetings as some civilian leaders began to call for the ouster of the military Government.


LAIDLAW INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAIDLAW INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
127,649,000
50,802,000
Net inc
4,934,000
5,123,000
Share earns
.24
.25
9mo rev
343,263,000
141,071,000
Net inc
13,010,000
12,014,000
Share earns
.64
.60


BALLET: BOLSHOI IN GRIGOROVICH'S 'GOLDEN AGE'
LEAD: WHAT is it about the Bolshoi Ballet that makes it easy to extol its virtues - to forgive its sins, in other words?
Very likely, the answer lies in this historic Moscow company's unsurpassed gift of communicating with its audience.


Geography Of Family Life
LEAD: WILLIAM STERNE, a 50-year-old Boston executive, recently turned down a job in New York City that would have paid $20,000 more than he makes now.


TUCKER SEEKS TO CUT MANAGER FROM PACT AND PURSE
LEAD: Tony Tucker, the International Boxing Federation heavyweight champion, has taken one of his three managers, Alan Kornberg, to arbitration.


PRAISE AND A SEMIFINAL SPOT FOR CONNORS
LEAD: It really doesn't matter anymore whether Jimmy Connors wins Wimbledon.
Whatever happens between now and Sunday evening is not going to detract from the showing he has made here thus far or alter the way this year's tournament will be remembered.


MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC INDUSRIAL CO LTD (JAPAN)(N) reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC INDUSRIAL CO LTD (JAPAN)(N)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,153,600,000
31,335,000,000
Net inc
324,500,000
1,121,000,000
Share earns
1.78
6.15
The latest results are for a special 4-month and 11-day fiscal period from Nov.


AFTER 50 YEARS, WATERFRONT BOSS QUITS
LEAD: Teddy Gleason, the iron-fisted boss of the New York City waterfront for 50 years, stepped down yesterday.
As he bowed out, he declared, ''We got everything we fought for.''


TOUR DE FRANCE
LEAD: They're Off: Jelle Nijdam of the Netherlands won the right to wear the leader's yellow jersey at the start of the 74th Tour de France by posting the fastest time in the prologue yesterday in West Berlin.


STANDARD MICROSYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD MICROSYSTEMS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,769,000
12,000,000
Net inc
332,000
b131,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


The U.N. Today: July 2, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


'20/20' EXAMINES TORUBLE IN PALAU
LEAD: PALAU is an island republic in the Pacific; it is also, ''20/ 20'' suggests, the victim of Washington intrigue.
The United States Government, or at least one of its more roguish parts, has used underhanded and perhaps criminal methods to spread military bases.
This is a good story - island paradise, sinister forces, chicanery and palm trees - but pay attention and it starts to unravel.


Jordan Welcomes Waldheim With State Honors for Talks
LEAD: Jordan gave Kurt Waldheim, the Austrian President, a 21-gun salute today when he arrived on his second official visit abroad after more than a year of denying assertions he had a role in deporting Greek Jews to Nazi death camps.


Mack Debt Marks A Shearson First
LEAD: Mack Trucks Inc. is offering $215.1 million of debt securities, backed by its loans on heavy and light trucks, through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Brothers.


FUGITIVE GUNMAN HELD IN A BROOKLYN SHOOTING
LEAD: A man the police called a ''known terrorist'' who is wanted in connection with at least seven murders was captured late Tuesday by officers who chased him into a Brooklyn alley after a shooting, the police said.


GOLDMAN BAND REJECTS CONTRACT
LEAD: Members of the Goldman Memorial Band voted 42 to 2 yesterday to reject a contract offer by the band's board of directors.


2 LEADERS OF TOSHIBA RESIGN
LEAD: The chairman and the president of the Toshiba Corporation, whose subsidiary has been found guilty of illegal sales of high technology to the Soviet Union, resigned today.


PETTIBONE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PETTIBONE CORP
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
23,270,000
21,821,000
Net loss
b456,000
c10,047,000
Yr rev
92,624,000
97,549,000
Net inc
b2,928,000
d52,465,000
Share earns
1.05
-
b-After a loss of $500,000 from disposal of discontinued operations for both periods and an extraordinary loss of $248,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary gain of $1,404,000 for the year.


In a Mass-Produced World, a Vestige of Craftsmanship
LEAD: Sol Polisi, left, and his assistants installing a wood carving on the steamboat Andrew Fletcher at the South Street Seaport.
Mr.
Polisi runs seaport's woodworking shop. (NYT/Keith Meyers)


RAYCOMM TRANSWORLD reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAYCOMM TRANSWORLD (OTC)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
60,686,992
73,934,019
Net loss
b2,795,385
c713,281
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $446,478 and an extraordinary loss of $930,826 related to the discontinued operations.


Whither Mrs. Dole?
LEAD: Elizabeth Hanford Dole says she is not walking a delicate line.


Saudis Linked to Donations to Angola Rebels
LEAD: A California business executive told a Congressional subcommittee today that the Saudi royal family provided millions of dollars to anti-Government rebels in Angola and told him it was at the behest of William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence.


SCHEIB, EARL INC reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCHEIB, EARL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,726,000
14,163,000
Net inc
412,000
659,000
Share earns
.09
.14
Yr sales
69,010,000
62,525,000
Net inc
5,071,000
5,035,000
Share earns
1.11
1.04


NATO Is Seeking a New Secretary General
LEAD: Lord Carrington, Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, is making plans to retire, and the alliance has begun the search for a new leader, according to Western diplomats.


Corrections
LEAD: An article and chart that ran in Business Day on Monday, surveying the performance of international stock markets in the second quarter, carried a series of inaccurate figures.


TOKYO FACES SERIOUS DROUGHT AS RESERVOIRS DROP TO LOWS
LEAD: When a familiar water-heater advertisement urging people to take a daily shower disappeared from television screens this week and gift bottles of mineral water turned up on department store shelves, Tokyo residents got the message.
The city is facing another drought.


PUBLIC FINANCING FOR CAMPAIGNS IN NEW YORK CITY ADVANCES
LEAD: State leaders said they had agreed today on the need for legislation to provide public financing for candidates for top New York City offices.


Prices Rise in Mild Session
LEAD: Prices of Treasury issues did an about-face yesterday and rose in mild trading, especially on instruments with shorter maturities.


Cooper Shifts Management
LEAD: The Cooper Companies, formerly Coopervision Inc., said today that Peter Riepenhausen, vice chairman, had been named chairman of the company's group that handles surgical products.


Judge Backs Pay Law Benefiting Lawmakers
LEAD: A Federal district judge has upheld a law under which Congress was given a $12,100 salary increase this year despite opposition from both the House and Senate.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Express Bank Ltd., elected Dr.
Heinz D. Zimmer director and vice chairman for global private banking.


METS POUR IT ON AFTER RAIN LETS UP
LEAD: The Mets brought their battle with the first-place Cardinals to a wet but rousing close last night when they rallied to beat St.
Louis again, 9-6, and took the series, two games to one.


Allegis Expected To Lay Off 250
LEAD: The Allegis Corporation will soon announce the layoff of about 250 executives in a drive to cut costs, company sources said.
The sources also said that some top Allegis executives would be given more responsibility while others would be reassigned.
The sources did not give details.
The move is part of the new management structure being put in place by Frank A.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An Albany dispatch in some copies on Tuesday misstated the crimes covered in a bill proposed by New York's District Attorney Association.
The bill would cover all bias-related assaults, not just racially motivated ones.


SENATORS' REMARKS PORTEND A BITTER DEBATE OVER BORK
LEAD: A bitter and largely partisan battle over the confirmation of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court appeared virtually certain today as key Democratic senators predicted a long fight with an uncertain outcome.


Ex-Senator Scott's Wife Dies
LEAD: Marian Scott, wife of Hugh Scott Jr., a former Senate Republican leader, died Tuesday of complications from a cerebral hemorrhage, officials said today.
She was 87 years old.
Mrs.
Scott was admitted to Georgetown University Hospital about six weeks ago.
Mr.
Scott, 86, a Pennsylvnian who led his party in the Senate from 1969 to 1977, remained in stable condition at Bethesda Naval Hospital, where he was admitted Sunday after suffering a stroke.


Financial Corp. Sees Big Loss
LEAD: The Financial Corporation of America said today that it expects a second-quarter loss of $150 million to $200 million, underscoring the severity and persistence of the problems plaguing the parent of the nation's largest savings and loan institution.


Peat Marwick Fills Key Post
LEAD: The post of vice chairman for tax, a major position at Peat Marwick, has been filled by David C. Smith, a partner in charge of the tax department in the firm's Houston office, the accounting firm said.


Kenya Reports Elephant Kill
LEAD: Tanzanian poachers have killed at least 15 elephants in southwest Kenya in two months, the Government said today.
The poachers were reported to be mainly members of a tribe in northern Tanzania operating in and around Kenya's Masai Mara national park.
Many are said to be former soldiers in the Tanzanian Army and, it was asserted, are also involved in cattle rustling.


Primerica's President Sees a Profitable Future
LEAD: Kenneth A. Yarnell Jr., who brought Gerald Tsai Jr. and the American Can Company together, has been named president and chief operating officer of the company, now known as the Primerica Corporation.


British Insider Fined $40,000
LEAD: Geoffrey Collier, the former head of securities at the British investment bank Morgan Grenfell &amp; Company, was given a suspended one-year prison sentence and fined $:25,000, or about $40,000, today after pleading guilty to two insider-trading charges.


Future of Mansions Concerns Newport
LEAD: The sound of saws slicing mansions into condominiums breaks the golden stillness these days on Bellevue Avenue, the seaside street known as Millionaires' Row.
The two-mile boulevard of opulent homes is shaded by beeches, oaks, chestnuts and black walnuts.
But as developers turn some of these vast homes into apartments, another kind of shadow is being cast over the neighborhood and surrounding community of 35,000 people.


FORD CUTS ACCOUNTS AT JWT
LEAD: The JWT Group, which is being acquired by Britain's WPP Group, is losing some of its assignments from the Ford Motor Company, its largest client.
Ford had said it would restudy its agency relationships if JWT's management changed.


Job Safety Shift in California
LEAD: Safety enforcement at 600,000 California job sites shifted from the state to the Federal Government today in a move that critics say will make the workplace more dangerous for up to 14 million workers.


Japan-Poland Car Pact Seen
LEAD: A consortium of Japanese companies reportedly told the Polish Government today that it would finance the construction of a Daihatsu automobile plant in Poland.
If a final agreement can be reached between the Daihatsu Motor Company and Poland, the plant would be the first Japanese car factory in Eastern


AUDIOVOX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUDIOVOX CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
68,639,000
52,358,000
Net inc
2,033,000
1,294,000
Share earns
.30
.19
Shares outst
6,855,593
6,807,242
6mo sales
121,795,000
92,539,000
Net inc
2,496,000
1,447,000
Share earns
.37
.21
Shares outst
6,831,418
6,807,242


Advertising; Church's Fried Chicken Moves to Bloom
LEAD: Church's Fried Chicken of San Antonio is taking its advertising account to the Bloom Agency in Dallas.
The ad budget is $12 million, according to Robert H. Bloom, chairman of the parent Bloom Companies.


3 Freed Whales Are Reported To Have Traveled 51 Miles
LEAD: The three pilot whales that were released at sea Monday have traveled 51 miles to the southeast, the New England Aquarium reported today.


Day-Care Center For Sick Children
LEAD: As a neonatal intensive-care nurse, Lisa Schwartz frequently saw the problem: parents of chronically ill youngsters could not find a day-care center for them.


U.S. IS SAID TO FIND MINES MOORED IN LANES TO KUWAIT
LEAD: About a dozen moored mines have been found by American specialists in shipping lanes to Kuwait in the last three days, according to Pentagon officials.


CONCERT: SEOUL BAROQUE ENSEMBLE
LEAD: SEOUL, South Korea, is probably nearer to the German border today than was Vienna or Salzburg in 1750 -so rapid has the exchange of information between peoples become.
Thus it was not very surprising for a group such as the Seoul Baroque Chamber Ensemble to pass through Merkin Concert Hall on Monday night and leave behind performances of


South Korea Knows of Democracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


TOP OFFICIAL AND DEATH ROW FEAR TEXAS IS SHRUGGING OFF EXECUTIONS
LEAD: Executions in Texas have become so routine, Attorney General Jim Mattox says, that he fears their deterrent purpose is being lost and that Death Row inmates fear they have been forgotten.


Myriad Species In Fertile Pots Fill a Terrace
LEAD: TWENTY-FIVE years ago Monroe Pinckard found a cast-stone planter on the sidewalk near his new East Side apartment and thought it would make a fine container to put on his empty 18th-floor terrace.
That planter is still around - somewhere - buried in the leafy tangle of several hundred species that now fill almost every inch of his sunny 10-by-50-foot terrace.


COMNET CORP reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMNET CORP (OTC)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
40,754,000
37,203,000
Net inc
b2,632,000
c903,000
Share earns
1.06
-
b-Includes minority interest of $331,000, or 13 cents a share.
c-Net loss


Florida Trustees' Chairman Accused of Buying Degrees
LEAD: The Florida Institute of Technology's board of trustees will investigate a report by the Federal Bureau of Investigation stating that its chairman bought some of his college degrees through the mail, a board spokesman said today.


HOUSTON REALLY WANTED BIGGER SHOW
LEAD: This city wanted the Democratic National Convention and ended up with a debate tonight among the party's seven Presidential hopefuls.
The organizers of the debate wanted the Republicans and ended up with the Democrats.


Pasta Talks Are Extended
LEAD: The Reagan Administration postponed today its July 1 deadline for the European Community to end its subsidy of pasta exported to the United States, according to the office of the United States trade representative.


TAB PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TAB PRODUCTS CO (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
31,662,000
32,457,000
Net inc
1,962,000
1,828,000
Share earns
.29
.28
Yr rev
123,681,000
121,429,000
Net inc
6,790,000
5,685,000
Share earns
1.00
.85


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JULY 2, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-13


NATO Endures
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Footprints of a Legend
LEAD: Helen Hayes signs an autograph in cement after leaving her footprints outside the Helen Hayes Theater at 240 West 44th Street.
The star was joined by Mark Hamill, left, and Robert Joy, who are performing there in ''The Nerd,'' for the ceremony marking the 75th anniversary of the theater that now bears her name.


TIGHTER U.S. RULES PROPOSED FOR MUNICIPAL INCINERATORS
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency today proposed tighter Federal controls on garbage incinerators and issued a study showing that pollution from such incinerators can cause cancer and other illness.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Beneficial Corp., Wilmington, Del., said it had completed the previously announced sale of its Western National Life Insurance Co. to Conseco Inc. for $261 million.


SENATE OPPOSES OIL IMPORT FEE
LEAD: The Senate deleted a provision in the trade bill today that would have allowed the President to impose an oil import fee to reduce dependence on foreign oil.


Downey's Quiz
LEAD: Representative Thomas J. Downey is convinced that most people talk a great deal about welfare but really don't know too much about it.


Greenspan's Main Task
LEAD: It has been suggested that the incoming Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, should continue the policies of his predecessor, Paul A. Volcker.
But more of the same is not the answer to today's problems.
Mr.
Greenspan's main task is not to fight inflation but to restore a credible policy of growth so that the world can safely deal with the large-scale debt problems that the collapse of inflation left in its wake.


GENESEE BREWING CO reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENESEE BREWING CO (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Sales
38,255,000
37,952,000
Net inc
1,524,000
2,426,000
Share earns
.92
1.48
Yr sales
167,096,000
167,591,000
Net inc
6,902,000
7,222,000
Share earns
4.17
4.38


CLARK, J L MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLARK, J L MANUFACTURING CO (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
44,102,000
37,257,000
Net inc
4,529,000
3,627,000
Share earns
.56
.45
6mo sales
82,433,000
73,938,000
Net inc
7,972,000
7,431,000
Share earns
.99
.92


JUDGE SMITH CONVICTED OF PERJURY IN QUEENS CABLE-TV INVESTIGATION
LEAD: Justice Francis X. Smith, who supervised 50 state judges in Queens, was convicted yesterday of perjury and criminal contempt for lying about what was said at private meetings on the awarding of cable television franchises.


Sharon Steel Loans
LEAD: The Sharon Steel Corporation, operating under bankruptcy court protection, has won a fourth extension of a deadline for arranging private loans to accompany a $5.2 million Federal grant.
An official for the Mellon Bank, meanwhile, said the bank would lend money to the troubled steelmaker provided its claim for repayment can be secured against the company's current assets, such as inventory, working capital or money owed by customers.


13 to Carry Testimony Of North and Poindexter
LEAD: Channel 13 will carry the entire testimony of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter before the Congressional committee on the Iran-contra arms affair.


CBS RENEWS 'WEST 57TH' FOR AUTUMN
LEAD: ''West 57th,'' the CBS News magazine program that has had varying slots on the CBS schedule for more than two years, has been given an unconditional renewal for the fall season.


The Ceiling Fan: Updated and Popular
LEAD: ''WE have people coming in here from the eastern end of Long Island who buy 10, 12, 15 fans at a time,'' said Steven Samuels, president of the Ceiling Fan Place in Huntington, L.I. ''They put them in every room of the house.''


2 Allied Units May Expand
LEAD: Robert Campeau, whose Campeau Corporation acquired the Allied Stores Corporation in December, said he was considering expanding Allied's Brooks Brothers and Ann Taylor units to Europe and Canada.


Bork Irked by Emphasis on His Role in Watergate
LEAD: ''I get a little tired of it being portrayed as the only thing I ever did,'' Judge Robert H. Bork once said about his role at a critical moment in the Watergate scandals, what was widely referred to at the time as the ''Saturday Night Massacre.''


The Worm and the Apple: Fire and Water; Bucks and Bangs
LEAD: ''Wall-to-wall bang bang'' is a phrase television producers use to describe action-packed news footage from combat zones.
It would also aptly describe New York's firecracker season.


Reichhold Rejects Offer by Dainippon
LEAD: Reichhold Chemicals Inc. yesterday rejected a $473 million hostile takeover bid from Dainippon Ink and Chemicals Inc. and said that it would explore other possible offers for the company.


Murdoch Backed
LEAD: The British Government gave the publisher Rupert Murdoch permission to buy the loss-ridden Today newspaper from Lonrho P.L.C. for $:38 million, or about $61 million.
Mr.
Murdoch's News International P.L.C. announced the proposed acquisition on Tuesday, noting that it required the approval of Lord Young, the Trade and Industry secretary.


Market Place; How Warrants Of Kidde Look
LEAD: AFTER trading in a relatively narrow range for four years, shares of Kidde Inc. have raced to new highs in recent weeks.
This advance stems from reports that the conglomerate will embark upon restructuring moves that would enhance shareholder value.


Pork Sharply Higher; Corn Prices in Retreat
LEAD: Pork futures prices surged sharply higher yesterday with many contracts gaining the limit allowed for daily trading on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.


Argentina's Alfonsin Has Lost His Way
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bilzerian Sweetens Bid for Pay 'N Pak
LEAD: The Florida investor Paul A. Bilzerian submitted two slightly sweetened takeover offers for Pay 'N Pak Stores.
One proposal, made through the Bicoastal Financial Corporation, would pay $22 a share for Pay 'N Pak, made up of $17 in cash and $5 in preferred stock.
The second proposal was for $17 in cash and $5.50 in preferred stock, on the condition that the Kent, Wash., company revoke its agreement to pay a cancellation fee to the Rosewood Holding Corporation.


CASH MACHINES IN MINNESOTA DISPENSING WELFARE BENEFITS
LEAD: Some welfare recipients here are receiving monthly benefits through electronic cash-dispensing machines in a six-month experimental program that began Monday.


Democrats Fail in Senate Bid To Delay U.S. Escorts in Gulf
LEAD: Senate Democrats tried to win support today for a resolution seeking a delay in President Reagan's Persian Gulf escort plans, but Republicans successfully blocked the attempt.


STAGE: 'I.D.,' COMEDY ABOUT IDENTITY
LEAD: BILLED as a comedy, ''I.D.,'' by Gayden Wren, at the American Theater for Actors, is actually a series of sometimes related skits.
A few are funny - a robot programmed to think like a man and a man hypnotized into thinking he's a robot debate about whether to turn off the power to find out which is the real robot; two women on a stalled elevator discover they are the same person; three plants wonder whether the enormous creature sprinkling water on them is intelligent enough to be communicated with.


BAKKER SEEKING AN EXAMINER TO MONITOR PTL BANKRUPTCY
LEAD: Lawyers for Jim Bakker, the former leader of the PTL Ministry, have asked a Federal judge to appoint an independent examiner to observe the new PTL management and its reorganization plans during bankruptcy proceedings.


NORTH QUESTIONED ON CONTRA AFFAIR
LEAD: After seven months of silence, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North appeared before Congressional investigators today, for the first time, for questioning about his dealings with Iran and the contras in Nicaragua.


UNITED STATIONERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED STATIONERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
181,961,000
152,217,000
Net inc
2,642,000
2,808,000
Share earns
.17
.18
Shares outst
15,343,805
15,296,721
9mo sales
544,533,000
483,618,000
Net inc
11,463,000
11,412,000
Share earns
.75
.78
Shares outst
15,324,874
14,695,352


VICEROY HOMES LTD reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VICEROY HOMES LTD
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
48,991,000
35,107,000
Net inc
4,837,000
2,368,000
Share earns
.66
.36
The results are in Canadian dollars.


Brazil Freezes Some of Debt
LEAD: Brazil, whose $111 billion foreign debt is the biggest of any developing country, said today it was suspending repayment of $1.05 billion of principal due this year to the Paris Club, a group of Western creditor nations.


NIGERIA LEADER DETAILS PLAN FOR RETURN OF CIVILIAN RULE
LEAD: President Ibrahim Babangida announced a political plan today to guide Nigeria from military rule to civilian democracy by 1992.


LEGAL ADVISOR TO ARCHDIOCESE
LEAD: Charles J. Tobin Jr., who as director of the New York State Catholic Conference for 25 years represented the state's bishops on issues such as divorce and abortion, died of cancer Tuesday at his home in Albany.
He was 71 years old.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Costly A-Plant Licensed


HOYT TO JOIN WHITE SOX
LEAD: LaMarr Hoyt has agreed to sign with the Chicago White Sox, the team for which he won the Cy Young Award in 1983, although he is not expected to pitch for them this season.


Plan to End Partnerships' Tax Break Is Opposed
LEAD: A Treasury proposal announced this week to end a special tax break for corporations that set themselves as up as master limited partnerships and sell their shares on stock exchanges met predictable resistance today from representatives of Wall Street and the partnerships.


Bridge: Death of Popular Competitor Leaves Vacancy in Title Play
LEAD: One of the most successful and popular American women in bridge, Evelyn Levitt, died last week at the age of 67 when a lifelong goal was on her horizon.


SUCCESSFUL LOSERS
LEAD: Of the 15 pitchers who have lost the most major league games, four are active this season.
Phil Niekro passed Gaylord Perry in May and is now in fourth place on the career list with 268 losses, only 45 fewer than Cy Young's total of 313.
The 10 active pitchers with the most career losses, through Tuesday's games: Pitcher, team W L Phil Niekro, Indians 317 268 Don Sutton, Angels 315 247 Steve Carlton, Indians 328 234 Nolan Ryan, Astros 257 234 Tommy John, Yankees 271 213 Bert Blyleven, Twins 236 203 Joe Niekro, Twins 218 194 Jerry Reuss, Angels 196 163


SENATE PASSES 1987 SPENDING BILL, PUTTING OFF DECISION ON EMBASSY
LEAD: The Senate approved a $9.4 billion spending bill this evening, and an Administration official said President Reagan was expected to sign it.


BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY CO LTD reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY CO LTD (NYSE)
Year to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,372,400,000
8,743,000,000
Net inc
b861,300,000
b1,012,900,000
b-Includes extraordinary credits of $41,000,000 and $24,700,000 for the latest year and year-earlier period, respectively.


20 YEARS AFTER A 'SUMMER OF LOVE,' HAIGHT-ASHBURY LOOKS BACK
LEAD: It lasted but a moment, the ''Summer of Love'' that drew tens of thousands of young people to the Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco in 1967.


ROSE CHANGES PLANS
LEAD: Contrary to statements he had made in Los Angeles last weekend, Pete Rose, the manager of the Reds, said in Cincinnati Tuesday he did not know when he would start taking batting practice.
Rose said Sunday he had planned to start taking batting practice this week, probably Tuesday, to get ready in case he would return to the roster.


3 Sentenced in Boston In I.R.A. Gun-Running
LEAD: Three Massachusetts men who admitted smuggling seven tons of weapons and ammunition for the Irish Republican Army were sentenced to up to 10 years in prison today, and two were also sentenced for smuggling marijuana into the United States.


U.S. BERATES PANAMANIAN REGIME IN PRESSING FOR DEMOCRATIC RULE
LEAD: In an effort to bring pressure on Panama's military to allow democratic rule, the Reagan Administration has lashed out in the past 24 hours against the leadership of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Harriett Johnson, 79, A New York Post Critic
LEAD: Harriett Johnson, music critic of The New York Post for 43 years, died of cancer Friday in La Jolla, Calif.
She was 79 years old.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.45
6.56
7.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.72
6.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.80
5.89
5.95
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.21.
8.23
7.30
30-YR.


America Needs A Literacy Corps
LEAD: America prides itself on being an ''advanced'' nation, but its level of illiteracy mocks the term.
At international gatherings, President Reagan, in common with most 20th century American Presidents, represents the country with the poorest literacy record of all the industrialized nations.


CAMPBELL HONOR
LEAD: The Houston Oilers said today they will retire jersey No. 34 worn by their former running back, Earl Campbell, on Aug. 13 at the Astrodome.
Campbell led the Oilers in rushing in each of his first six seasons before he was traded to New Orleans Oct. 9, 1984.
Campbell, 32 years old, retired last August, with 9,407 rushing yards.


7 Democrats Hold First Major Debate of '88 Campaign
LEAD: The seven Democratic candidates for President during their televised debate last night in Houston.


National Aluminum
LEAD: The National Aluminum Corporation announced price increases today ranging from 6 percent to 8 percent, following similar moves by other major producers.
The company, a subsidiary of Pittsburgh-based National Intergroup Inc., said the changes are effective with orders received next Monday.
The percentage increases will raise prices by 7 cents a pound for extrusions and 6 cents a pound for foil and common sheet.


2 PARTIES IN KOREA BEGIN CAMPAIGNING FOR FUTURE POWER
LEAD: The ruling and opposition parties began their separate campaigns today for future power, on a day when both sides spoke of a South Korean ''political miracle.''


No Retirement For IDS Head
LEAD: Robert F. Froehlke started his retirement job yesterday -as president and chief executive of the $17 billion IDS Mutual Fund Group, a unit of the American Express Company.


ROYALS BEAT TWINS
LEAD: Jim Eisenreich smashed a pinch-hit double off the center-field wall with one out in the bottom of the ninth inning tonight, scoring Buddy Biancalana from first base and giving the Kansas City Royals a 4-3 victory over the Minnesota Twins.


'Crimes' by Israel Are Cited by Barbie's Lawyers
LEAD: Defense lawyers in the trial of Klaus Barbie took the floor today and provoked an angry quarrel in the courtroom when they attacked Israel and other countries for committing ''crimes against humanity'' that, they argued, were ''more serious'' than those of Mr.
Barbie himself.


THE EXILE RETURNS, EMBODYING THE AGONY OF '73
LEAD: In the Chile of 1987, Carmen Castillo seems to have come directly from another time.
But she carries with her, in her blood and her loves, much of the country's anguished modern history.


SALANT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SALANT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Sales
28,972,000
29,033,000
Net inc
b392,000
c1,331,000
Share earns
.12
-
6mo sales
50,366,000
53,936,000
Net inc
b750,000
c1,732,000
Share earns
.23
-
b-After tax credits of $157,000 for the quarter and $299,000 for the 6 months.


Penney Reshuffles For a New Concept
LEAD: Two months after it announced its headquarters move from New York City to Dallas, the J. C. Penney Company, the nation's third-largest retailer, said it was making its most sweeping executive restructuring in years in the headquarters and in the field, effective Aug. 1.


Genetics Gets Protein Patent
LEAD: Genetics Institute Inc., a biotechnology company based in Cambridge, Mass., said yesterday that it had received a patent on a pure form of erythropoietin, or EPO, a naturally occurring protein that analysts say could become one of the largest-selling drugs produced by genetic engineering.
The announcement sent


Tony Webster Is Dead at 65; An Award-Winning TV Writer
LEAD: Anthony (Tony) Webster, an Emmy-winning television writer for the ''Sid Caesar Show,'' ''Your Show of Shows,'' ''The Phil Silvers Show,'' ''Bob and Ray'' and more recently, ''Love Boat,'' died of cancer of the esophagus Saturday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 65 years old.


TOSHIBA WARNS ON JOBS IN U.S.
LEAD: A ban on imports of Toshiba Corporation products by the United States would cut off more than $1 billion worth of equipment and could lead to layoffs of Toshiba employees in the United States, the head of Toshiba's American operations said today.


REPLIGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REPLIGEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,756,553
1,003,532
Net loss
b18,098,092
812,641
Shares outst
5,884,015
4,314,905
Yr rev
5,379,987
4,745,274
Net loss
b21,157,129
1,365,952
Shares outst
5,743,986
4,259,123


Honda Exports To Japan Set
LEAD: Honda of America said today that by early next year it would export its powerful Gold Wing motorcycles to Japan.
The company said it was the first time a Japanese vehicle manufacturer would build models in America for its home market.


Yields Flat Or Up a Bit
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were flat or slightly higher for the week ended yesterday as they continue to move along the plateau they reached on June 17.


Vacationing by Car, Children in Tow; Keeping Sibling Revelry in Check
LEAD: HERE are some hints from parents and children that might help families survive an almost interminable automobile trip:


The U.S. Treasury vs. the Antilles
LEAD: Few Americans know that the Netherlands Antilles is a conduit for billions in loans from Europeans.
Thus few Americans noticed this week when the U.S.
Treasury terminated a tax treaty with the tiny Caribbean state and triggered panic selling in the $600 billion Eurobond market.
The Treasury Department was right to crack down on the Antilles' collusion with U.S.


AART DE JONG
LEAD: Aart de Jong, an art dealer who in recent years helped to bring a new generation of artists to public view, died last Friday when he was struck by a van while riding a bicycle in Greenwich Village.
He was 29 years old.


CHRYSLER ACTS IN FALSE MILEAGE CASE
LEAD: Lee A. Iacocca, chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, said today that the company had acted in a way that was ''dumb'' and ''unforgivable'' by selling cars that had been driven while their odometers were disconnected.


Judge Bork, the Senate and Politics
LEAD: There's no getting politics out of a nomination to the Supreme Court.
Political justice and a politicized judiciary are to be avoided, but picking a justice is a political act.
That's why President Reagan's nomination of Judge Robert Bork will test the Senate.
It has not only a right but a duty to scrutinize Judge


KANSANS TAKE DRINK THEY BELIEVE SIGNALS AN ECONOMIC BOOM
LEAD: Around this long-dry state today, Kansans with cocktail glasses uplifted were exorcising the ghost of Carry Nation, the fire-breathing temperance leader who put her stamp on the state's conscience and the slash of her ax on many a saloon.


PERJURY CHARGES DENIED AS AMERUSO TRIAL OPENS
LEAD: A former New York City Transportation Commissioner, Anthony R. Ameruso, may have given ''technically incorrect'' answers to a commission investigating municipal corruption, but he did not commit perjury, his attorney told a judge yesterday.


THE 2 KIMS: CAN THEY KEEP A UNITED FRONT?
LEAD: Through more than two weeks of street protests, strategy for anti-Government forces seemed to be directed largely by dissident clergymen and campus militants.


Mutual Radio and Union Agree to a 3-Year Pact
LEAD: Announcers and editors averted a strike early today by agreeing to a three-year contract with the Mutual Broadcasting System, according to Tom Powers, an attorney for the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists.


SURGEON ASSERTS HIS COMPLAINTS LED TO DISMISSIAL
LEAD: A surgeon at Kings County Hospital Center said yesterday he had been dismissed for insubordination because he refused to perform surgery in an operating room infested with flies.


Occidental Sale
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said it had completed the previously announced sale of all of the stock of the United Gas Pipe Line Company and UER Marketing to the Lasalle Energy Corporation of Dallas for $482 million, plus two subordinated notes totaling $138 million.
The operations sold were units of Occidental's Midcon subsidiary.


Whim of Limestone: Ozark Cave Is Now a Real-Estate Listing
LEAD: THE cave that John Dillon Hay ''built'' is a bit off the beaten track.
You fly into Springfield, Mo., then drive two and a half hours or so south into the lush, remote wilderness of the Ozark Mountains of Arkansas.
You go past Dogpatch, U.S.A, the Li'l Abner theme park, continue past the Full Gospel Church (watch for skunks around there), cross the Little Buffalo


Rail Concern Is Blamed For Derailment in Ohio
LEAD: A Federal Railroad Administration report released today said improper maintenance procedures contributed to the derailment of a railroad tanker last year that forced thousands of people to evacuate their homes for up to five days.


A TENANT HELPS A BURLAR GET IN, THEN STABS HIM
LEAD: A burglar who got halfway into the window of a fourth-floor Queens apartment and then begged the tenant to help him the rest of the way in was arrested yesterday after the tenant stabbed him during a scuffle inside the apartment, the police said.


BULLPENS SPELLING TROUBLE FOR YANKEES AND METS
LEAD: A year ago tomorrow, Dave Righetti started the remarkable streak that carried him to the major league record for saves.
After failing to gain saves 9 times in 26 save situations, Righetti reeled off a string of 24 saves and 29 in his last 30 save situations for a total of 46.


OFFICIAL SCORN FOR IMPORT BAN
LEAD: The State Department said today that import penalties voted by the Senate against Japanese and Norwegian companies that sold sensitive technology to the Soviet Union were ''counterproductive'' and ''contrary to the spirit and practice'' of export control agreements.


Old New York, Re-created
LEAD: WHEN Mark Bachman, left, a 34-year-old scenic artist for film and television, moved from Bakersfield, Calif., to New York City in 1982, he was awed by the street signs. ''They have mythic proportions,'' he said. ''When I see the Wall Street sign, I think about the stock market crash in 1929.''


KEAN'S APPEAL AVERTS JERSEY GARBAGE STRIKE
LEAD: A strike by unionized garbage collectors in northern New Jersey was averted early today after negotiators accepted an appeal by Governor Kean to continue contract talks.


New York's Hard Climb Ahead
LEAD: ''New York Ascendant'' - that is the optimistic title for the report of the Commission on the Year 2000, chaired by Robert F. Wagner Jr.
The text makes clear that the ascent will be more like a mountain climber with a heavy pack than the carefree flight of a balloon.


Spotlight on Congress's Cemetery
LEAD: On Friday, the local chapters of 20 patriotic organizations will gather at one of Washington's more obscure historical sites for what might be described as a family affair.


OPPENHEIMER &amp; CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OPPENHEIMER &amp; CO INC
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Revenue
209,999,000
194,189,000
Net inc
10,961,000
15,780,000
Yr rev
772,400,000
575,401,000
Net inc
26,890,000
35,509,000


PRESIDENTS FUMBLE ATHLETIC REFORM BID
LEAD: The subject was sports, the agenda was money, but the reality was politics.
That, in short, was how many participants saw the special convention of the National Collegiate Athletic Association that ended here Tuesday.


WARD DISCLOSES A SECRET INQUIRY ON BLACK GROUP
LEAD: Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward, in a highly unusual move, revealed yesterday that the New York City Police Department's intelligence division was conducting an undercover investigation of a group of self-proclaimed black revolutionaries he called the ''New York Eight.''


New York Gets a New Education Chief
LEAD: Dr.
Thomas Sobol getting a kiss from his wife, Harriet, after he was sworn in as State Education Com missioner.
Judge Joseph W. Bellacosa of Court of Appeals administered oath.
Holding the Bible were Nikisha Allmond, left, and Bridget Reilly.
Dr.
Sobol was formerly Schools Superintendent in Scarsdale.


EVERT AND NAVRATILOVA TO PLAY IT AGAIN
LEAD: There are not many Wimbledons in Chris Evert's future, opportunities to be a part of the two weeks that matter most in tennis.
That was why one interested observer thought Evert was going about her task all wrong, wearing a frown for an occasion that demanded her best smile.


'BABY BELL' EXPANSIONS ARE VIEWED AS UNLIKELY
LEAD: The seven regional ''Baby Bell'' telephone companies have almost no chance of persuading Federal District Judge Harold H. Greene to allow them to expand vastly by providing long-distance service, and only a slim chance of winning permission to manufacture equipment, lawyers and other telecommuniciations specialists maintain.


IN BORK'S WORDS: ABORTION, DEATH PENALTY, GAY RIGHTS
LEAD:  Abortion


New Philips Chip
LEAD: Philips N.V. said it had made its first one-megabit semiconductor, a submicron SRAM, or static random access memory, chip.
The development came as part of a $1 billion joint project with Siemens A.G. of West Germany.
Aanalysts said that major American and Japanese companies were still likely to sell their chips first and dominate the market.


IN NICARAGUA: WHAT TO DO TO THE POTATO
LEAD: Several thousand Nicaraguans spent part of Saturday doing something that Nicaraguans don't often do.
They ate potatoes.


FIGHTING APARTHEID DESPITE THE COST
LEAD: This tiny nation, a former Portuguese colony made up of 10 volcanic islands scattered off the west coast of Africa, has hardly any trees, precious little fresh water and, so far as Government officials know, just two dentists in its entire population.


New Chairman At Law Firm
LEAD: John E. Merow became chairman of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell yesterday, during one of the most tumultuous periods in the blue-chip law firm's 108-year-history.


GRAND JURY CLEARS POLICEMAN IN A FATAL BROOKLYN SHOOTING
LEAD: A Brooklyn grand jury has cleared a police officer who killed a man he said had charged at him with a knife, although the dead man's family said he was unable to grip a weapon.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: DON'T TREAD ON ME: The Selected Letters of S. J. Perelman.
Edited by Prudence Crowther.
Illustrated. 372 pages.


REAGAN CITES HIS 'RESTRAINT'; CONFIRMATION FIGHT LOOMS
LEAD: President Reagan announced today that he would nominate Judge Robert H. Bork to the United States Supreme Court, setting the stage for a bitter battle in the Senate over his confirmation.


BUSY LAW FIRMS' PROFITS LEAP
LEAD: Many of the nation's leading law firms have had their most profitable year ever, fueled by a wave of corporate restructurings, the reaction of businesses to the new tax law and a jump in litigation.


Governor Used His Popularity to Get Legislative Accord on Code of Ethics
LEAD: With an agreement on a new government code of ethics, Governor Cuomo has scored perhaps the biggest victory of his term in office.
He took on the Legislature as he never had before, not just rejecting a code he considered weak but, in effect, shaming lawmakers into accepting one that was much stronger.


KEMP PROPOSES WIDE AIDS TESTS AND MONITORING
LEAD: Representative Jack F. Kemp today offered a detailed policy for dealing with AIDS.


Florida ZIP Codes Revised
LEAD: A million Florida homes and businesses were given new ZIP codes today in the United States Postal Service's largest single set of code changes in one state. ''No other state is experiencing similar growing pains,'' said Woodrow Conner, Florida division general manager of the Postal Service. ''Our daily mail volume will double in the next nine years.


Reactors' Foes Gain a Key Ally
LEAD: Opponents of nuclear power plants in Shoreham, L.I., and Seabrook, N.H., have won the backing of a key Congressional leader for legislation that would effectively block operating licenses for the reactors.


HBO'S 'NOT NECESSARILY THE NEWS'
LEAD: NOT every attempted gag in ''Not Necessarily the News'' is necessarily funny, but the first program of a new edition of the series, which has been enlivening cable television since 1983, is definitely, defiantly newsy.
Tonight, on HBO at 11 P.M., the show's four frantic reporters - Anne Bloom, Danny Breen, Stuart Pankin and Lucy Webb - concentrate on Washington, taking aim mostly at the right and scoring some palpable hits on such broad targets as television evangelists, principals of the


BIG BEAR CO reports earnings for 13wks to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIG BEAR CO (OTC)
13wks to May 30
1987
1986
Sales
215,994,000
209,234,000
Net inc
3,609,000
3,398,000
Share earns
.46
.43
39wk sales
657,531,000
648,731,000
Net inc
10,397,000
8,390,000
Share earns
1.33
1.07


TWO BRONX SCHOOLS: STUDY IN INEQUALITY
LEAD: At Public School 24 in the middle-class neighborhood of Riverdale in the Bronx, computers and special programs abound.
The principal, David Rothstein, speaks enthusiastically of his teaching staff.


YANKS POLISH OFF JAYS IN 12TH, 6-1
LEAD: The Yankees did not talk about a sweep when they arrived, but late today - after they had taken three straight from the Toronto Blue Jays and moved in front by three games in the American League East - they allowed themselves a small luxury.


U.S. Studying Firm's Bonds
LEAD: A United States Attorney and the Securities and Exchange Commisson are heading an investigation into $1.6 billion of unusual municipal bond issues underwritten last year by Matthews &amp; Wright, a securities firm based in New York, several legal sources said yesterday.


CSX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CSX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,010,000 000
1,754,000,000
Net inc
100,000,000
124,000,000
Share earns
.65
.81
6mo rev
3,900,000,000
3,400,000,000
Net inc
173,000,000
209,000,000
Share earns
1.12
1.37


Price of Milk: The Changes Hit Close to Home
LEAD: Most New York City consumers don't know a Guernsey from a Holstein (to say nothing of a Jersey) but they have probably figured out by now that something has been happening to the price of milk (thanks to a New Jersey dairy).


Bolshoi's 'Golden Age': At the Met and on A&amp;E
LEAD: While ticket holders are watching the Bolshoi Ballet at the Metropolitan Opera House tonight, television viewers - at least those who receive the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network -can watch the same ballet at home.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: SINCE doorbell wiring systems run on low voltage, any amateur can safely and easily repair them without worrying about getting a dangerous shock or creating a fire hazard.


HIGH-TECH BROOKLYN COMPLEX APPROVED
LEAD: Metrotech, a $770 million development of commercial offices and technology research proposed for 17 acres in downtown Brooklyn, was approved yesterday morning at the close of a Board of Estimate meeting that lasted nearly 24 hours.


Actors' Fund Benefit Will Aid Needy Artists
LEAD: The Actors' Fund of America announced Tuesday that it would hold a gala benefit in Washington on Oct. 5 to restore money to its fund for helping people from the theatrical community in financial distress.


But Should We Trust Those Medical Tests?
LEAD: To the Editor:


First Boston, Goldman Get Ohio Facility Bonds
LEAD: Cities and states issuing debt in the municipal market have increasingly sought to narrow the time between the announcement of a bond sale and the auction.
These municipal issuers are seeking greater borrowing flexibility, similar to that of corporations, which can come to market when interest rates are attractive - almost at a moment's notice.


BUILDING SPENDING RISES 0.3%
LEAD: Construction spending rose a slight three-tenths of 1 percent in May as declines in government spending and residential construction dampened building activity, the Commerce Department said today.


ROACH, HAL STUDIOS reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROACH, HAL STUDIOS (OTC)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,969,507
3,049,982
Net loss
b3,014,829
c1,121,437
b-After a $3,451,646 loss from discontinued operations.
c-After net from a minority interest of $1,542.


Global Markets, Corrected
LEAD: An article and chart in Business Day on Monday detailing the performance of major international stock markets in the second quarter carried incorrect figures on changes in their market value, both in dollars and in local currency.


Judge Upholds Rowe's Fees
LEAD: In a case that has been closely watched by the money market industry, a Federal judge in New York ruled yesterday that T. Rowe Price Associates Inc. did not charge excessive fees for managing the Rowe Price Prime Reserve Fund, a multibillion-dollar money market fund.
In a 70-page opinion, Federal


TRANZONIC COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANZONIC COMPANIES (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,483,300
13,850,812
Net inc
1,077,600
515,468
Share earns
.93
.43
Shares outst
1,161,283
1,208,446


CONAGRA INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONAGRA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,507,942,000
2,097,893,000
Net inc
39,954,000
37,702,000
Share earns
.50
.47
Yr sales
9,001,553,000
7,835,677,000
Net inc
148,726,000
135,263,000
Share earns
1.85
1.68


7 IN CONNECTICUT VYING FOR A SEAT IN CONGRESS
LEAD: After 17 years of comfortably electing the same Congressman, the affluent Fourth Congressional District along Long Island Sound is facing a fractious contest in the heat of summer to choose a successor to Stewart B. McKinney.


HILLENBRAND INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HILLENBRAND INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Revenue
181,511,000
159,440,000
Net inc
14,612,000
12,534,000
Share earns
.38
.32
6mo rev
348,721,000
313,401,000
Net inc
26,467,000
23,432,000
Share earns
.69
.60


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  On the Bounding Main


RUTH BRINTON PERERA
LEAD: Ruth Brinton Perera, a founder of an association to help the wives of Japanese executives and diplomats adapt to life in the United States, died Sunday at the Lehigh Valley Hospital Center in Allentown, Pa., of injuries suffered in an automobile accident.
She was 81 years old and lived in Kennett Square,


EDUCATORS URGE TURN TO STUDIES ABOUT RELIGION
LEAD: A panel of educators today called for an end to ''the curricular silence on religion'' that it says has permeated the classroom since the Supreme Court banished officially sanctioned prayer in public schools a quarter-century ago.


QUALITY FOOD CENTERS reports earnings for Qtr to June 13
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUALITY FOOD CENTERS (OTC)
Qtr to June 13
1987
1986
Sales
43,263,000
35,594,000
Net inc
b144,000
194,000
Share earns
.03
.06
Shares outst
4,546,429
3,325,000
6mo sales
84,631,000
68,706,000
Net inc
b758,000
236,000
Share earns
.19
.07
Shares outst
3,935,714
3,325,000


Calendar: Summer Classes and Crafts
LEAD:  Summer Classes, New York Botanical Garden, Mosholu Parkway at Southern Boulevard, Bronx; 212-220-8747.


Genentech Pact
LEAD: Genentech Inc., a biotechnology company based in South San Francisco, and Mitsubishi Chemical Industries, Japan's largest chemical company, said they had agreed to exchange marketing rights and to collaborate in research and development of pharmaceuticals.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


The Worm and the Apple: Fire and Water; Drained of Reason
LEAD: Each year New York City's public beaches are declared open on Memorial Day.
Why then do the city's public swimming pools stay empty until late June?
Department of Parks and Recreation officials offer only leaky reasons.


SCS-COMPUTE INC reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCS-COMPUTE INC (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,380,000
11,157,000
Net inc
4,278,000
4,344,000
Share earns
1.41
1.92
Shares outst
3,032,000
2,265,000
Yr rev
18,018,000
15,262,000
Net inc
1,655,000
1,307,000
Share earns
.60
.58
Shares outst
2,777,000
2,264,000


U.S. 'Dumping' Charged
LEAD: The United States is among half a dozen countries accused by the synthetic fiber industry of ''dumping'' polyester on the European market at cut-rate prices, the European Community said today.
The community's executive commission said it is investigating charges that American companies - together with those of Mexico, Taiwan, Rumania, Turkey and Yugoslavia - are selling synthetic fibers in Europe below production costs.


PACT FOR LAFONTAINE
LEAD: The Islanders re-signed Pat LaFontaine and Gerald Diduck to multiyear contracts just before they would have become free agents.
The Islanders maintained their policy of not disclosing details of the contracts.


PARKE CUMMINGS
LEAD: Parke Cummings, a humorist and author of books on sports, died yesterday at his home in Westport, Conn., after a heart attack.
He was 84 years old.


Taking a Church to Town
LEAD: Tractors and a flatbed truck moving the 100-year-old Theophilus Church along the road to Winside, Neb., where it is to be used as a museum.
Other tractors helped steady the 72-ton building from the rear. (AP)


EQUITY SETS TERMS FOR LETTING BRITON STAR IN 'PHANTOM'
LEAD: The governing council of the Actors' Equity Association has given the producers of ''Phantom of the Opera'' a set of conditions under which it will allow Sarah Brightman, a British actress, to re-create her leading role in the musical on Broadway in the fall.


THE 'FUSS' OVER MCGWIRE
LEAD: When the switchboard operator at the Westin Hotel in Chicago was asked to put through a phone call to Mark McGwire's room at noon yesterday, she said, ''He has a 'Do Not Disturb' sign on.'' That's understandable.
But for the Oakland Athletics' rookie with 28 home runs, the search for peace and privacy has only begun.


Producers Weigh Offer From Directors Guild
LEAD: Producers considered a last-minute offer from the Directors Guild of America today as union members began a vote that could mean the first strike in the guild's 51-year history.


No Headline
LEAD: ROOKIE GETS POLE


Dining Out Guide: All-American
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
AMERICAN HARVEST, Vista International Hotel, 3 World Trade Center (938-9100) - *(June 5, 1987) Traditional American themes - quilts, wooden carvings and still-life paintings - provide the decoration for the quiet and spacious dining room of this downtown restaurant.


Bicycle Carriers Recalled
LEAD: Certain child carriers for bicycles sold by Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company are being recalled because the shoulder-harness buckle could disengage, allowing the child to fall out, the Consumer Product Safety Commission announced Wednesday.
The recall involves the Championship Deluxe Bicycle Child Carriers, sold nationally by Sears for about $40 from February to July 1986.


Borg-Warner Deal Brings Financing
LEAD: The Borg-Warner Holdings Corporation has filed a dual offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission: $600 million of senior subordinated debentures due in 1997 and $203.7 million of senior subordinated discount debentures due in 1999.


New Museum Director
LEAD: The Smithsonian Institution has announced the appointment of Martin O. Harwit, a Cornell University astrophysicist, as director of its National Air and Space Museum.
He succeeds Walter J. Boyne, who resigned last August to devote full time to writing.
Mr.
Harwit served as chairman of Cornell's astronomy department from 1971 to 1976 and serves now as professor of astronomy and as co-director of the history and philosophy of science and technology program.


RESTAURANTS
LEAD: FIRST and Second Avenues in the 70's and 80's, Manhattan's other Little Italy, is abloom with colorful canopies over inviting windows, making it virtually impossible for the casual diner to sort out the exceptional from the forgettable.
Violetta, an unassuming two-year-old restaurant, is the kind of place I have strolled by dozens of times without paying particular notice - that is, until some


Holiday Tomorrow
LEAD: Independence Day is tomorrow, but closings vary.
Following are holiday schedules for today and tomorrow:


The Uses of Heroin For Cancer Pain
LEAD: To the Editor:


BROADWAY
LEAD:  Theater In the Country It's nice to cross a bridge to somewhere when the thermometer in Manhattan soars, and it's even more pleasant when an evening of theater accompanies the cool breezes and the rustle of trees.
Now is the time, and the playhouses within easy reach are geared and waiting, but before going into what's out there, a bit of happy news for early fall.


IN A MANSION, ALLIANCES TO OVERCOME ADDICTION
LEAD: In the limestone Renaissance Revival mansion on East 93d Street where Dwight Gooden recently spent a month in drug rehabilitation, substance abusers of different incomes, ages and attitudes forge incongruous alliances, uneasy at first, that are a key element of their recovery.


British Actress to Reprise Her Role in 'Phantom'
LEAD: The producers of ''Phantom of the Opera'' agreed yesterday to terms set by the Actors' Equity Association that will permit Sarah Brightman, a British actress, to re-create her leading role in the hit London musical on Broadway.


ASSETS BOESKY GAVE U.S. SAID TO LOSE VALUE
LEAD: A court-appointed official has negotiated to sell assets handed over by Ivan F. Boesky in his settlement of insider trading charges for nearly $20 million less than they were worth at the time of the settlement last November, according to several legal sources with knowledge of the matter.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.56
6.07
6.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.67
5.64
5.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.79
5.80
5.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.14
8.21
7.23
30-YR.


SYRACUSE SHIFTS FOOTBALL GAME
LEAD: The Syracuse University basketball team, which lost to Indiana by 1 point in the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship game last season, will open a 30-game 1987-88 schedule against North Carolina Nov. 21 in the Tipoff Classic at Springfield, Mass.


DEMOCRATIC CAMPAIGN VIOLATIONS
LEAD: The House Democratic whip and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee admitted today that they had had violated campaign finance laws by accepting use of a private yacht and aircraft for political events.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on April 1 about housing segregation in New York City and its suburbs misstated the racial makeup of Freeport, L.I.
According to 1980 census figures, Freeport is not ''largely black''; its population is 64 percent white, 31 percent black and 5 percent other.


Honoring Dulles
LEAD: For two years, family and friends of the late John Foster Dulles, who was Secretary of State in the Eisenhower Administration, have been trying to raise $2 million for a memorial celebration next February on the anniversary of his 100th birthday.


LEACH PITCHES ANOTHER AMAZING GAME
LEAD: The blend of hitting and pitching that carried the Mets to the top last year has not been as awesome this season but it's getting there.


ZONING HAMPERS REVIVAL OF STATEN ISLAND BUILDING
LEAD: The institutional structure at 1000 Targee Street in the Concord section of Staten Island seems jinxed.
In its 14 years of existence, the four-story beige brick building, now a shell with its windows punched out, was lived in for only two years.
Its inability to attract tenants has had nothing to do with its lackluster boxy design.


18 ALIENS, TRAPPED IN A BOXCAR, DIE IN BUNGLED SMUGGLING ATTEMPT
LEAD: Eighteen illegal aliens trapped in a locked steel-walled boxcar were found dead today in stifling 120-degree temperatures in what the authorities called a bungled smuggling effort.


BRONX SURROGATE REMOVED OVER AFFAIR WITH AIDE
LEAD: Surrogate Bertram R. Gelfand of the Bronx was removed from the bench yesterday by the State Court of Appeals, which cited his judicial misconduct during an affair with a law assistant and his ''evasive, incredible and false'' testimony about the matter.


LaROUCHE INDICTED IN PLOT TO BLOCK INQUIRY ON FRAUD
LEAD: Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., the persistent Presidential candidate whose politics center on conspiracy theories, has been indicted by a Federal grand jury here on charges that he conspired to block an investigation of a $1 million credit card fraud by his campaign workers.


'Richard II' Opening Postponed to Thursday
LEAD: The opening of ''Richard II,'' the first of this summer's New York Shakespeare Festival productions at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park -scheduled for last night - has been postponed until Thursday because of this week's rain.
Previews will continue, weather permitting, tonight through Sunday and next Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 P.M.


85 IOWANS SEE DEBATE AND PICK VICTOR
LEAD: Senator Paul Simon scored heavily on arms control and taxes.
Representative Richard A. Gephardt picked up the most voter support and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis was rated the best performer among the Democratic Presidential candidates.


IN DEMOCRATS' FIRST JOUST OF '88 RACE, ALL THE LANCES ARE TILTED AT REAGAN
LEAD: The discussion was civilized, even good-natured.
The result was muddled enough so that almost all the candidates went off thinking they had accomplished something.
And for the time being, at least, the often fractious Democratic Party looked like the peaceable kingdom.


Substitute State Health Insurance for Medicaid
LEAD: To the Editor:


From Bolshoi, 'The Dancer Who Jumps'
LEAD: Irek Mukhamedov is one of the Bolshoi Ballet's most popular young stars.
The 27-year-old dancer, who will appear at each performance this weekend at the Metropolitan Opera House, is said to epitomize the heroic style of Yuri Grigorovich, the Bolshoi's artistic director and chief choreographer.
To many New York balletomanes, Mr.


PHILADELPHIA COUNCILMAN AND AIDE GUILTY OF GRAFT
LEAD: A City Councilman here and his senior aide were convicted of conspiracy and extortion today and of attempting to extort more than $1 million from the developer of what has been called the crown jewel in the city's effort to restore its dilapidated waterfront.


'NOT SERIOUS STUDENTS'
LEAD: No basketball players admitted to Virginia Tech from 1981 to 1986 have been graduated from the school, administrators said yesterday in releasing a report on an investigation into National Collegiate Athletic Association violations. ''In reviewing the academic records of basketball athletes, it is evident that most are not serious students,'' the report said.


PATIENT RESUSCITATION BILL IS WITHDRAWN IN SENATE
LEAD: A bill that would have set guidelines for when physicians should and should not resuscitate patients was taken off the State Senate floor during debate today when it became clear it would not pass.


SMEAL, PRESIDENT OF NOW, TO STEP DOWN AND SEEK WOMEN TO RUN FOR PUBLIC OFFICE
LEAD: Eleanor C. Smeal, the outspoken president of the National Organization for Women, has informed its leaders that, contrary to widespread expectations, she does not intend to run for another term in office this year.


Prices Rise in Light Trading
LEAD: Bond prices ended a holiday-shortened week on a positive note, registering gains of half a point or more yesterday on signs that economic activity remains relatively weak.


WASHINGTON TALK: The Attorney General; IS MEESE A TARGET OF POLITICAL ATTACK? OR IS HE CORRUPT? OR INCOMPETENT?
LEAD: When Edwin Meese 3d arrived in Washington in 1980, he was heralded as a crisp manager and a fervent police enthusiast whose dedication to law and order was rivaled only by his loyalty to Ronald Reagan.


DRUG BAN FOR BENGAL
LEAD: Stanley Wilson, a running back for the Cincinnati Bengals who scored eight touchdowns last season, has been suspended indefinitely by the National Football League for renewed involvement with cocaine.
It is the second time that Wilson has been suspended for violating the league's drug policy.
The former Oklahoma star was suspended in October 1984 and reinstated in


MILITARY LEADERS IN HAITI YIELD ON PLANS FOR CONTROL OF ELECTIONS
LEAD: In a dramatic effort to end the political crisis that has engulfed Haiti for the last 10 days, the military Government announced tonight that it was restoring control of the country's electoral process to an independent civilian council.


U.S. APPEALS ORDER TO RELEASE ASTRONAUT TAPE
LEAD: The Federal Government has appealed a court decision that would require it to release a tape recording of the astronauts' voices aboard the space shuttle Challenger before it disintegrated.


Advertising; A Job Shift Back to Magazines
LEAD: SITTING relaxed in a Hearst Magazines conference room yesterday, Alvin Hampel, who has just reached ''the big six-oh,'' recalled that some 52 years ago he sold Liberty magazine door-to-door.
His first pay was a balsa glider, and when it broke, so did his heart.


Not One Dole but Two
LEAD: A biography is being written about Washington's ''power couple'' that its co-author says started out as two separate books.


Unresolved Controversy
LEAD: Even as he was being taken to the airliner in New York, Karl Linnas protested his innocence.


Grumman Gets Big NASA Job
LEAD: NASA said today that it had selected the Grumman Aerospace Corporation of Bethpage, L.I., for its biggest space station award to date - a contract worth up to $1.25 billion over the next 11 years.


MICHAEL BENNETT, THEATER INNOVATOR, DIES AT 44
LEAD: Michael Bennett, the most influential theater director and choreographer of his generation and the creator of ''A Chorus Line,'' the longest-running show in Broadway history, died yesterday morning at his home in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 44 years old and had been suffering from lymphoma, a form of cancer, as a result of AIDS, his attorney, John Breglio, said yesterday.


WHERE HAVE ALL THE 2-YEAR-OLDS GONE
LEAD: Where are the 2-year-olds?


Octopus Shares Aid Charity
LEAD: Paul Hamlyn sold his Octopus publishing company today and promptly announced he was giving away about $:50 million, or $80 million, of the profits to charity.


SINDELAR POSTS 68 TO TAKE ONE SHOT LEAD
LEAD: Joey Sindelar, one of the PGA Tour's long hitters, birdied the first three of four par-5 holes at the Glen Abbey Golf Club today and eagled the par-5 18th to take the first-round lead in the 78th Canadian Open.


SOVIET DENIES MAKING OFFER ON MISSILES
LEAD: The Soviet Foreign Ministry today denied a report that a Soviet official had informally offered a compromise proposal on the issues holding up an arms-control agreement on medium- and shorter-range missiles.


Of Whales and People
LEAD: The ships were due east of Nantucket and whales were on the sailors' minds, a familiar enough story.
But last week, when the sailors set out from Boston, they aimed not at killing whales but at saving them.


SUMMER WEEKENDS: STRETCHING THEM OUT
LEAD: Warren Owens likes at least two things about owning his own business. ''You can have your dog at work, and everyone has to be nice to it,'' he said. ''And you can leave early on Fridays in the summer to go to Block Island.''


WARD EXPLAINS TAPING OF A BLACK RADIO PROGRAM
LEAD: Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward and Mayor Koch told listeners of a talk show aimed primarily at black listeners yesterday that the police intelligence division had monitored the program only to learn of events in the black community that might require the deployment of police officers for public safety.


Demonstration in Panama
LEAD: Panama's embattled strongman, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, has just given a classic demonstration of a dictator's abuse of democratic forms.
If he meant to bolster his credentials as a popular leader, he has in fact further stained them.


Summer At Modern Museum
LEAD: Although open-air concerts abound at this time of year, one of the city's most intimate, under-the-skies musical series is the Museum of Modern Art's Summergarden.
The sculptures of Rodin and Matisse, Picasso and Henry Moore provide a backdrop for 18 evenings of music in the museum's Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Sculpture Garden.


TOP JAPAN PARTY FACTION SPLITS
LEAD: As politicians in the governing Liberal Democratic Party begin to prepare for a leadership election in October, the party's most powerful faction, led nominally by former Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka, has split into three groups.


Northrop Ousts Missile Executives
LEAD: The Northrop Corporation, under criticism for irregular purchasing practices in its MX missile program, removed two senior executives from the division because of ''management lapses and errors in judgment.''


BLACK U.S. JUDGE ASSAILS D'AMATO OVER SUCCESSOR
LEAD: The only black Federal judge serving in Brooklyn yesterday criticized Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato for recommending a white candidate to replace him when he retires in the fall.


ON ROAD TO RECORD
LEAD: Although he has been leading the Mets for less than three and half seasons, Dave Johnson is within reach of becoming the manager with the most victories in the franchise's 26-season history.
With the team away from Shea Stadium until July 16, Johnson might achieve his club-record 340th victory on the road, where the Mets have won 57 percent of their games since he became the 11th manager in Met history in 1984.


U.S. KEEPS TAX STATUS ON ANTILLES
LEAD: The Treasury Department gave in yesterday to pressure from Americans who own bonds of corporate subsidiaries in the Netherlands Antilles, saying it would ask Congress to allow interest on the bonds to remain exempt from withholding taxes.


Dow Soars 26.94 Points, to 2,436.70
LEAD: The stock market rallied strongly yesterday, as the Dow Jones industrial average jumped 26.94 points and virtually erased its losses for the holiday-shortened week.


BOSTONIANS AWAIT A GLORIOUS FOURTH
LEAD: Everyone who plans to attend the Boston Pops July 4 concert anticipates having a good time.
But the handful who have been camping out in front of the stage for the last 10 days see it the other way around; they are having a good time anticipating.


Allied-Signal Ordered to Pay
LEAD: A Federal jury said today that Allied-Signal Inc. must pay the holders of the General Poly Corporation more than $70 million because of actions that the now-defunct plastic-bag maker says forced it to seek bankruptcy protection.


A Triumph for All New York
LEAD: Albany, home of ethics reform: It sounds like sarcasm but today it becomes truth.
Pushed and cajoled by Governor Cuomo, New York's Legislature is catapulting the state to a promising new level of integrity in government.


Italy's No. 1 Bank Marketing Notes
LEAD: Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, Italy's largest bank, has become the first Italian issuer of medium-term notes in the United States.
On Wednesday it began offering $500 million of notes on a continuous basis, with maturities ranging from nine months to 10 years.
Salomon Brothers and Paine Webber are agents.


A BRASH LABORITE QUITS FRONT ROW
LEAD: Among his admirers, Denis Healey is sometimes called ''the best Prime Minister Britain never had.'' Detractors have characterized him as a political thug who, as one victim put it, ''could not see a belt without hitting below it.''


Sale of Metromail
LEAD: R.R.
Donnelley &amp; Sons said it had reached a merger agreement with the Metromail Corporation, a Lincoln, Neb., company that provides computerized marketing information and production services to direct-mail companies.
Donnelley, the nation's largest supplier of printed materials, offered $282.7 million for Metromail.


Rampal, Ill, Cancels Engagements in July
LEAD: Jean-Pierre Rampal, the French flutist, is suffering from the flu and bronchitis and has canceled his July engagements, all of which were in the northeastern United States.


SEOUL RIVALS MEET FOR THE FIRST TIME IN A SURPRISE VISIT
LEAD: Two men who may oppose each other for the presidency met tonight to pave the way for negotiations on a new constitution.


Bridge; Blackwood Convention Is Problem If One Has Void
LEAD: Since the world's most popular bidding convention was devised by Easley Blackwood in Indianapolis more than half a century ago, it has been a major success with a few minor problems.


NUMBER OF NEW YORKERS WITH JOBS ROSE TO RECORD HIGH LAST MONTH
LEAD: The number of employed New York State residents hit a record high in June, but the unemployment rate for New York City increased slightly, according to figures released yesterday by the Federal Department of Labor.


STATION OFFERS PERSPECTIVE OF BLACK NEW YORKERS
LEAD: From sunrise to sunset each day, WLIB-AM, a radio station oriented to the concerns of a large segment of New York's black community, becomes what David Lampel likes to call ''a crucible of black opinion'' as listeners call in to address issues in the news and questions posed by hosts and guests.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  PALE KINGS AND PRINCES.
By Robert B. Parker. 256 pages.
Delacorte Press. $15.95.
PUSS IN BOOTS.
By Ed McBain. 248 pages.
Henry Holt. $15.95.
WEEP NO MORE, MY LADY.
By Mary Higgins Clark. 315 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $17.95.


Money Fund Assets Rise
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 384 money market mutual funds increased $524.6 million, to $236.15 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 96 institutional funds were up $353.8 million, to $64.54 billion.
Assets of the 198 general-purpose funds were up $855.4 million, to $68.11 billion.


Hugh Masekela
LEAD: Hugh Masekela, a trumpeter, will perform with Kalahari, the band of African musicians that has been appearing on Paul Simon's ''Graceland'' tour, on Sunday night.
They will play at midnight at the Limelight, 660 Avenue of the Americas, at 20th Street (212-807-7850).
Tickets are $12.


CAPASSO ORDERED TO PAY EX-WIFE $6 MILLION
LEAD: A state appeals court yesterday ordered the longtime companion of Bess Myerson to pay his former wife about $6 million as her share of their marital property.


BETHLEHEM PRICES
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation announced a new price schedule for sheet products that will mean about a 3 percent increase for hot-rolled products.
A company spokesman, Bill Gignac, said the new price schedule, effective with shipments on Oct. 4, ''will be more indicative of production costs.''


E-II Holdings Offering Both Debt and Equity
LEAD: A $1.5 million debt issue by E-II Holdings Inc. was priced yesterday through Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. as sole underwriter.
E-II Holdings has a collection of independently operated businesses consisting mostly of the consumer product and food specialty subsidiaries formerly owned by the Beatrice


AT HIGH SPEED
LEAD: Even casual auto racing fans are becoming blase about the fantastic lap speeds that Indy cars and Nascar stock cars post at oval tracks like Indianapolis and Daytona.
Last fall, Rick Mears blazed around Michigan International Speedway, a high-banked two-mile oval, at better than 233 miles per hour.


ESTONIAN SENT TO FACE DEATH IN SOVIET DIES IN A HOSPITAL
LEAD: Karl Linnas, who was deported from the United States in April to face a death sentence in the Soviet Union as a Nazi war criminal, died today of heart and kidney disease in a Leningrad hospital, the official Soviet press agency Tass reported.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''I told him that the Democratic Justice Party should not dream of remaining the ruling party.
It must be ready to become an opposition party.''  - Kim Young Sam,the South Korean oppositionleader, describing aconversation with theruling party's chairman,Roh Tae Woo. [ A1:6. ]


Turkish Civilians Challenge Role of Military
LEAD: In ways that would once have seemed improbable, Turkish politicians and newspapers have begun to challenge both the authority and the competence of members of the country's military, an institution previously immune from such public questioning.


Lightning, Storms and Flooding Wreak Havoc in Parts of the Nation
LEAD: Automobiles navigating a flooded street in Indianapolis yesterday as Jamie Gulfoy used the occasion of a five-inch rainfall to practice his casting.
The heavy rain was blamed for the deaths of two teenagers there.
Flooding caused evacuations in parts of Ohio.
Lightning in Oklahoma City blew the top off an oil storage tank, causing burning crude oil to flow through a street and into a nearby creek.


Bank Auditor Is Acquitted
LEAD: A Federal court jury today found a former accounting firm for the Continental Illinois National Bank not guilty of failing to warn bank officials that they had bought bad loans from the Penn Square Bank.
The bad loans nearly bankrupted the banking company, which needed a $4.5 billion Federal bailout to survive.


2 NETWORKS TO BLACK OUT ADS IN FLORIDA TAX RIFT
LEAD: The CBS and NBC television networks, in response to a request by three leading advertisers, agreed yesterday to black out certain national advertisements in Florida that their affiliates would normally carry, The move was viewed as a largely symbolic protest of the state's new 5 percent sales tax on service businesses.


SOVIET TELLS PIANIST HE CAN EMIGRATE
LEAD: Vladimir Feltsman, whose career as a pianist came to a virtual halt after he applied eight years ago to emigrate to Israel, said today that he had received permission to leave with his wife and son.


It Wasn't Hatch
LEAD: Before President Reagan announced Wednesday that he would nominate Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court, a crowd that had gathered for a hearing by the Senate Judiciary Committee had some idea of who the nominee would not be.


U.S. ACCUSES CHILE OF INACTION
LEAD: The State Department accused the Chilean Government today of failing to take swift action in two noted murder cases and of a general tolerance of abuses by Chilean security forces.


EX-PACER JOINS STAFF
LEAD: Billy Knight, a former all-star forward with the Indiana Pacers in both the American and National Basketball Associations, has rejoined the N.B.A. team as a member of its front office.
The 35-year-old Knight, who retired in 1986 after playing one year in France, will work with the Pacers in the area of community relations.


Anti-Military Protests Continue in Panama
LEAD: Hundreds of people demonstrated against the military-dominated Government here today, and armed men set fire to a building owned by the publishers of the opposition newspaper La Prensa while riot police watched.


POP AND JAZZ GUIDE
LEAD: Ladysmith Black Mambazo, Central Park's Summerstage, Central Park Band Shell, near 72d Street (860-1335).
Expect a crowd; this unaccompanied vocal chorus from South Africa has been stopping the show at just about every performance on Paul Simon's ''Graceland'' tour, and is more than capable of holding any number of listeners spellbound on its own.


Streak Ends For Bedrosian
LEAD: Glenn Davis hit a three-run homer off Steve Bedrosian with two out in the ninth inning tonight to give the Houston Astros a 7-6 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies.


'TRUTH IN SPENDING' ASKED BY REAGAN
LEAD: President Reagan, seeking to revive his effort to reduce the growth in Federal spending, will urge Congress to require the preparation of statements assessing the economic impact of any new spending it proposes, White House officials said today.


Yes, a Mission in Mongolia
LEAD: When the United States opens a mission sometime next year in Mongolia, the venture will have some of the flavor of diplomacy as practiced in the last century, when envoys journeyed to exotic places with pack animals and bearers cleared the way with machetes.


3 Killed by Tamil Land Mine
LEAD: Three employees of a Government farm in northwest Sri Lanka were killed today when their jeep ran over a land mine set off by Tamil guerrillas, the Government said.
The guerrillas are fighting for a separate Tamil state in the northeast area of the island nation.
A statement said six Tamils were killed yesterday by security forces in separate incidents in the north and east.


Misjudging Gulf Risks
LEAD: Top Reagan Administration officials admit there is risk in U.S.


CHIEFS ON ONODAGA RESERVATION ORDER END TO SALES OF FIREWORKS
LEAD: For a man who traffics in celebration, Ave Bucktooth is not feeling particularly jolly.


FROM A GYPSY TO BENEFACTOR OF THE STAGE
LEAD: It was one of those rare occasions when the theater seemed to have gathered its past, present and future into one house on one night.


'Star Trek' Lives
LEAD: To the Editor:


AUCTIONS
LEAD: THE Duke of Devonshire, owner of one of the largest art collections in the world, will sell 16 Old Master drawings, by Raphael, Veronese, Barocci, Lorenzo di Credi and Rembrandt, on Monday night at Christie's in London.
The auction house estimates that the drawings will bring a total of $8 million.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tour de France  Piasecki Leads: Lech Piasecki, a Pole who rides for the Italian Del Tango team, was the leader of the Tour de France after yesterday's first two stages.
Piasecki took the lead after the day's first stage, a 70-mile jaunt through the streets and parks of West Berlin, finishing sixth over all.


STRONG LEADERS REQUIRED TO MEET YEAR 2000 GOALS
LEAD: If the bold and imaginative ideas proposed for New York City schools by the Commission on the Year 2000 are to work, they will clearly require equally bold and imaginative leadership in putting them into effect, according to educators and Board of Education members.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  A Nose Is a Nose . . .


HOT-AIR BALLOON SETS FLIGHT MARK
LEAD: Two adventurers lifted off today and headed out over the sea on a 3,400-mile trans-Atlantic flight in a huge hot-air balloon, a journey no one has completed.


Italian Festival Set for New York
LEAD: ''Italy on Stage '87,'' a two-month-long festival next fall in New York City of Italian theater, music, films, painting and sculpture, was announced here yesterday by officials of the Italian Government.


Economic Scene; Limited Impact Of the Young
LEAD: THE generation following the baby boom is finally coming of age, but without the expected economic impact.


FOR SANDWICH SHOP IN COURT COUNTRY, CASE CLOSED
LEAD: Walter's was an insider's place.


Art: Brooklyn Painters
LEAD: THE first exhibition in which the Brooklyn Museum, under its present director, Robert Buck, provided a forum for the growing number of artists living or working in its borough was ''Working in Brooklyn -Sculpture,'' in the fall of 1985.
The 10 artists - including Donald Lipski, Chris Macdonald, Tom Otterness, Judy Pfaff, Alan Saret, William Tucker and Christopher


Markets Closed Today
LEAD: The nation's stock and commodity markets will be closed today in observance of the Fourth of July holiday.
Government offices will also be closed.
Banks and many businesses will be open.


CORREECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a Washington dispatch yesterday about a California businessman's charges on Saudi aid to the Angolan rebels included an incorrect reference to the Saudi response.
The official Saudi response was given by Frederick Dutton, a Washington lawyer representing the Saudis, who said that the businessman had ''no credibility'' and that his allegations were ''junk and nonsense.


FUGITIVE DIVIDES FRANCE AND IRANIANS
LEAD: A diplomatic confrontation between France and Iran sharpened today as a Government spokesman confirmed that police officers ringing the Iranian Embassy here were looking for an Iranian whose testimony is sought in connection with a terrorist bombing campaign last year.


U.S. SYPHILIS CASES RISE 23%
LEAD: After declining for five years, syphilis cases in the United States increased 23 percent in the first quarter of this year, largely among heterosexuals, Federal health researchers reported today.


PACT FOR JOEY MEYER
LEAD: Joey Meyer has signed a new five-year contract as basketball coach at DePaul University, extending through the 1991-92 season.
The 38-year-old Meyer led the Blue Demons to 28 victories and 3 losses last season, a school record for victories.
DePaul advanced to the final 16 of the N.C.A.A. tournament before falling to Louisiana State.


Eisenreich Helps Saberhagen to 14th
LEAD: Bret Saberhagen, helped by Jim Eisenreich's three-run homer, won his 14th game of the season as the Kansas City Royals beat the Minnesota Twins, 10-3, tonight.


THE EVENING HOURS
LEAD: REMEMBER last year's historic hoopla on the Fourth of July, a day that found New York Harbor paved with fiberglass boats and the city packed with huddled masses yearning to glimpse the Statue of Liberty as it lighted up and turned a century old?


Beauty Contest
LEAD: Despite an impressive amount of beef, the Democratic Presidential candidates came out of their television debate in Houston looking like a cross between Bob Forehead and Max Headroom.


BIANCHI SPEAKS OUT
LEAD: After a second interview with the Knicks earlier in the week, Al Bianchi said yesterday by telephone from Phoenix that ''nobody has said anything to me.'' Bianchi's remarks came in response to reports that he would be named the club's director of player personnel next week. ''The job I interviewed for was director of basketball operations,'' he said.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JULY 3, 1987
LEAD:  Markets


What the Century Club Is Doing About Women
LEAD: To the Editor:


Camping Out At Ecology Lab In the Catskills
LEAD: For almost 40 years, Camp DeBruce has done its best to turn out ecologically sound children, but the news at lunch Wednesday was not good.


Time to Rehire Some Patco Air Controllers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Adams and Pullen
LEAD: George Adams on saxophones and Don Pullen on piano, who played with Charles Mingus, will lead a quartet tonight through Sunday at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street (212-255-4037).
Sets begin at 10 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is a $12 cover and a $6 minimum.


U.S. Dismisses Health Official
LEAD: The Deputy Assistant Secretary of Health and Human Services for population affairs was dismissed today for refusing to carry out a superior's order to resume Federal financing for Planned Parenthood clinics.


POP AND JAZZ GUIDE
LEAD: Lou Donaldson Quartet, Carlos 1, 432 Avenue of the Americas, between 9th and 10th Streets (982-3260).
Lou Donaldson is an alto saxophonist and singer who combines the distinctive features of two stars who were prominent in different generations of jazz.
His saxophone is fired with memories of Charlie Parker as he flashes through sweeping lines that crackle with the musical fires lighted by Parker in the 1940's.


UNION CONFIRMS GOODEN MEETINGS
LEAD: Officials of the baseball players' union met three times with Dwight Gooden last summer after rumors persisted that the Mets' pitching ace was taking drugs.
But Gooden denied the reports, and also denied them when officials of the Mets raised the same question.


AMID RUBBLE, DREAMS FOR SQUATTERS
LEAD: The people of the Mahabir enclave do not exist officially in the city, although one of them bled to death in a rickshaw the other day.


U.S. JUDGE TELLS POLICE TO PRESERVE INQUIRY RECORDS
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday barred the New York City Police Department from destroying or altering any records concerning its investigations of black radicals or its taping of a radio station primarily serving blacks.


MOROCCAN MISSES MARK
LEAD: Said Aouita of Morocco ran the second-fastest mile in history at a grand prix track meet here today, covering the distance in 3 minutes 46.76 seconds.


THE USA TODAY STORY: NEUHARTH'S OBSESSION
LEAD: In a move of unusual corporate candor, the Gannett Company has cooperated in the preparation of a book chronicling the tumultuous history of its USA Today, complete with tales of bitter infighting, costly mistakes and a furious struggle to keep the national newspaper alive.


Mimi Wallace Marries
LEAD: The marriage of Mimi Wallace, a senior vice president and director of business affairs at Ted Bates Advertising in New York, to Elhanan C. Stone, executive vice president and general counsel of Ted Bates Worldwide Inc., took place yesterday at the Registry Office in Hamilton, Bermuda.
Lionel R. Dowling, assistant Registrar General of Bermuda, officiated.


Shareholders Clear VW Management
LEAD: At a packed and sometimes heated annual meeting, Volkswagen A.G.'s stockholders voted approval today of the auto maker's senior managers, effectively absolving them of the foreign-exchange swindle that cost the company almost $260 million in losses.


Susan Modlin Is the Bride Of Jay Solomon Markowitz
LEAD: Susan Elizabeth Modlin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elihu Modlin of Hewlett Bay Park, L.I., and Jay Solomon Markowitz, a son of Fay Miskin of Brooklyn and Alan Markowitz of Woodmere, L.I., were married last evening at the Seawane Club in Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
Rabbi Robert L. Rozenberg performed the ceremony.


DRIFTER CHARGED IN BLUDGEONING OF HIS PARENTS
LEAD: A 20-year-old drifter was charged today with killing his parents, whose bodies were found Wednesday bludgeoned and badly burned in the backyard of their home in this peaceful Fairfield County town.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JULY 3, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-7


GERMAN? YES, AND A TOUCH OF RUSSIAN
LEAD: As a child in distant Soviet Central Asia, Larissa Grams was allowed to speak only German at home - more precisely, the Schwabisch dialect her forebears took to Russia two centuries earlier.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
William Lower has been promoted to executive vice president, creative director, at Wells, Rich, Greene/Chicago.


Jazz Pioneers Downtown And Uptown
LEAD: ''PEOPLE have tried to build a better world, but they've failed because they didn't have a blueprint,'' Sun Ra once remarked. ''You can't tear something down, you know, unless you've got something better.
I've got my equations, and these equations are valid.
I'm not doing any of this on faith or on what I think.


Greyhound Deal Backed
LEAD: The Interstate Commerce Commission gave temporary approval today for an affiliate of Greyhound Lines Inc. to operate Trailways Lines Inc.


George S. Wise Dead; Led Tel Aviv University
LEAD: Dr.
George S. Wise, philanthropist, educator and business executive, died of a heart attack yesterday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami Beach.
He was 81 years old.


Waldheim Calls Reception in Jordan 'Excellent'
LEAD: President Kurt Waldheim of Austria and his wife, Elisabeth, touring the ancient Roman city of Jerash, north of Amman.
Mr.
Waldheim, who was given a warm reception on his arrival Wednesday, was taken by helicopter on a sightseeing tour by King Hussein.
Mr.
Waldheim used binoculars to peer into Israel as the King flew near the border.


Havana Building Collapses
LEAD: Four people were killed and 15 were injured when a four-story apartment building partly collapsed in central Havana, the national news agency AIN reported today.
President Fidel Castro went to the scene of the accident, which occurred Wednesday night in the old colonial part of the city.
About 30 people lived in the building.


Westchester County
LEAD: Old-time fiddlers and classical musicians will join national rodeo champions and costumed patriots to provide a memorable Fourth of July weekend in Westchester County.


Advertising; Doyle Graf Mabley To Handle Natori
LEAD: Natori, a fashion house that is also involved in fragrances and home furnishings, has retained Doyle Graf Mabley as its ad agency.
The billings could come to $3 million.


No Headline
LEAD: RANGER PITCHING IS A THREAT


Palau Balking at U.S. Compact
LEAD: A new political agreement with the United States appeared today to be falling short of approval in a referendum, and the Government of this Pacific nation said it was laying off two-thirds of its employees as a result.


FILM: 'SLEEPWALK,' A FANTASY
LEAD: ''Sleepwalk'' was shown as part of this year's New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times March 20.
The film opens today at the Bleecker Street Cinema, at La Guardia Place, and the Carnegie Screening Room, Seventh Avenue and 57th Street.


SYRIA KEEPS DENOUNCING U.S. DESPITE MOVES TO END STRAIN
LEAD: Syria is keeping up a war of words against the United States despite recent moves at ending the strains between the two nations.


AN ERRATIC QUARTER FOR STOCK MARKETS
LEAD: With its choppy swings, the second quarter gave fits to many individual and institutional stock investors.


One
LEAD: Until he was 3, Michael Bennett DiFiglia was probably much like any other small boy.
Then he took his first dancing lesson, and an astonishing man of the theater, Michael Bennett, was born.


QUICK FIXES FOR FAT KNEES
LEAD: Women who genuflect to fashion on knees that are less than lovely are facing a dilemma as hemlines rise to heights not seen in two decades: How to wear the new short skirts without being called pudding knees, cottage-cheese knees and such?


BOWLING LESSONS WELL LEARNED
LEAD: Dick Weber, who is in the Professional Bowlers Association Hall of Fame for winning 10 of the first 23 events the P.B.A. staged, from 1959 to 1962, does not compete much anymore.
Silver-haired at the age of 57, he is the organization's Midwestern regional director, more concerned that tournaments in an eight-state area are run smoothly than in competing himself in televised national events.


Directors Guild Rejects 2 Offers
LEAD: Members of the Directors Guild of America have rejected contract offers by motion picture and television producers and authorized the union leadership to call the first strike in the guild's 51-year history, a spokesman said yesterday in New York.


Hudson Valley
LEAD: If you would rather climb a mountain instead of watching the rockets' red glare or listening to firecrackers this weekend, the place to go on Sunday is the foot of Slide Mountain, the highest peak in the Catskills (elevation: 4,180 feet).


Robert C. Ekins, Communist Who Fought 50's Conviction
LEAD: Robert C. Ekins, a sculptor and Communist Party member who successfully appealed a 1950's conviction of advocating the violent overthrow of the Government, died Tuesday in the Hospital of St.
Raphael.
He was 79 years old and lived in New Haven.


Insider Case Deal Seen
LEAD: A prominent Israeli businessman who is a key figure in an insider-trading investigation has agreed to cooperate with the Government's efforts to prosecute a former executive of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, according to legal sources with knowledge of the investigation.


Saudi Policy Reflects Self-Interest Above All
LEAD: To the Editor:


JOBLESS RATE AT LOWEST POINT SINCE '79
LEAD: The nation's unemployment rate declined two-tenths of a percentage point to 6 percent in June, the Labor Department reported today.


Al Hibbler at West End
LEAD: Al Hibbler, a singer, will perform tonight through Sunday at the West End Cafe, 2911 Broadway at 114th Street (212-666-8750).
Sets begin at 9, 10:30 P.M. and midnight and 1:30 A.M.; there is no fourth set on Sunday.
There is a $6 cover and a $7.50 minimum tonight and tomorrow, a $5 cover and a $7.50 minimum on Sunday.


2 'Vicious' Prisoners Escape From the Nassau Courthouse
LEAD: Two men, described as ''vicious'' by the detective who arrested them, escaped from the custody of the Nassau County Sheriff's Office yesterday while leaving the county court building in Mineola on their way back to jail.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: THE colors are as soft as a Mediterranean dawn, and the food, based on a recent sampling, can be equally alluring.
Cafe Greco is a sunny new restaurant with a sidewalk cafe on Second Avenue near 71st Street that offers what it calls Mediterranean specialties - a little Italian, a little Greek, a little North African.


William Parker
LEAD: William Parker, a bassist, will lead a group including Charles Gayle on saxophone tonight at 9 at El Bohio, 605 East Ninth Street, between Avenues B and C (212-260-4478), as part of its Jazz Arts Expo, which will include an exhibition of art by Romare Bearden and others.
On Sunday at 3 P.M., Dave Sewelson, a saxophonist, will perform.


TWO ETHICS MEASURES PASS IN ALBANY
LEAD: The Legislature tonight unanimously passed a bill that would require outside audits of the State Legislature, the Governor's office and the state court system, and also gave unanimous approval to the sweeping ethics legislation agreed to earlier this week.


N.B.A, IN PROTEST, CANCELS MEETINGS
LEAD: The National Basketball Association today announced that its annual meeting would not be in Scottsdale, Ariz., Sept. 20-22, because of a controversy over the state's failure to observe Martin Luther King day as a legal holiday.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on the Washington Talk page yesterday about a memorial ceremony at the Congressional Cemetery in Washington misstated the day of the event.
It is tomorrow, not today.


Democrats Pick Clear Battlefield on Bork, But Political Consequences Are Uncertain
LEAD: In choosing ideology as the battlefield for the confirmation of Robert H. Bork, Senate Democrats have expanded a highly charged contest over the direction of the Supreme Court into a fight with high stakes for the party as well.


Ballet: Debuts in Bolshoi 'Golden Age'
LEAD: DURING the Bolshoi Ballet's current season at the Metropolitan Opera House, its first visit to the United States since 1979, New Yorkers will discover an entirely new young generation of principal dancers who have elicited great acclaim in Europe.


INADVERTENT ENGINE SHUTOFF PROMPTS F.A.A. ORDER ON BOEING 767'S
LEAD: Prompted by an incident Tuesday in which a Delta Air Lines captain mistakenly shut down both engines of his Boeing 767 jet, the Federal Aviation Administration has issued an emergency order requiring a safety guard between switches to prevent a recurrence.


BAKER SEES TOUGH FIGHT OVER BORK BUT SAYS HE DIDN'T OPPOSE CHOICE
LEAD: Officials close to the White House chief of staff, Howard H. Baker Jr., said today that he had had some doubts about nominating Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court, but Mr.
Baker himself said it was President Reagan's decision and that he had no objection.


Summergarden: Modern Music In an Alfresco Setting
LEAD: Sou Hon Cheung, left, Joshua Gordon and Leslie Cullen of the Juilliard Contemporary Ensemble will open the Summergarden series tonight.
Page C19. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


Yugoslav Debt Problems
LEAD: The Yugoslav Government confirmed today that it was having difficulties repaying part of its $20 billion foreign debt.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman, Aleksandar Stanic, said that repayment of about $200 million in principal to commercial banks would be delayed for two months. ''It is a question of temporary problems in repaying obligations that came due in June, arising from seasonal factors,'' Mr.


MOET'S UNIT IN U.S. NAMES A PRESIDENT
LEAD: Richard Q. Armstrong, who used to be in the ginger ale business, has moved on to champagne.


Market Place; Oil-Price Rise Propels Stocks
LEAD: SANDI HABER SWEENEY, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, has a theory about oil-service and offshore drilling stocks: ''When crude prices improve, the investment community is willing to anticipate that a recovery in drilling activity can't be that far behind.''


Copper Continues Rise Amid Tight Supplies
LEAD: Copper futures set life-of-contract highs yesterday for the third consecutive session amid tight supplies, unseasonably strong demand and dwindling inventories of the raw commodity.


ANOTHER MARINE IS ACCUSED OF SECURITY OFFENSES IN SOVIET
LEAD: Another marine has been charged with security violations while serving as an embassy guard in Moscow and in Bern, Switzerland, the Marine Corps said today.


SOVIET PROPOSES TALKS IN GULF WAR BUT IRAN IS REPORTED TO REJECT CALL
LEAD: The Soviet Union has proposed to Iran that it join Iraq in holding a peace conference in Moscow to seek an end to their seven-year-old war, but Iranian officials have rejected the idea, Administration officials and Western diplomats said today.


AN EXPLOSION OF FESTIVITIES FOR A FABULOUS FOURTH OF JULY
LEAD: IN a city fabled for its celebrations, no holiday weekend can compare with the Fourth of July's magnificent medley of outdoor festivities.
A cacophony of fireworks and festivals brightens the skies and the streets.
Music galore -from Sousa to symphonies - resounds in the parks.
And as sleek jets soar above Coney Island, a flotilla of sailboats glides through New York


Dollar at 3-Month High Against the Yen in Japan
LEAD: The dollar firmed in thin domestic trading yesterday after rising against most key currencies overseas and hitting a three-month high against the yen in Tokyo.


NAVRATILOVA TURNS BACK EVERT AND FACES THE FUTURE
LEAD: There is no longer a sharp edge to their rivalry, a feeling that one is standing in the way of the other.
Now, there are more smiles across the net when Martina Navratilova and Chris Evert play, more animated behavior.
And there are the inevitable congratulatory hugs when the matches are over, two tennis players taking comfort in the knowledge that they are growing old on the court together.


JUDGE GIVES TEACHERS JAIL TERMS AND SAYS STIKE CORRUPTED YOUTHS
LEAD: Three months after an illegal six-day strike by teachers and other school employees in Lyndhurst, a judge is scolding 175 teachers, custodians and secretaries and sentencing them to three-day jail terms.


THE OLD MAN'S GAME
LEAD: We root for old guys.
We root for them not to leave us too soon - and many times, any time is too soon.
They've been around and have become familiar and we've come, if not always to love them, to understand them, or appreciate them, or enjoy them.


TOSHIBA, U.S. TALK ON EXPORTS
LEAD: American lawyers for the Toshiba Corporation met with Pentagon officals today to discuss steps the company will take to improve its export control procedures.


No Headline
LEAD:  FRIDAY
GRAND SIGHTS
Anyone who has ever visited the Grand Canyon has experienced the awesome grandeur of the four-billion-year-old geologic wonder.
The beauty and mystery of the canyon have been captured in a half-hour documentary film, ''Grand Canyon: The Hidden Secrets,'' which can be seen this month at the Naturemax Theater at the American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street.


Eight-Part Series on 13, 'South American Journey'
LEAD: ''I WAS looking into a continent still wild, lawless, volatile -delightful,'' Jack Pizzey says.
He has just crossed the Andes; he is at the shore of Lake Titicaca, and we are only a minute or so into the opening of ''South American Journey,'' an interesting eight-part series that begins on Channel 13


British Developer Turns Attention to East Coast
LEAD: Tony Grant is coming to New York to develop property with the benefit of having the deep pockets of the Ladbroke Group P.L.C., a big diversified British company, to dig into.


LESSON FOR DARLING: DON'T THINK
LEAD: Ron Darling considered that he hadn't won a game in 10 weeks, groped for the reason or the rationale, frowned and said: ''Maybe you have to fail before you succeed.''


TRUMP WINS APPROVAL FOR 3D CASINO IN JERSEY
LEAD: The Casino Control Commission ruled today that Donald J. Trump may proceed with plans to build and operate a huge new casino hotel in Atlantic City in addition to two he already owns.


New Jersey
LEAD: In celebration of the Fourth of July, New Jersey will offer a cacophonous weekend of classical concerts, marching bands and exploding fireworks.
From Cape May in the south to Liberty State Park in the north, skyrockets will sporadically light up the skies.
In addition, the usual variety of fishing, bathing and boating opportunities abound along the state's 127 miles of coastline.


For a Bipartisan Policy on Nicaragua
LEAD: After seven years of acrimonious debate, it is painfully clear that the United States does not have a sustainable national policy toward Nicaragua.
There is a very good chance that the cornerstone of current policy - support for the contras battling the Sandinista Government - will be repudiated, if not this year, then next.


Licenses for Bicycles
LEAD: To the Editor:


Art: John Graham, A Brilliant Scoundrel
LEAD: THE title of his retrospective at the Neuberger Museum in Purchase, N.Y., proclaims John Graham an avatar -tongue in cheek, no doubt, for the artist was more scoundrel than incarnation of a god.
He was, too, the kind of European scoundrel that transplants so well in American soil, being as pragmatic as he was magnetic and all but omniscient on the subjects of art and culture.


CASE AGAINST BARBIE IS ATTACKED BY THE DEFENSE AS A TISSUE OF LIES
LEAD: Klaus Barbie's principal defense lawyer said today that a guilty verdict would be a ''dishonor'' to French justice and to France itself.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Soviet Denies Arms Report


Cannon in Talks On S.E.C. Inquiry
LEAD: Cannon Group Inc. said it is in settlement discussions with the Securities and Exchange Commission to resolve the agency's formal investigation.
The inquiry includes an examination of Cannon's method of amortizing film costs.
Some industry experts have charged that Cannon recognized costs too slowly for films that did worse than expected, thus inflating reported earnings.


SMITH WINS BOXING SUIT
LEAD: It took almost two years and a law-suit, but Lonnie Smith is finally going to be compensated for being shortchanged while wresting the World Boxing Council superlightweight championship from Billy Costello in Madison Square Garden Aug. 21, 1985.
In winning a civil suit against his former attorney, Jack Solerwitz, and the promoters of the bout, Smith was awarded almost $3 million by a jury in Federal Court in Mineola, L


Jill A. Abramow Weds Bradley P. Gerla on L.I.
LEAD: At Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., last night Jill A. Abramow, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Abramow of New York, was married to Bradley P. Gerla, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Gerla of Kings Point, L.I.
Rabbi Chaim Etrog, assisted by Cantor David Benedict, performed the ceremony.


Queens Rape Suspect Sought in New Attacks
LEAD: Three women were sexually assaulted in Queens late Wednesday and early yesterday by an unidentified man who the police said was suspected of at least eight attacks on women in the area since June 14.


BACHE BRAVES A NEW WORLD
LEAD: Prudential-Bache Securities has never before been a pioneer, but these days its energetic chairman, George L. Ball, is leading the brokerage firm on what he calls an expedition into Wall Street's most inviting frontier.


Construction Machinery In Queens Exhibition
LEAD: A two-month exhibition on large construction machinery has opened at the New York Hall of Science in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens, featuring weekend demonstrations, artworks and films related to the theme.


Connecticut
LEAD: Fourth of July celebrations in Connecticut this year will include Highland Games, a symphony performance, a lobster festival and bicycle races, as well as traditional fireworks displays.


DOCUMENTS SHOW OMISSION BY MEESE
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, in a 1985 document disclosing his personal investments to the Justice Department, failed to mention that on the day before the disclosure he had invested $60,000 with a financial consultant closely tied to the Wedtech Corporation.


I.R.S. SETS TIGHT RULE ON INTEREST
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service proposed regulations today that would require taxpayers to keep detailed records in order to deduct the interest they pay on loans used for investments and business expenses.


Ratners Group Buying Sterling
LEAD: Ratners Group P.L.C., Britain's biggest jewelry chain, will enter the lucrative American market by buying Sterling Inc., a leading American retailer, for a little more than $200 million.


When Police Sow Suspicion
LEAD: Worried about more racial violence after the Howard Beach incident last winter, New York City's Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward demanded better intelligence gathering in the black community.
He got more than he asked for and black leaders now accuse the department of unwarranted surveillance and intimidation.


CHURCH'S FRIED CHICKEN reports earnings for Qtr to June 14
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHURCH'S FRIED CHICKEN (NYSE)
Qtr to June 14
1987
1986
Revenue
94,588,000
118,036,000
Net inc
3,548,000
6,852,000
Share earns
.10
.18
6mo rev
183,051,000
226,437,000
Net inc
3,959,000
12,151,000
Share earns
.11
.32


Campanis Comments
LEAD: Al Campanis, who lost his job as player personnel chief of the Los Angeles Dodgers because of remarks about the qualifications of blacks for executive positions in sports, said yesterday that his dismissal would be worthwhile if the result was ''betterment of blacks.''


INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL EQUIPMENT reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL EQUIPMENT (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Revenue
575,000
712,000
Net loss
144,000
b45,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
1,891,000
2,276,000
Net loss
402,000
bc304,000
Share earns
-
.14


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Isuzu Motors Inc., Whitter, Calif., said it had increased retail prices on cars by 1.5 percent and on trucks by 3.7 percent.


CARDIAC RESUSCITATOR reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARDIAC RESUSCITATOR
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
535,100
982,600
Net loss
2,310,900
305,100
Yr sales
2,132,600
2,900,200
Net loss
4,072,800
1,894,500
Cardiac Resuscitator Corp. is 78 percent owned by Emerson Radio Corp.


HADRON INC reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HADRON INC (OTC)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
24,782,000
22,329,000
Net inc
1,308,000
852,000
Share earns
.10
.06
Shares outst
13,707,913
13,429,649


IN CAMBODIA, THE PRINCESS SERVES THE PROLETARIAT
LEAD: In the rundown capital of this threadbare country, fought over by opposing Communist armies, a radiant royal princess continues to hold court.


LANDFILLS AND MEANS OF DISPOSAL ARE ISSUES IN JERSEY TRASH TALKS
LEAD: Dwindling landfill space and looming changes in trash-disposal methods have emerged as major issues in contract talks aimed at averting northern New Jersey's third garbage strike in six years.


AMERICAN CLAIMS EVALUATION reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CLAIMS EVALUATION (OTC)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,095,000
740,000
Net loss
66,973
b7,642
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


Framers Said Nothing of Accountability
LEAD: To the Editor:


COSTAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COSTAR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,801,000
4,721,000
Net inc
b859,000
c329,000
Share earns
.49
.19
6mo sales
10,936,000
8,669,000
Net inc
b755,000
c310,000
Share earns
.43
.18
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $162,000 and $369,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, and a gain on disposal of discontinued operations of $530,000 and a tax credit of $307,000 for both the quarter and 6 months.


TRANSACTIONS
LEAD:  BASEBALL


POOR SKILLS CITED IN NEW YORK ENTRY-LEVEL APPLICANTS
LEAD: In its first major recruitment effort in more than a decade, the New York Telephone Company this year met with results that surprised few labor experts: 84 percent of applicants from New York City failed the entry-level examinations.


Books of The Times; The Tolstoys Together
LEAD:  LEV &amp; SONYA.
The Story of the Tolstoy Marriage.
By Louise Smoluchowski. 288 pages.
G.P.
Putnam's Sons. $19.95.


Superconductivity May Not Revolutionize Our Lives
LEAD: To the Editor:


On Knowledge, Will And Birth Control
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JULY 4, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


EX-CONTRA IS EXILED TO FISHING
LEAD: Having trawled through a revolution and a counterrevolution in the last decade, Eden Pastora Gomez, the former Sandinista and contra commander, is casting a shorter line these days.


NORTHRUP UNDER FIRE ON 3 FRONTS
LEAD: The Northrop Corporation has been thriving for several years, winning a series of the most prestigious and lucrative military contracts by combining a reputation for quality work with top technology.


THE GAME OF PRICING FINE WINE
LEAD: SOME things never seem to change; high wine prices in restaurants, for instance.
Restaurateurs say they have to charge what they do to survive.
But three times the retail price?
Restaurants do not pay retail prices for their wines to begin with.


AIR FORCE AIDE BALKS AT SECRECY PACT
LEAD: An Air Force official who was once dismissed for disclosing military cost overruns has defied a Presidential order intended to stop the unauthorized disclosure of secret information.


KURT LAMM
LEAD: Kurt Lamm, the secretary general of the United States Soccer Federation since 1971, died of a heart attack at Brookdale Hospital in Brooklyn Wednesday night.
He was 68 years old.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 38.


PAMAMA STRIKE CALLED IN FIRE TIED TO REGIME
LEAD: Business leaders called a general strike in Panama this afternoon after a fire that they said was set by a pro-Government mob destroyed an important commercial complex in the capital Thursday.


JAZZ: HARRIS AND BOURELLY
LEAD: Jerome Harris and Jean-Paul Bourelly, guitarists celebrating the release of new albums with performances at S.O.B.'s on Wednesday, displayed two faces of jazz-based electric music.


In the Ring With Mr. Wotan
LEAD: On the advice of doctors I am taking a few years off from my reading of Marcel Proust's ''Remembrance of Things Past.'' Those reports that I attacked five volumes of the masterpiece with a machete, however, are a canard.
I am particularly vexed by rumors that the suspense of Volume 2 (''In the Shadow of Young


Departure at Maryland
LEAD: David Gregg, the University of Maryland forward, will not return next year, the school has announced.
Gregg was in the dormitory room June 19, 1986, when Len Bias collapsed and died of cocaine intoxication.
Gregg recieved immunity from prosecution for testifying in the trial of Brian Lee Tribble, who was aquitted last month on charges he supplied the cocaine that killed Bias.


PROFFITT'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROFFITT'S INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 2
1987
1986
Revenue
9,440,203
9,325,416
Net inc
394,535
338,050
Share earns
.14
.12


South African Churches Back Force by Guerrillas
LEAD: The South African Council of Churches has taken the first formal steps toward justifying the use of violence by guerrillas fighting to end apartheid rule.


Dr. William L. Donn, Scholar At a Geological Observatory
LEAD: Dr.
William L. Donn, a researcher in climatology, geology and atmospheric physics, died Tuesday at his home in Grand View-on-Hudson, N.Y.
He was 69 years old.


Japan Surplus Eases a Bit
LEAD: The broadest measure of Japan's foreign trade surplus registered a modest decline in May from a year ago, the Government said today, showing signs that a strong yen may be helping reverse the United States-Japan trade imbalance.


About New York; July 3d Languor: Memories of '86 And Leo's Liver
LEAD: David Wolpers and your Lee Iacoccas may come and go, but Leo Steiner's patriotism never flags.


SCIMED LIFE SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCIMED LIFE SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,588,000
2,233,000
Net inc
61,000
b80,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
2,908,000
2,474,000
b-Net loss


WARNINGS OF SUICIDES OVER HOLIDAYS ARE REPORTED TO BE MISPLACED
LEAD: Mental health professionals often warn that patients are at an increased risk of suicide at the time of the major national holidays, such as the Fourth of July.
But a California sociologist says the warnings are misplaced.


K-V PHARMACEUTICAL reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*K-V PHARMACEUTICAL (OTC)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
23,439,043
24,258,783
Net inc
682,458
459,247
Share earns
.14
.09


Occidental Offer
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation, in an effort to cut dividend expenses by $37.5 million annually, has offered to buy out its largest class of preferred shareholders and increase its outstanding common stock by nine million shares.
Under the offer, which expires July 31, Occidental would exchange 1.5 shares of common stock for each share of preferred stock that pays a $6.25 annual dividend.


MEDICAL ACTION INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDICAL ACTION INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,012,582
14,769,897
Net inc
603,893
b348,838
Share earns
.12
-
Shares outst
4,993,846
4,793,810
b-Net loss


LONE RALLY THWARTS RANGERS
LEAD: The Yankees, fresh from the three-game sweep in Toronto that catapulted them into a three-game division lead, scored in only one of the 17 innings in which they batted last night.
But that one brief spurt enabled them to win one of the two games they played against the Texas Rangers.


OLYMPIC BROADCASTING reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OLYMPIC BROADCASTING
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,300,000
1,300,000
Net loss
3,500,000
1,3000,000


DARLING FAILS FOR 14TH TIME, 8-3
LEAD: Faced with mounting internal dissension, the Mets held a team meeting before their game tonight as Manager Dave Johnson attempted to smooth things over.


VOILA! A MUSTACHE MAKES AN OLD MAN OF YVES MONTAND
LEAD: A fake mustache deserves some credit for Yves Montand's acclaimed portrayal of a wily patriarch in ''Jean de Florette,'' the French film about greed and fate that opened recently at the Paris theater.
The mustache, it seems, made him immediately at home in a part he initially rejected.


By PETER J. BOYER
LEAD: Leaders of the Directors Guild of America, declaring themselves engaged in ''a struggle for the hearts and minds of the American entertainment industry,'' said yesterday that their members were prepared to strike after their decisive rejection of contracts offered by the television networks and Hollywood film studios.


Goodyear Changes
LEAD: The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company plans to build a new plant and sell its retread machinery operations, the company said.
The Long Mile Rubber Company, a Goodyear subsidiary based in Dallas, will build a plant at an undetermined site to help strengthen the company's position in commercial retreading, Goodyear said.


2 NEW YORK BILLS WOULD HOLD GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS ACCOUNTABLE FOR ETHICS
LEAD: Aides to Governor Cuomo said today that he planned to wait until at least next week to sign two major pieces of legislation on government ethics and accountability that were approved late Thursday by the State Legislature.


DOCTORS HIT INSURANCE RATES
LEAD: Doctors protesting the nation's highest malpractice insurance rates have curtailed emergency services in South Florida and threatened to stop treating patients.


Can Top New York Officials Implement The Proposals of Commission on Year 2000?
LEAD: When elected officials want to postpone a controversial decision, or avoid it altogether, they often resort to a time-honored political ploy: assemble a commission of experts and have them prepare a report.


De Beers to Sell Stake to Botswana
LEAD: De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., the South African diamond giant, has agreed to sell a stake in the company to the Botswana Government for more than $370 million.


Monoclonal Settles Lawsuit
LEAD: Monoclonal Antibodies Inc. said that it had settled a patent infringement suit filed against it in 1984 by Hybritech Inc.
The settlement came after a


How the Endangered Species Act Is Succeeding
LEAD: To the Editor:


HASIDIM CONFRONT THE SECULAR WHILE LIVING A LIFE APART
LEAD: In the playgrounds of the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, Hasidic boys with spiraling earlocks race their Easy Rider-style tricycles against other Hasidic boys.
Hasidic girls, in long pinafore dresses, jump to a rope swung by other Hasidic girls.


$100 MILLION SAVING EXPECTED
LEAD: In a move that is expected to save New York consumers $100 million a year, Governor Cuomo and the Legislature agreed today on a bill to end a half-century of restrictions on the milk sales in the state.


In Case You Haven't Noticed, It's July 4
LEAD: A worker in Brooklyn preparing a barge for use in Macy's fireworks display tonight.
After the hoopla of last year, New York City is planning a rather quiet holiday.
Page 29.
In Washington, President Reagan kicked off the weekend with a speech at the Jefferson Memorial.
Page 5. (NYT/Dith Pran)


'Tosca' Rescheduled
LEAD: Rain forced the postponement of the free Metropolitan Opera performance of Puccini's ''Tosca'' Thursday night at Liberty State Park in Jersey City.
It has been rescheduled to Sunday at 8 P.M.


Arab-American Rapport Takes a Step Forward
LEAD: To the Editor:


THATCHER DEFENDS REAGAN'S ABILITIES
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said today that she did not think the Iran-contra affair had undermined President Reagan's international standing and his ability to achieve an arms control agreement with the Soviet Union.


AM COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Year to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AM COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Year to April 2
1987
1986
Revenue
12,882,000
11,425,000
Net loss
2,494,000
3,744,000


Overboard on Pensions
LEAD: In decades past, New York's state and local governments were able to attract workers with promises of lifetime security based on livable pensions.
The inflation of the 60's and 70's betrayed those promises.


CRAFT HOUSE reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRAFT HOUSE
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,977,000
3,418,000
Net inc
b383,000
c603,000
Share earns
.27
.42
Yr sales
15,515,000
12,768,000
Net inc
b1,513,000
c781,000
Share earns
1.06
.54
b-Includes gains of $50,000 and $503,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, from discontinued operations.


CELLULAR PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CELLULAR PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
574,687
204,385
Net loss
374,952
637,473
Yr rev
1,445,336
976,301
Net loss
1,426,017
1,289,543


GOLDEN ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOLDEN ENTERPRISES (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
31,107,620
32,525,063
Net inc
1,548,777
2,215,082
Share earns
.12
.17
Shares outst
13,083,926
13,028,087
Yr rev
123,340,717
120,763,222
Net inc
7,953,313
6,838,377
Share earns
.61
.53
Shares outst
13,066,054
13,024,078


AT BRONX COURTHOUSE, SPACE CRUNCH
LEAD: At the Bronx County Courthouse, juries have deliberated in storage rooms, judges have conferred in coat closets and lawyers have appealed for relief from the tight quarters.


CLEOPATRA KOHLIQUE reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLEOPATRA KOHLIQUE
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,155,612
3,492,023
Net inc
103,212
359,812
Share earns
.03
.11


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I'm very lucky to be alive.''


HOSPITAL STAFFING SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOSPITAL STAFFING SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,034,676
2,714,614
Net inc
113,320
b122,202
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
3,169,732
3,150,000
6mo rev
5,909,606
5,309,188
Net inc
303,003
b202,701
Share earns
.10
.06
Shares outst
3,159,974
3,150,000


N.E.A. President Re-elected
LEAD: Teachers gave a resounding mandate today to Mary Hatwood Futrell, electing her to a third term as president of the National Education Association and rebuffing an attempt to unseat the union's vice president.


A CALL TO SAVE TROPICAL FORESTS
LEAD: An appeal for urgent international action to save the world's fast disappearing tropical forests was made here today by a group of third world political leaders, environmentalists and development experts.


Protection From Hate
LEAD: Legislation on bias-related crime ought to be easy to pass: Who could oppose measures to curb violence based on prejudice?
Governor Cuomo's bill, now before the State Legislature, was inspired by the Howard Beach incident and introduced five months ago.
It would stiffen criminal penalties for such acts.


WHERE THE CAMPERS STRUT, AND FRET A LITTLE
LEAD: The public-address system was booming, ''Good morning, it's wake-up time everyone,'' but none of the campers assembled for reveille at the flagpole.
In fact, there was no flagpole.
Nor did the campers stand at attention for the unfurling of the camp colors or the singing of the camp song.
There are no camp colors.


Polaroid Found Liable in Suit
LEAD: The Polaroid Corporation has been found liable for damages in a class action suit involving allegations that company officials sold stock without disclosing information about the company's problems.
A six-person jury in Federal District Court reached its decision Thursday after one day of deliberations.


PAGE AMERICA GROUP reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAGE AMERICA GROUP
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,212,500
14,740,900
Net loss
7,032,400
10,124,900


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, JULY 4, 1987
LEAD:  International 2-4, 28  Moscow called for a withdrawal of all foreign warships from the Persian Gulf and condemned the American military buildup in the region as an effort to establish ''military-political hegemony.'' Page 1  Moscow plans to cut its work force in industries and farms by up to 20 million people by the end of the century, using layoffs, mergers and a retraining program to streamline industry, a leading Government economist said.


BUILDING MUSICAL BRIDGES IN THAILAND
LEAD: In a practice room above the dirt and din of modern Bangkok, a small group of musicians, squatting on the floor with ancient instruments, produces the intricate patterns and delicate harmonies of traditional Thai music.


MESTEK INC reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MESTEK INC (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
30,060,000
16,814,000
Net inc
1,225,000
827,000
Share earns
.12
.11
Shares outst
9,392,000
7,542,000
The company said the 1987 earnings include results of Mestek and Reed National Corp., while 1986 earnings include Reed only.


Child Hurt in Fall From Roof
LEAD: A 2-year-old was in critical but stable condition last night after an accidental fall from the roof of a five-story housing project in the Gravesend section of Brooklyn.
A police spokesman, Sgt.
Maurice Howard, said the toddler, Sean Wallace of 2331 West 11th Street, near Avenue X, was being boosted by a 6-year-old playmate so he could look over the side of the roof but fell over it instead.


Prof. Vaclav Cerny, Advocate Of Rights in Czechoslovakia
LEAD: Prof.
Vaclav Cerny, a founding father of the Czechoslovak Charter 77 human-rights movement, died in Prague, members of the movement reported today.
He was 82 years old.


JOHNSTOWN AMERICAN COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSTOWN AMERICAN COMPANIES (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
30,948,000
36,169,000
Net inc
553,000
529,000
Share earns
.05
.05
9mo rev
93,654,000
110,796,000
Net inc
1,734,000
1,482,000
Share earns
.16
.14


Pay 'N Pak Rejects 2 Sweetened Bids
LEAD: A special committee of the Pay 'N Pak Stores Inc. board has rejected two sweetened takeover offers from the Florida investor Paul Bilzerian, citing an earlier buyout agreement with a management-led group.
The management group, which includes the chairman, David Heerensperger, has begun a leveraged buyout of the


Joseph R. Strayer Dies; Historian and Author
LEAD: Joseph R. Strayer, a medievalist and former chairman of the history department at Princeton University, died Thursday at the Princeton (N.J.) Medical Center after an intestinal infection.
He was 82 years old and lived in Princeton.


JACKSON RIGHTS GROUP DROWNING IN DEBT
LEAD: Operation PUSH, the civil rights group that the Rev.
Jesse Jackson has used as his springboard to Presidential politics, is in a financial shambles and may not be able to continue its work, according to the group's auditor.


MOSCOW PROPOSES FOREIGN WARSHIPS QUIT PERSIAN GULF
LEAD: The Soviet Union called today for the withdrawal of all foreign warships from the Persian Gulf and condemned the American military buildup in the region as an effort to establish ''military political hegemony.''


STAR TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STAR TECHNOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b560,000
3,513,000
Yr net inc
b1,374,000
c19,971,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-After an extraordinary charge of $1.3 million for the quarter and year.
c-Net loss


PRESTO-TEK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRESTO-TEK CORP
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,359,102
2,043,314
Net inc
202,903
69,044
Share earns
.08
.04
6mo sales
2,459,346
5,088,201
Net inc
468
543,439
Share earns
-
.37
The year-ago 6 months' net includes a tax credit of $252,503.


WOMEN'S FINALISTS HAVE COMMON FOE
LEAD: There has rarely been a match with so much at stake - winning streaks on both sides of the net, the No. 1 ranking - all to be determined at Centre Court in the most prestigious tennis tournament in the world.
That will weigh heavily on the minds of Martina Navratilova and Steffi Graf as they await their showdown Saturday.


ROCK: BOSTON IN CONCERT IN BYRNE ARENA
LEAD: The enormous popularity of Boston, which played the first of four sold-out concerts at the Brendan Byrne Arena on Wednesday, demonstrates the conservatism of commercial rock radio and the eternal adolescent need for reassurance.


The Seven Dwarfs
LEAD: The strongest and saddest impression this viewer took away from the collective appearance of the Democratic Presidential candidates on national television was that Snow White was missing, while the Seven Dwarfs prattled on.


Independence Day
LEAD: Fireworks - 9:20 P.M., East River, 14th to 49th Street.


Public Broadcast Group Elects Ledwig President
LEAD: The Corporation for Public Broadcasting has elected Donald E. Ledwig president and chief executive officer.
The vote, held Thursday, was unanimous.


INSIDE
LEAD: Turmoil in Haiti
Although the military Government has capitulated on civilian control of elections, calls for its ouster grew amid new outbreaks of violence that left eight more people dead.
Page 4.


KOREA DISSIDENTS HALT TALKS PENDING RELEASE OF PRISONERS
LEAD: The country's top opposition leaders toughened their stance on negotiations with the rulling party today, saying that they would not talk until all South Korean political prisoners are released and their civil rights restored.


Kurt Weill Premieres In Series in September
LEAD: Several world and United States premieres of music by Kurt Weill will be featured during a five-part series devoted to the composer beginning Sept. 17 at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
The series will open the 1987-88 season at the concert hall.


Casey, Ex-Chief of C.I.A., Left $500,000 Estate to His Wife
LEAD: William J. Casey, the former Director of Central Intelligence, left an estate worth more than $500,000 to his wife, according to papers filed in Nassau County Surrogate Court.


PHILS TOP ASTROS, RYAN, 2-1
LEAD: Bruce Ruffin pitched a six-hitter over eight innings and Philadelphia beat Houston and Nolan Ryan, 2-1, tonight.
The victory came before a crowd of 56,825, the largest in the National League this season, which was also treated to postgame fireworks.


Kaisertech Deal
LEAD: Kaisertech Ltd., the new holding company for the Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation of Oakland, Calif., said it expects to buy the Chevron Corporation's half interest in the Harshaw/Filtrol Partnership on Aug. 1.
A specialty chemicals company based in Cleveland, Harshaw/Filtrol had 1986 revenues of about $264 million and employs about 2,100 people at 19 facilities worldwide.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Rain and Frost: Rain interrupted the second round of the Canadian Open yesterday at Oakville, Ontario, after David Frost posted a five-under-par 67.
The South African had a one-stroke lead with half the field having finished the round.
Play was suspended until this morning at 7 o'clock.


LIFESTYLE RESTAURANTS reports earnings for 16wks to May 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIFESTYLE RESTAURANTS (AMEX)
16wks to May 16
1987
1986
Revenue
12,546,000
18,295,000
Net loss
b2,023,000
c978,000
28wk rev
22,007,000
31,719,000
Net loss
b3,803,000
c1,427,000
b-After a loss of $95,000 and income of $5,000, both from discontinued operations, for the 16 weeks and 28 weeks, respectively; and a gain from the sale of discontinued operations of $699,000 for both the 16 weeks and 28 weeks.


LITTLE PRINCE PRODUCTIONS LTD reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LITTLE PRINCE PRODUCTIONS LTD (OTC)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,698
48,404
Net inc
b587,080
c21,226
Share earns
.30
.01
b-After a gain of $596,194 from a jury verdict in litigation against Nederlander organization and a loss of $4,313 from reversal of a tax credit.


INFLATION AND INVESTING DRIVE RISE OF THE $1 MILLION HOUSE
LEAD: A million dollars for a house?
Not so long ago, only movie stars and barons of industry occupied such places.
But lesser lights of Hollywood and vice presidents of industry live in them now, as do doctors, lawyers, bankers and partners of accounting firms.


One of Two Suspects in Rape Is Recaptured After Escape
LEAD: One of two ''extremely dangerous'' rape suspects who escaped from the police outside the Nassau County Courthouse was captured in Queens today after a woman telephoned an anonymous tip to the police, the authorities said.


PRECISION AEROTECH reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRECISION AEROTECH (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,918,000
7,822,000
Net inc
333,000
282,000
Share earns
.11
.14
Shares outst
3,006,404
1,979,916
Yr sales
33,398,000
27,445,000
Net inc
b1,225,000
669,000
Share earns
.48
.32
Shares outst
2,472,068
1,948,534


GONE WEST ROMPS
LEAD: Gone West, who floundered while trying to provide Woody Stephens with his sixth straight Belmont Stakes winner last month, won back his national prominence yesterday with a 12 1/2-length triumph over Pledge Card and Polish Navy in the $230,400 Dwyer Stakes at Belmont Park.


QUIET EXIT FOR JIMBO
LEAD: One of the many skills of the acting profession is the fine art of dying - knowing how to tumble down a flight of stairs, gesturing and clutching and screaming all the way.


UAS AUTOMATION SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UAS AUTOMATION SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
722,286
285,291
Net loss
158,052
417,253
Yr rev
1,718,836
3,330,538
Net loss
1,888,146
1,035,555


DANCE: CHO'S 'PANAMA'
LEAD: Clearly a lot of work went into Cho Kyoo-Hyun's ''Panama,'' an ambitious mixed-media piece performed at La Mama Annex on Wednesday.
Mr.
Cho has woven an astonishing variety of theatrical elements into the 90-minute piece.
And the performers of his Empty Hands group are impressive.
Ultimately, however, ''Panama'' was a large and rather empty-seeming mystery.


THEATER, FILM AND TV ACTOR
LEAD: King Donovan, an actor and comedian whose career on the stage and in films and television spanned 50 years, died of cancer Tuesday in the Connecticut Hospice in Branford, Conn.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan with his wife, the actress and comedienne Imogene Coca.


VERDIX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERDIX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,435,123
871,374
Net inc
181,109
b794,944
Share earns
.02
-
Yr rev
5,405,155
3,818,069
Net loss
444,480
836,347
b-Net loss


MUSIC: ORIGINAL DIXIELAND JAZZ BAND
LEAD: The place in jazz history of the original Dixieland Jazz Band, the group of five white New Orleans musicians who set New York on its ear in 1917 when it played at Riesenweber's Cafe on Columbus Circle, is based primarily on the widely held view that it was the first jazz group to be recorded.
Musical merit or originality had been secondary considerations.


DEBT ACTIONS MAY EFFECT BANK LOANS, DIVIDENDS
LEAD: With leading banks setting aside additional reserves for losses on third-world debt, bank shareholders may end up with skimpier returns and both business and individual borrowers might find it harder to obtain loans, experts on the banking industry say.


BANK SUIT SEEKS NEW DOME BIDS
LEAD: The Bank of Montreal, which is one of the largest creditors of Dome Petroleum Ltd., took legal action today to reopen bidding for the financially troubled Canadian oil company, which had agreed to be acquired by the Amoco Corporation.


AN AIR-CONDITIONER GUIDE, FROM B.T.U. TO E.E.R.
LEAD: When the temperature reached 90 degrees last week, many New Yorkers went shopping for an air-conditioner.


CALLS GROW AMID VIOLENCE, FOR OUSTER OF HAITI'S RULERS
LEAD: Despite the military Government's capitulation on civilian control of elections, calls for its ouster grew today amid new outbreaks of violence.


Transport Outlay Bill Gaining
LEAD: A $26.8 billion spending bill for transportation was approved Wednesday by the House Appropriations Committee, even though the Office of Management and Budget has said that it will urge President Reagan to reject the measure as being too costly.


PLEASURE BY THE PITCHERFUL
LEAD: Offers of iced tea on a sultry summer evening always conjure up the same picture for me: my mother's squat poppy-red pitcher, which from the end of June until Labor Day was filled late each afternoon with tea, sugar, lemon wedges and fresh mint.


U.S. AIDE TO FIGHT DISMISSAL IN ABORTION POLICY DISPUTE
LEAD: A Federal official dismissed from her job for refusing to make grants to Planned Parenthood clinics said today that she would challenge her dismissal.


Catherine A. Schreiber Is Wed in Connecticut
LEAD: Catherine Anne Schreiber, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Jaques Schreiber of Rowayton, Conn., was married at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien, Conn., yesterday to Stephen McNally, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. McNally of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Kevin Douglas Bean performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


XICOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 14
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XICOR INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 14
1987
1986
Sales
14,075,000
9,370,000
Net inc
b1,421,000
c1,274,000
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
14,482,000
11,943,000
6mo sales
25,941,000
17,836,000
Net inc
b2,110,000
c3,184,000
Share earns
.15
-
Shares outst
13,648,000
11,868,000


ROBINS, RORER PUSH MERGER BID
LEAD: The A. H. Robins Company and the Rorer Group said yesterday that they intended to merge, signaling a possible end to years of bitter legal fighting over Robins's liability for injuries caused by its Dalkon Shield contraceptive device.


BENIHANA NATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to March 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BENIHANA NATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to March 29
1987
1986
Sales
15,342,410
17,907,738
Net loss
1,517,663
1,330,231
Shares outst
3,426,913
3,213,945
Yr sales
75,059,467
76,254,739
Net loss
6,460,113
917,391
The company said the latest year results were impacted substantially by advertising expenses related to the introduction of its oriental lites line of frozen food; the advertising costs for fiscal 1987 were $7,165,740.


FOOD LION INC reports earnings for 12wks to June 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOOD LION INC (OTC)
12wks to June 20
1987
1986
Sales
668,256,632
544,752,558
Net inc
20,153,624
15,459,704
Share earns
.13
.10
24wk sales
1,286,797,081
1,041,437,457
Net inc
36,415,286
27,233,951
Share earns
.23
.17


SOVIET PLANNING BIG LABOR SHIFT OUT OF INDUSTRY
LEAD: The Soviet Union plans to shift up to 20 million people from its industrial and agricultural work forces by the end of the century, using layoffs, mergers and a program of intense retraining, according to a leading Government economist.


Dollar Up Against Yen In Pre-Holiday Trading
LEAD: The dollar rose yesterday against most currencies in thin holiday-shortened trading.


Israelis Block Landing Of Guerrillas in North
LEAD: Israeli troops foiled an attempt by Palestinian guerrillas to land in northern Israel today.


BEEBA'S CREATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEEBA'S CREATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
33,378,368
34,803,628
Net inc
1,576,411
1,490,487
Share earns
.41
.44
Shares outst
3,882,579
3,424,884
9mo sales
72,737,541
64,985,228
Net inc
2,756,985
2,456,517
Share earns
.71
.75
Shares outst
3,879,657
3,295,100


CROWNAMERICA INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROWNAMERICA INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,967,000
21,361,000
Net inc
4,000
202,000
Share earns
-
.18
9mo rev
65,131,000
65,623,000
Net inc
745,000
1,315,000
Share earns
.64
1.14


Hot Street, Tired Feet
LEAD: A shopper, complete with a balloon, taking a break yesterday in front of a fountain on Avenue of the Americas near 55th Street.
High humidity and a high of 88 degrees produced a sticky sort of day.
Today may start out with thunderstorms, but the sun will emerge in the afternoon, just in time for picnics, outings and fireworks.


28 STILL CONFINED IN TEHERAN IN A FRENCH-IRANIAN STANDOFF
LEAD: Twenty-eight French citizens remained confined to the French Embassy in Teheran for a fourth day today as a standoff continued between France and Iran over an Iranian wanted for questioning here.


The Constitution as News
LEAD: According to the Constitution's Bicentennial Commission in Washington, the nation's charter is not only being debated in this, its 200th birthday year.
It's also being consumed.
Eight million pocket-sized copies are already in circulation, two million from the commission alone.
The Times publishes it today in our news columns in addition to our traditional Fourth of July facsimile of the Declaration of Independence.


Wilson Denies Report
LEAD: Stanley Wilson, the Cincinnati Bengals' fullback who been suspended by the National Football Leage for a second time for cocaine use, has denied using the drug, according to a published report.


Your Money; Loss-of-Income Insurance
LEAD: DR.
JOSEPH ADLER, a New York chiropractor, bought a disability insurance policy five years ago and has not filed a claim.
Nevertheless, he is by no means unhappy about paying the annual premium.


THRUWAY NEGLECTED ADVICE FOR BRIDGE, ENGINEER SAYS
LEAD: An engineer has testified that officials ignored his recommendation to add rocks as erosion protection around footings of the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway bridge that collapsed on April 5.


LENDL MOVES INTO FINAL
LEAD: He is leaving sooner than he would have preferred, but Jimmy Connors has always made it clear that he judged success in terms of the number of tournaments he won, not the nice tries.
And yet, Our Jimbo, as the British fans appeared on the verge of calling him, took some satisfaction in the contribution he made to


BMW Sales Rise
LEAD: The West German car maker Bayerische Motoren Werke A.G. said the popularity of its new ''7'' series of prestige cars helped increase sales 17 percent in the first six months of 1987 against the corresponding period last year.
BMW said sales for the period rose to 8.92 billion West German marks, or $4.88 billion.


Emergency Declared to Stem Crowding in Washington Jails
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry declared a state of emergency in the city's chronically overcrowded prison system today, beginning a process that could result in the release of 350 inmates convicted of nonviolent crimes.


WORLCO DATA SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WORLCO DATA SYSTEMS
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,177,657
1,788,081
Net inc
b17,645
c357,398
Share earns
.01
.13
Shares outst
3,194,168
2,725,152
Yr rev
10,892,444
8,110,208
Net inc
b329,948
c445,849
Share earns
.11
.16


UNCERTAINTY SEEN ON ANTILLES BONDS
LEAD: The long Fourth of July weekend allowed owners of $32 billion of Eurobonds issued from the Netherlands Antilles to catch their breath yesterday.
They had had their fireworks earlier in the week.


UTILITECH INC reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UTILITECH INC (OTC)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
938,600
3,308,000
Net loss
3,305,500
1,567,700
Shares outst
5,498,285
2,616,112
The company said latest year losses include an adjustment in asset values of about $600,000, representing reserves for the reduction in the value of assets such as trucks, helical drivers and grouters.


PERCEPTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PERCEPTRONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
13,262,985
7,872,886
Net loss
2,209,212
b330,493
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
3,432,575
3,856,416
Yr rev
38,403,700
28,994,386
Net loss
1,315,760
b831,486
Share earns
-
.23
Shares outst
3,425,875
3,603,741


ZZZZ's Chief Said to Resign
LEAD: Barry Minkow, the 21-year-old entrepreneur who founded the ZZZZ Best Company, has reportedly resigned from the fast-growing carpet-cleaning concern.


MANOR CARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANOR CARE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
126,866,000
123,713,000
Net inc
11,321,000
11,176,000
Share earns
.28
.28
Yr rev
501,761,000
482,518,000
Net inc
b39,102,000
38,278,000
Share earns
.98
.96


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Woman of the Theater


New York City Issues Curbs On Swimming in Its Waters
LEAD: The New York City Health Department has announced that many of the waters bordering the five boroughs are unsafe for swimming.


REAGAN VOWS TO ALTER BUDGET PROCESS
LEAD: President Reagan pledged today to use the remaining months of his Presidency to pursue four ''essential economic freedoms'' that would alter Congressional spending and tax policies.


L A GEAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*L A GEAR INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
15,775,000
9,481,000
Net inc
901,000
943,000
Share earns
.22
.38
Shares outst
4,052,500
2,500,000
6mo sales
23,414,000
15,658,000
Net inc
941,000
1,350,000
Share earns
.23
.54


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD:  Questions appear on page 11.


Bakker Says Church Renounces Charges; Statement Disputed
LEAD: Assertions by the evangelist Jim Bakker that the Assemblies of God denomination has reconsidered his dismissal and disproved allegations of homosexuality against him are unfounded, a church spokeswoman said today.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A dispatch from San Francisco on Thursday, about the 20th anniversary of the ''Summer of Love'' in the Haight-Ashbury district, misstated the date of a concert and rally at Golden Gate Park that will conclude summerlong festivities.
It is Sept. 12, not Sept. 21.


COURT DATE IN AIRLINE PROTEST
LEAD: An airline passenger charged with disorderly conduct for complaining about a flight delay in a manner the airline said made crew members fear for their safety has decided to take his case before a jury.


Grand Metropolitan And Martell Join
LEAD: France's oldest major cognac producer, Martell, and the British hotel and liquor company Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. announced a merger of their international drinks distribution networks today, just a month after the champagne and cognac house Moet-Hennessy and Guinness forged a similar link.


Thon Leaves Astros
LEAD: Dickie Thon, the Houston shortstop, left the Astros last night before their game in Philadelphia, and said he would not play for the remainder of the season.


CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, a calendar of summer classes and crafts in The Home Section on Thursday included a misplaced schedule.


2 TRANS-ATLANTIC BALLOONISTS SAVED AFTER JUMP INTO SEA OFF SCOTLAND
LEAD: Two trans-Atlantic adventurers jumped into the sea today as their disabled hot-air balloon went down within sight of their landing target on the coast of western Scotland.


NEW LIGHT ON 1787 AND WASHINGTON'S DOUBTS
LEAD: George Washington was pessimistic.
The Constitutional Convention was nearing an end and had been so contentious, he said, that more than once it had been ''upon the point of dissolving without agreeing on any system.''


The Odometer Connection
LEAD: Chrysler got caught by a Federal grand jury with its monkey wrench on the odometer.
It was doing a little test-driving of new cars with the mileage indicators disconnected.
Illegal or not, that was crummy, and the company should have known it.
Such deception fits the caricature of used-car lots.
To do it on a product that is labeled and sold as brand spanking new is a tawdry breach of the public's trust.


BOXCAR SURVIVOR DESCRIBES ORDEAL
LEAD: The only man who emerged alive from a locked, ovenlike boxcar described today how his 16 Mexican friends, flailing deliriously in the dark, collapsed and died one by one while trying to ride a freight train to jobs in Dallas.


BAY FINANCIAL reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAY FINANCIAL (NYSE)
Year to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
43,079,000
39,341,000
Net loss
8,161,000
b1,876,000
Share earns
-
.58
b-Net income  The latest year and prior year include charges of $7,340,000 and $3,878,000, respectively, for depreciation and amortization on real estate; and provisions of $3,407,000 and $1,484,000, respectively, for possible investment losses.


ELECTROSOUND GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTROSOUND GROUP (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,829,000
7,498,000
Net inc
b120,000
cd1,259,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
1,971,000
1,512,000
Yr rev
30,458,000
35,970,000
Net inc
b725,000
c683,000
Share earns
.39
-
Shares outst
1,880,000
1,512,000


CALTON INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALTON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
23,924,000
25,089,000
Net inc
2,217,000
1,366,000
Share earns
.12
.09
Shares outst
18,870,000
15,000,000
6mo rev
42,338,000
51,555,000
Net inc
3,745,000
2,072,000
Share earns
.20
.14
Shares outst
18,583,000
15,000,000


FACELIFTERS HOME SYSTEMS reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FACELIFTERS HOME SYSTEMS
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,224,121
2,300,855
Net loss
b1,563,495
c96,865
Share earns
-
.02
b-Includes a $1,510,487 loss from discontinued operations.
c-Net income and after net of $242,715 from discontinued operations.


FARM WORKERS CONFOUNDED BY IMMIGRATION LAWS
LEAD: Under the new Federal immigration law, three Haitian farm workers who came to this country a year and a half ago as boat people should be eligible for United States citizenship.


AFTER MORE THAN 10 YEARS, THE B-1 BOMBER IS COMING OF AGE
LEAD: The B-1 bomber streaked across the desert of south Texas at 650 miles an hour only 500 feet above ground, dashing into valleys and slipping over rocky hills like a fighter plane.


Pay Equity Belongs in Any Revision of New York City Charter
LEAD: To the Editor:


FRENCH COURT FINDS BARBIE GUILTY AND ORDERS HIM TO PRISON FOR LIFE
LEAD: Klaus Barbie, the wartime Gestapo chief of this city, was convicted early today of crimes against humanity and was sentenced to life imprisonment.


NEWARK'S MAYOR DRAWS PRAISE AND QUESTIONS
LEAD: Sharpe James completed his first year as Mayor of New Jersey's largest city this week by continuing his boosterism of the city and boarding a Continental Airlines flight inaugurating service between Newark and Paris.


Beverly Cagan-Rogowsky Is Wed to Morton Eligator
LEAD: Beverly Cagan-Rogowsky and Morton H. Eligator were married yesterday at La Panetiere in Rye, N.Y., by Rabbi Robert Fine.


MUTUAL FUNDS' TOUGH QUARTER
LEAD: After a sterling first quarter, mutual funds generally disappointed investors in the second three months of the year.


EXPERT ON THE MIDDLE EAST HAS BEEN A LEADING PLAYER
LEAD: Long before he became a noted expert on terrorism and Middle East problems, Michael A. Ledeen of Washington was a leading figure on the international bridge scene.


The Constitution of the United States of America
LEAD: WE THE PEOPLE of the United States in Order to form a more perfect Union, to establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.


Fred M. Sedillo Is Wed To Ann Sayre Osborn
LEAD: At the Friends Meeting House in Haverford, Pa., yesterday, Ann Sayre Osborn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Neill Osborn of Haverford, and Fred M. Sedillo, a son of Justiniano F. Sedillo of Los Angeles and Lucille Vallejos of Las Vegas, Nev., were married in a Quaker ceremony.


Markets Closed
LEAD: The nation's stock, credit and commodity markets were closed yesterday in observance of the Fourth of July holiday.


Taiwan Cabinet Offers a Bill To End 38-Year Martial Law
LEAD: The Cabinet today sent the legislature a proposal to end 38 years of martial law in what Prime Minister Yu Kuo-hwa declared was the beginning of a new era of democracy.


AGNEW DEALINGS REVELAED IN LAWSUIT
LEAD: A case now in the preliminary stages in Federal District Court in Brooklyn provides a rare glimpse of Spiro T. Agnew's activities as an international business broker since leaving the Vice Presidency amid charges of taking bribes and kickbacks.


LURE OF NORTH OUTWIEGHS ALIENS' FEAR
LEAD: It was the economic disparities on the two sides of the Rio Grande that drove Miguel Tostado Rodriguez into the torrid boxcar in which 18 of his companions died Thursday in Sierra Blanca, Tex.


LIBERTY I. DONATION PLAN ASSAILED
LEAD: The rangers who work at the Statue of Liberty say they are being pressed to solicit donations from visitors to make up for the elimination of the $1 entrance fee a few weeks ago.


NOW HEAD SETS AGENDA
LEAD: FOUR years after the publication of Betty Friedan's watershed ''Feminine Mystique'' in 1963, Ed Lesen was having a tough time carrying out his duties as a junior high school counselor in Brooklyn.


Risks in Co-ops On Leased Land
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHRYSLER MINIVANS COMFORTABLE AND FUN
LEAD: We were heading up the east face of the Rockies.
I was at the wheel, a confetti of snow in my face, pushing the Plymouth minivan for all it was worth.
I had my foot flat on the floor, pedal to the metal as they say.
And what that meant was 35 miles an hour.


Gauging Value of an '87 College Degree
LEAD: THE class of 1987 has now departed the campuses, to start jobs or to start looking.


Accused of Killing Husband, A Jailed L.I. Woman Is Dead
LEAD: A 71-year-old woman who was being held at the Nassau County jail on charges of killing her 76-year-old husband died of a heart attack today, the police said.


MISHA DICHTER PREPARES FOR A CARAMOOR ANNIVERSARY
LEAD: A SLIGHT breeze riffles the Waccabuc trees, a dog romps in the wooded yard and Misha Dichter, the pianist, looks like a happy man.


EIGHT IMPORTANT DAYS IN NOVEMBER: UNRAVELING THE IRAN-CONTRA AFFAIR
LEAD: When Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North breaks his public silence Tuesday and testifies before Congress about the Iran-contra affair, much of the most dramatic questioning is expected to deal with seven critical days last November.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: JULY 5, 1987
LEAD:
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
ACT OF WILL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford.
(Bantam, $4.95.) Three generations of talented,
ambitious women in England and New York.
2
1
LAST OF THE BREED, by Louis L'Amour.
(Bantam, $3.95.) The adventures of a United
States Air Force major in Siberia.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Augusta, Me.; A Newcomer On Main Street
LEAD: A NINE-STORY brick building is rising on Water Street in the heart of Maine's capital city, the first new building in the downtown area in more than half a century.


Shirley Released
LEAD: ONE month after they signed him, the Kansas City Royals gave Bob Shirley, the former Yankee pitcher, his release and activated Bud Black, who had been on the disabled list after undergoing arthroscopic surgery on his knee.
Shirley was signed by the Royals June 5 after he was released by the Yankees.


Presidential Illusions
LEAD: THEY SAY HE'S A natural.
He's got the Jack Kennedy hairdo, he's got the Jimmy Carter teeth, he's got the Ronald Reagan sincerity.


WINDS OF CHANGE BLOW THROUGH ONTARIO'S THEATER FESTIVAL ON THE AVON
LEAD: A visitor to the Festval Theater, a legacy of Tyrone Guthrie's era as the first artistic director of Ontario's Stratford Festival, has only to walk 100 yards across the manicured lawns that run to the Avon River to watch a mother swan settling her cygnets under her wing for the night.


Correction
LEAD: A map May 24 accompanying an article on the Oregon Trail transposed the identification of two sites: Trail Ruts and Fort Laramie Historic Site.


JELLIED SALADS, STAPLE OF THE 50'S, SHOULD NOT BE FORGOTTEN
LEAD: DO you remember tomato aspic?
Look into your cookbooks from the 1950's and early 1960's and you may find recipes for this once-popular jellied salad.
Serious recipes called for fresh or canned tomatoes; the shortcuts used tomato juice.


At Soviet Rock Concert, the Beat of Security
LEAD: The Soviet Union staged a rock concert for peace here today with several American bands and enough soldiers and plainclothes security agents on hand to secure a small city.


Mammals of the Deep
LEAD:  WATCHING THE WHALES  Produced by the Marine Mammal Fund, Fort Mason Center, Bldg.
E, San Francisco, Calif. 94123. 30 minutes. $39.95.


REMEMBERING HOWSER
LEAD: George Brett wearing patch in honor of Dick Howser, former Royals' manager who died last month.
His number was the first retired by the team. (AP)


POP FICTION FOR SMART GIRLS
LEAD: I LIKE TO THINK THAT BEFORE I got paid to be a novelist, I was one of the best secretaries in New York.
I wore lace-collared dresses, didn't smoke without asking permission and hardly ever called in sick.
I typed flawless letters.
And I made reservations - in the first-class sections of airplanes, on the concierge floors of fancy hotels.


'It's Incredible,' Barbie Says Of His Verdict and Sentence
LEAD: Klaus Barbie, the wartime Gestapo chief here, found it unbelievable that he was convicted of crimes against humanity and sentenced to life in prison, a defense lawyer said today.


PROCEDURES FOR WOOD PRESERVATIVES
LEAD: EVER since the Environmental Protection Agency banned certain wood preservatives in early 1985, there has been confusion about whether it is safe for do-it-yourselfers to use any of the chemical wood preservatives still on the market.


The Pieces Are in Place For Affirmative Action
LEAD: THE Rev.
Jesse Jackson did not mince words.
Unless baseball started hiring more blacks and more Hispanic people in managerial jobs on and off the field, he warned in May, there might be a boycott of major league games on the Fourth of July.


Wedding Planned By Page Eastburn
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Eastburn 3d of Doylestown, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Page Eastburn, to Kevin P. O'Rourke, the son of Joan O'Rourke of Nyack, N.Y., and Pompano Beach, Fla., and Peter J. O'Rourke of Old Greenwich, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.


POSTINGS: 27-Story Tower; Queens Condos
LEAD: A condominium tower with amenities typical of expensive new apartment buildings in Manhattan is coming to Queens.


Celebrating What's Sweet About Home
LEAD: When friends living abroad describe what they miss most about America, the thoughtful ones skip past Yosemite and the Hudson Highlands and get to the heart of the matter: ''Freedom of movement.'' A translator who now works in Beijing echoes it.
It isn't that the Chinese authorities forbid movement, she says, but that the impossibility of owning a car rules out travel on the spur of the moment and that the lack of good telephone service makes planning a train or plane journey so difficult that one often gives up.


On the Ball
LEAD: DESPITE all the clamor about the livelier ball causing the large increase in home runs this season, one test of baseballs used in the major leagues this year showed that they are not much different from those used 10 years ago. ''They're essentially the same,'' said Roger Haller, president of Haller Testing Laboratories of Plainfield, N.J., after the tests, arranged by USA Today, were performed on 116 baseballs taken from every major league team.


Making Punishment Fit Crime in Drug Cases
LEAD: To the Editor:


Selling Off Some Intangible Assets
LEAD: The Parish of Trinity Church has proposed to sell the air rights to St.
Paul's Chapel downtown to the owners of the old A.T.&amp;T.
Building, who want to build an addition.
If the city approves the $10 million sale, $300,000 would be used as a trust fund to care for the chapel; other money would support parish social programs.


MS. BLUEMLE TO MARRY TODD PURDUM IN FALL
LEAD: Tiffany Windsor Bluemle, who received a Master of Public Administration degree last month from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, and Todd Stanley Purdum, a reporter on the metropolitan staff of The New York Times, plan to be married Nov. 7.
Robert L. Bluemle of Paradise Valley and Greer, Ariz., has announced his daughter's engagement to a son of Mr.


BACK TO SCHOOL
LEAD: ''Puleeeze, Dad, get a move on!
If you don't get your act together, you're going to be late for school.'' Reveille in a number of Westchester households next spring could sound something like that.


Students in China Turn Cynical and Apathetic
LEAD: STUDENTS at the University of Science and Technology in Hefei recently pasted narrow scrolls of paper on dormitory door posts, ink-brushed with the following sentiment: ''We are indifferent to all affairs: state affairs, party affairs and world affairs.
We turn a deaf ear to all sounds: the sound of wind, the sound of rain and the sound of reading.


ALYSSA KARP IS BRIDE OF STEVEN JAY SADOFF
LEAD: At the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York last night Alyssa Faith Karp, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene H. Karp of Secaucus, N.J., was married to Steven Jay Sadoff, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Armin M. Sadoff of Beverly Hills, Calif.
Rabbi Harlan J. Wechsler performed the ceremony.


Kansas Falls Off the Wagon
LEAD: ''It's a great day,'' many Kansans said over and over Wednesday.
For the first time in 107 years the sale of liquor by the glass in public watering holes was not, in many places in the state, a violation of law.


EXPERT WITNESSES: BOOMING BUSINESS FOR THE SPECIALISTS
LEAD: In the back pages of one prominent law publication after another, a string of the same eye-catching classified ads appear.


The Editorial Notebook; Me I Am!
LEAD: I am the only ME I AM who qualifies as me; no ME I AM has been before, and none will ever be.


POST FUTURUM BLUES
LEAD:  THE RAT  By Gunter Grass.
Translated by Ralph Manheim. 371 pp.
San Diego: A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $17.95.


Photography
LEAD: The most obvious message of ''Portrayals,'' an exhibition of recent portrait photography at the ICP/Midtown gallery (77 West 45th Street), is that the single image no longer suffices.
When it comes to portraying someone - even someone as recognizable and well known as the artist Alex Katz - it apparently helps to have a number of pictures competing for our attention.


SUMMER WEDDINGS ARE BEING PLANNED BY MARIAN K. AND BETH M. WARSHOFSKY
LEAD: A July 26 wedding is planned by Marian Kay Warshofsky and Thomas H. Edmonds Jr.
On Aug. 9, Ms.
Warshofsky's younger sister, Beth Marla Warshofsky, is planning to marry Arthur L. Herman.
Announcement of the engagements is made by Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Warshofsky of New York, parents of the future brides.


PATRICIA LEFEVERE WED TO DR. R. A. GARDNER
LEAD: Patricia Lefevere, a special report writer for the National Catholic Reporter in Kansas, Mo., and Dr.
Richard A. Gardner, a clinical professor of child psychiatry at the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, were married yesterday at their home in Tenafly, N.J.
An ecumenical service was performed by the Rev.


Notes On a Brief Campaign
LEAD: Until I read Peter Tauber's article ''Notes on a Brief Campaign'' (May 31), I still had some lingering thoughts about Gary Hart's qualifications: could it be that we lost a good Presidential candidate because of a quirky love-nest situation?


MODEST EXTERIOR, TOP ITALIAN FARE
LEAD: ITALIAN restaurants are the most common ethnic eating places on Long Island.
With all that competition, it's difficult for any restaurant to stand out.
La Bussola in Glen Cove is that standout.


Votes in Congress; Last Week's Tally in Key Eastern States
LEAD:  Senate  1.
Import Ban: Vote on an amendment to the omnibus trade bill that would have put a permanent ban on the imports of the Toshiba Corporation of Japan and the state-owned Kongsberg Vapenfabrik of Norway because they diverted advanced equipment to the Soviet Union, enabling it to make quieter submarines.


PATRICIA KAVEE, LAWYER, TO WED
LEAD: Patricia Mignon Kavee, a lawyer, and David Lockwood Melick, a loss-prevention consultant for the Liberty Mutual Insurance Companies in New York, plan to be married in September.
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Kavee of Riverside, Conn., have announced their daughter's engagement to a son of David Marvin Melick of Union City, N.J., and Arden Davis Melick of Maplewood, N


Whistle-Blowers And the Law
LEAD: Our law firm represents executives and managers who have been discharged by their corporate employers (About Men, ''A Whistle-Blower,'' by Don Rosendale, June 7).
We hear Mr.
Rosendale's story frequently.
There are some things discharged whistle-blowers should know.


Civil-Rights Suit Over Jersey School Financing Nears Climax
LEAD: A lawsuit aimed at upsetting New Jersey's school financing law is moving closer to a decision that civil-rights lawyers hope will force the state to eliminate a widening gap between school budgets in rich and poor districts.


Classical Music
LEAD: Music will try to cool off the July night air this week.
Enterprises big and small will be spread out among the city's parks and downtown open spaces.
The New York Philharmonic is the busiest.
It moves into Central park Monday night, conducted by Raymond Leppard, in a program that includes Handel's ''Fireworks'' music and the Strauss Horn Concerto (the Philharmonic's own Philip Myers is soloist).


THEIR NEMESIS IN SEOUL
LEAD:  PRISON WRITINGS  By Kim Dae Jung.
Translated by Choi Sung-il and David R. McCann. 333 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $25.


TROLLING FOR FISH ISN'T ALWAYS A DRAG
LEAD: ALTHOUGH it doesn't appeal to everyone, trolling is sometimes the only way to catch fish consistently.


Headliners; Heartbreak
LEAD: After 40 years of filling the Amsterdam Avenue air with the aromas of his baked goods, Louis Lichtman found the rent rising faster than his dough.
Mr.
Lichtman, a 75-year-old Hungarian immigrant whose shop at the corner of 86th Street was a West Side institution, fought back tears last week as an auctioneer gaveled off the shop's fixtures and equipment.


Losing Markets
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEW YORKERS, ETC.
LEAD: THERE you are, walking down the street thinking you look pretty wonderful, and you meet a friend who tells you you look pretty wonderful, and you begin to feel really wonderful.
Then it happens.
A few blocks farther on, another friend crosses your path, gives you a quick glance and announces that you're not looking so hot and maybe you've been working too hard.


JANINE M. LINDEN TO MARRY OCT. 24
LEAD: The engagement of Janine M. Linden to Samuel Lewis Gordon Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gordon of Hartsdale, N.Y., and New Haven, Vt., has been announced by the future bride's father and stepmother, Mr. and Mrs.
M.
F.
Mager of New York and Casey Key in Nokomis, Fla.
The couple plan to marry on Oct. 24.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:  GWEN JOHN.
By Susan Chitty. (Franklin Watts, $17.95.) Gwen John (1876-1939) was an English painter, the older sister of the better-known painter Augustus John.
From this account, she appears to have been an eccentric, driven woman who led an unusual, principled and self-punishing life.
When, early in her career, her father told her she looked like a prostitute in a painting - she worked as an artist's model - she refused ever again to take money from him, in effect choosing poverty for life.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Swing Vote From School


A Shrewd Mitterrand Rises Above the Fray
LEAD: AS the plotting and scheming about next year's presidential election begins, France seems to be edging back toward the system of shifting coalitions that many here thought had been eliminated when Charles de Gaulle created the near-monarchical presidency of the Fifth Republic in 1958.


A Vision of New York as It Reaches for the Next Millennium
LEAD: IT was the most obvious thing for a city to do, but nothing like it had been done in nearly twenty years: last week, the Commission on the Year 2000 submitted to Mayor Koch its report on the future of the city, ''New York Ascendant,'' with an analysis of what New York is, where it is going, and what can and should be done.


CASEY ZMIJESKI IS MARRIED TO LAURA ENGLISH IN JERSEY
LEAD: Laura Elizabeth English, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. English of Chatham, N.J., was married yesterday to Charles Joseph Zmijeski, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles Zmijeski of West Hartford, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Drew Simpson performed the ceremony at the Chatham United Methodist Church.


American Jews Are Voicing Their Disquiet
LEAD: IN the months since the revelations about Israeli espionage in Washington, Israel's role in the Iran arms affair, and numerous embarrassing squabbles in the Israeli Government, officials here have been closely monitoring American opinion polls to see if these episodes have affected Israel's standing.


Senate Liberals Will Try to Block Nominee on Ideological Grounds
LEAD: WITH the direction of the Supreme Court, the Reagan legacy and the Democratic Presidential nomination all in play, the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork portends the biggest ideological battle of President Reagan's second term.
It will also be the major test of modern times on an issue as old as the Republic: Is the Senate's ''advice and consent'' role a mandate to reject a Presidential nominee to the


WATER TO GO ANYWHERE UNDER THE SUN
LEAD: WELCOME to the age of designer water.
Designer water?
It's a clear liquid that has bubbled up and landed right smack in our midst as a bona fide fashion accessory.


Superhero?
LEAD: To the Editor:


DR. JUDITH HALPERIN TO WED IN OCTOBER
LEAD: The engagement of Dr.
Judith Halperin and Dr.
Joel Neil Goldstein has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley D. Halperin of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., and Menemsha, Mass., parents of the future bride.
Her fiance is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Goldstein of New Rochelle, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.


MADRID
LEAD: Unseasonably cold weather this spring delayed the blossoms on the magnolia trees sprinkled about Madrid, but finally summer has arrived and residents and visitors are thronging to the many outdoor cafes (terrazas) that have proliferated in recent years.


THE HARTMAN DESERVES ANOTHER CHANCE
LEAD: I HELPED kill the Hartman Theater, and I'm sick about it.
I didn't pull the trigger; the Hartman Board of Trustees did that the first week of June.


RICHARD HARWOOD PLANS TO BE WED TO MISS WEBSTER
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Bayard Webster of Allendale, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jacqueline Park Webster, to Richard Charles Harwood, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert Harwood of Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.


'Civilianizing' Seoul; Washington Delivers a Quiet Nudge
LEAD: THERE was a heady feeling at the State Department last week as officials professed satisfaction with the role they played as South Korea moved toward democracy.
For many policymakers, the euphoria recalled their good feelings 16 months ago after ''people power'' triumphed in the Philippines.


Music: Summergarden, At the Modern Museum
LEAD: THE Museum of Modern Art opens its Sculpture Garden to music each summer, and this year - on the sensible assumption that people who frequent this museum ought to be apprised of what is current in music -the ''Summergarden'' series is being undertaken jointly with the Juilliard School and the director of its contemporary music ensemble, Paul Zukofsky.


HUMAN-WAVE RAID LOSSES IRAN'S FAVOR
LEAD: Some of Iran's senior religious leaders appear to oppose the ''human wave'' assaults in which thousands of ill-trained and ill-equipped Iranian troops cross the border to face ''martyrdom'' at the hands of the Iraqis.


Ballet: The Bolshoi Offers a Program of Excerpts
LEAD: THE Bolshoi Ballet played its trump card Friday night - it put a dazzling array of star-quality young dancers on display in one of its celebrated smorgasbord programs, and triumphed.


GEPHARDT INTENSIFIES HIS CRITICISM OF DUKAKIS
LEAD: Representative Richard A. Gephardt has stepped up his criticism of a fellow Democratic Presidential aspirant, Michael S. Dukakis, saying the Massachusetts Governor overstates his effectiveness and has not proposed anything to reduce the nation's trade imbalance.


MIXING PUBLIC SERVICE, PRIVATE CAUSES
LEAD: THOUGH he has traveled the world on business and as a United Nations delegate, Arthur Ross makes a point of spending his summers in East Hampton.


Where to Raft, Bicycle and Sail
LEAD: Following is just a sampling of the many tour companies offering adventure programs in North America; some offer tours abroad as well.
Outdoor- oriented programs are also offered by nonprofit organizations such as the Sierra Club.


Critics Fault Accountants For Not Blowing Whistles
LEAD: WHEN the Penn Square Bank of Oklahoma City failed in 1982, threatening a national banking panic, it could scarcely console investors with a report from a certified public accountant giving it a clean bill of health.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Union Station  Starring William Holden, Barry Fitzgerald.
Directed by Rudolph Mate. 1950.
Kartes Video Communications. 80 minutes. $19.95.


BRITISH FURHISHINGS AT THE MET
LEAD: BRITISH CABINETMAK-ers and silversmiths traveled an impressive distance between 1770 and 1840 - going from understated neoclassicism to unrestrained eclecticism.
Artisans borrowed freely from the ancients, embellishing chairs, chests and candlesticks with scrolls, urns, sphinxes and winged griffins, all of which can be seen in a redesigned English decorative arts gallery at the Metropolitan Museum of


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Wilmington, Del.; Condo Tower Fails to Draw
LEAD: THE market for high-rise luxury urban living is proving hard to establish in this corporate community of 70,000, the largest city in Delaware.


Linnas Death Sentence Reportedly Commuted
LEAD: The Soviet authorities commuted the death sentence of Karl Linnas, who had been convicted in absentia as a Nazi war criminal in 1962, before his death in Leningrad last Thursday, according to Mr.
Linnas's attorney and his daughter, who arrived in New York yesterday.


NET STARS CONVERGE ON LIVINGSTON
LEAD: WHEN a 17-year-old amateur is playing in his first high-level tennis tournament against seasoned professionals, things may get a little out of focus for him.


Jersey Discovers Pains and Perils In Office Growth
LEAD: SOME days, the superhighways that crisscross Parsippany-Troy Hills in the heart of New Jersey's corporate countryside roar to a standstill.
Route 80 backs up heading both east and west, and Route 287's four lanes of northbound and southbound traffic go nowhere fast.


OLDER ATHLETES SHOW IT'S NOT THE AGE, IT'S THE ATTITUDE
LEAD: CONSIDERING that she did not become an athlete until she was 68 years old, Mary Haines of Newington has come a long way, in every sense of the expression.


Hurdling the Land-Use Review Process
LEAD: A NEW apartment house is under construction in Harlem just a block from the campus of City College.
The nine-story building, called Logan Plaza, is at 1425 Amsterdam Avenue, between West 130th and 131st Streets.


A Vote for Hill
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Why Your Doctor Is a Group
LEAD: Martha Fay speaks of the upward surge in malpractice suits in recent years, a surge commonly laid to the greed of patients and their lawyers.
Yet, as a nonlitigious patient, I feel compelled to point out a possible correlation between this greater litigiousness and an increased emphasis on ''cost-effectiveness'' in medicine and a preoccupation with technology, office management and accounting.


THE SLOW, STYLISH REDESIGN OF SNUG HARBOR
LEAD: IT IS NOT AS FAMOUS AS THE FERRY and it has not aroused tempers the way the one-way toll on the Verrazano Narrows Bridge has, but the struggle over Sailors Snug Harbor must still be Staten Island's epic drama.
This collection of Greek Revival buildings, constructed in the 19th century as a retirement home for seamen, was almost torn down in the 1960's by the home's trustees, who wanted to replace the great row of templelike buildings with a high-rise structure; the city designated the complex a landmark, at which point the trustees went to court.


AOUITA AND CRAM ARE VICTORS
LEAD: Said Aouita of Morocco and Steve Cram of Britain, the fastest middle-distance runners in history, won their respective races today but failed to come close to their world records during the Bislett Games track and field meet.


A 'Nation of Tenants'?
LEAD: As partner in charge of Coudert Brothers' Japan practice, Arthur M. Mitchell, an American, advises Japanese and American companies on the intricacies of doing business in each other's countries.
Last week, Mr.
Mitchell, who attended the International Christian University in Tokyo, spoke with Kyle Crichton, the Business Forum editor, about the rise in Japanese investment here.


FAR TRUMPET IS HEARD ANEW AS CANDIDATES INVOKE J.F.K.
LEAD: Twenty-four years after his death, John Fitzgerald Kennedy's words and ideas go forth once again as a new generation of Democratic Presidential hopefuls looks back for a bridge to the future.


125 ARE REPORTED KILLED IN ZAIRE TRAIN ACCIDENT
LEAD: A trailer-truck crashed into a train at an unguarded crossing in southeastern Zaire this week, killing 125 people and injuring an unknown number of others, officials said today.
It was believed to be the worst train accident in African history.


The Big Push for Pentagon Dollars
LEAD: AMID the roar and searing heat of metal-working machinery, Rosemary Ruiz watches carefully as workers at her company in Orange, Calif., hammer out aluminum parts for some of the nation's most sophisticated military aircraft and missiles.
In another factory a dozen miles north of here, Oswaldo Llamas talks proudly about the cockpit canopies and windows his company has built for jets, including the


Zwanger Plans To Wed in September
LEAD: Betsy Zwanger, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome Zwanger of Massapequa Park, L.I., and Lawrence Polur, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Polur of Tampa, Fla., plan to marry Sept. 5, the future bride's parents have announced.


Rowdy Rivalry
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Why Your Doctor Is a Group
LEAD: I took great pleasure in reading Martha Fay's article ''Why Your Family Doctor Is a Group'' (June 7).
It is heartening to see that, despite the specter of malpractice suits and increasing third-party intervention, there is still ''a joy in the daily business of medicine ...,'' at least in Katonah.


AT A DEALMAKER'S DELI, THE LOX COMES WITH YACHTS
LEAD: IN April, Irwin L. Jacobs, the feared corporate raider and sometime greenmailer, became the nation's most unlikely delicatessen owner.
He began pitching pastrami for a simple, although not necessarily obvious, reason.
He did it to sell boats.


Added Cost In Selling A Co-op
LEAD: WITHIN the past year many sellers of New York City cooperative apartments have been finding out - to their chagrin - that a sizable chunk of the proceeds from a sale may have to be surrendered in taxes and fees.
On a $500,000 apartment, for example, the new costs could come to $20,000 or more.


IN WESTPORT, LIGHT MEALS FAST
LEAD: WESTPORT is more fortunate than many towns in having a number of ''hangouts'' - casual places where you can go for a light meal at moderate cost without dressing up.
One of the newest is Glynn's Cafe, in the center of town in a small house that has been like a revolving door to restaurants over the last 10 years or so.


A Curfew for Karin
LEAD: THE FIRST TIME SHE LEFT HOME, I thought it was a joke, but it wasn't.
I am one of those divorced fathers - call me insecure, call me frivolous - who likes to make a jest of everything.
So when my 17-year-old announced she was leaving to stay in the other (and pricier) part of town with a close friend of my ex-wife's, I quipped, ''Sure.


LOW BASS PUTS A SPEAKER ON HIGH
LEAD: AT ANY GIVEN TIME, there are a few speakers that are widely acknowledged to approach the real sound of music more closely than the rest.
Such models are usually sought out by professional recording engineers to monitor and evaluate their work.
They are also coveted by knowledgeable audiophiles undeterred by cost in their search for the possible best.


15 Wounded on West Bank In Bombing at a Restaurant
LEAD: A bomb exploded in an Arab restaurant frequented by Israelis in the West Bank town of Kalkilya today, wounding 15 people, an army spokesman said.


INSIDE THE 'JACKET': ALL KUBRICK
LEAD: STANLEY KUBRICK'S ''FULL METAL JACKET'' establishes its grip on the viewer's attention instantaneously, with an opening scene in which young recruits are shorn by an off-screen Marine Corps barber, while a corny, lulling song is heard in the background (''Kiss me goodbye and write me when I'm gone/Goodbye sweetheart, hello Vietnam'').


Where the Custom Is to Mix Diplomacy With Profits
LEAD: LATE last year, an Iranian-born businessman named Albert Hakim sat down with Iranian officials to try to win their help in freeing American hostages in Lebanon.
In a matter of hours, he made a key concession, agreeing that the United States would pressure Kuwait to release several Shiite Moslems convicted of a truck bombing.


Data Bank: July 5, 1987
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
I Q'87
IV Q'86
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,735.2
$3,696.1
$3,655.9
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.8
1.1
3.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
I Q'87
IV Q'86
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$136.6
$144.5
$126.9


GAIL COONS IS ENGAGED TO BRIAN MACDONALD
LEAD: Gail Elizabeth Coons, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard T. Coons of Oak Beach, L.I., and Venice, Fla., and Brian Allen MacDonald, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce MacDonald of Los Gatos, Calif., plan to be married Aug. 29, the future bride's parents have announced.


An Epic Struggle For Gold
LEAD: Sebastiao Salgado's stunning pictures of the Brazilian gold field at Serra Pelada show the stark intensity that can be achieved by black-and-white photography - a quality that the superficial intensities of color photography can never equal.


Cable TV
LEAD: Gifted pens are the sources of some rewarding film fare on cable this week - like Ernest Hemingway's ''Old Man and the Sea'' (1958), Wednesday at 2:30 P.M. on Cinemax.
This simple tale of a grizzled Cuban fisherman battling a huge marlin (Life) is much better suited to the small screen than it was to the large one.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Nudists vs. Birds In Rhode Island


GROWIN' UP AND ROCKIN' OUT
LEAD:  GLORY DAYS  Bruce Springsteen in the 1980s.
By Dave Marsh.
Illustrated. 478 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $18.95.


STREET CLASHES IN KWANGJU END LULL
LEAD: The police clashed with demonstrators here this evening in what appeared to be the first significant confrontation since the Government announced major concessions this week.


The 10 Most Popular Parks
LEAD: The number of visitors in 1986
Great Smoky Mountains (N.C., Tenn.)
9,836,300
Acadia (Me.)
3,929,100
Grand Canyon (Ariz.)
3,035,800
Olympic (Wash.)
2,940,000
Yosemite (Calif.)
2,363,700
Rocky Mountain (Colo.)
2,408,200
Yellowstone (Wyo., Mont., Idaho)
2,363,800
Shenandoah (Va.)
1,844,000
Zion (Utah)
1,670,500
Mammoth Cave (Ky.)
1,646,700


SNEERING HIS WAY TO THE TOP
LEAD:  HIS BUTLER'S STORY  By Edward Limonov.
Translated by Judson Rosengrant. 346 pp.
New York: Grove Press. $17.95.


Confederate Remains Found in Mass Grave
LEAD: Remains of Confederate soldiers from Texas who died at the Battle of Glorieta Pass have been recovered from a mass grave, and plans are being made to return them to their state.


KAREN LOUISE BALDWIN PLANS TO WED RICHARD ERVIN ZIMMERMAN ON OCT. 3
LEAD: Karen Louise Baldwin and Richard Ervin Zimmerman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Ervin Zimmerman of Chapel Hill, N.C., plan to marry Oct. 3, the future bride's parents, Mrs.
Frederic Houston Williams of New York and Cedric Benjamin Baldwin of Honolulu, have announced.


LAURA BECKERING ENGAGED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
J.
J.
Beckering of Huntington, L.I., have announced the engagment of their daughter Laura Francina Beckering to George A. Cooke Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cooke of Bradenton, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Beckering is a landscape architect at Abel, Bainnson &amp; Butz in New York.


An Epic Struggle For Gold
LEAD: Never have I seen anything that jolted me so (''An Epic Struggle for Gold,'' Portfolio by Sebastiao Salgado, Text by Marlise Simons, June 7)!
The images of a human anthill, Dante's ''Inferno'' and an ancient Roman mine, worked by slave labor, assaulted me all at once.
JAMES C. LEVIE  Altamonte Springs, Fla.


RABBI STAND-INS TO AID ISOLATED NEW ENGLAND JEWS
LEAD: In rural New England, where Jews are few and rabbis are as scarce as kosher delicatessens, weddings, burials and other Jewish ceremonies are often presided over by lay people who must limp along with fragments of knowledge remembered from childhood days in Hebrew school.


Broadcast TV
LEAD: On camera, Isaac Bashevis Singer's words come out like his short stories: handmade, wise and with a worldly twist.
A one-hour program in the American Masters series, ''Isaac in America: A Journey With Isaac Bashevis Singer'' (Monday night at 9 on Channels 13 and 49), should be watched with a pencil and paper handy to take down his aphorisms before they fly off like some of his ethereal characters.


U.S. Lashes Out at Panama Regime
LEAD: The Reagan Administration took aim at Panama's military leadership last week.
After anti-American demonstrations at the United States Embassy in Panama City, the State Department said the military had orchestrated them to counter American calls for democratic rule.


MISS PETERS PLANS OCTOBER WEDDING
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm Peters of Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, England, have announced the engagement of their daughter Nicola Ruth Peters to Jerrold Howard Temko, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Temko of Westport, Conn., and West Hebron, N.Y.
An Oct. 17 wedding is planned.


In Presidential Primaries, One Vote Isn't Enough
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. CATHOLICS TO RAISE MILLIONS FOR PAPAL VISIT
LEAD: Roman Catholic leaders around the country are staging $250-a-plate dinners, selling commemorative books and Norman Rockwell china plates, making face-to-face appeals to wealthy Catholics and non-Catholics, all in an effort to raise the $20 million that Pope John Paul II's visit to the United States in


IN Presidential Primaries, One Vote Isn't Enough; Winner Take All
LEAD: To the Editor:


SOUR TASTE TO METS
LEAD: FRAGILE by nature, a strawberry requires gentle handling.
It bruises easily.
And once bruised, it quickly sours. ''It succeeds in a wide range of soils and situations,'' the Encyclopaedia Brittanica says, ''but it is very perishable and requires cool, dry storage.'' As if the Mets didn't know.


Gorbachev Is but the Instrument, Not the Cause, of Soviet Change
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kennedy And Bork
LEAD: Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts is urging the Democratic majority in the Senate to mount a major ideological attack on President Reagan's nomination of Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court.
But if they're wise they won't follow him down this stormy path.


MISS FLEMISTER TO MARRY REID WHITLOCK
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Graciela Flemister of New York and the Rev.
Carl E. Flemister of New York and Exton, Pa., of the engagement of their daughter Grace Angela Flemister to Reid E. Whitlock, the son of Valerie Whitlock of Charlotte, N.C.


Protecting the Jersey Shore
LEAD: Governor Kean announced a plan last week to raise a governmental umbrella over New Jersey's 128 miles of beach, to which neighbors from New York and Pennsylvania have flocked in increasing numbers in recent years.


PROCEDURES FOR WOOD PRESERVATIVES
LEAD: EVER since the Environmental Protection Agency banned certain wood preservatives in early 1985, there has been confusion about whether it is safe for do-it-yourselfers to use any of the chemical wood preservatives still on the market.


HAITI PROTEST LEADERS REJECT CONCESSIONS
LEAD: The leaders of the protests that racked Haiti this week said today that ''too much blood has flowed'' for them to accept concessions, and they vowed to redouble their efforts to topple the Government.


BROAD BRUSH, 3-10, WINS SUBURBAN, IN A BATTLE
LEAD: Broad Brush dug in through the stretch to hold off Set Style and Bordeaux Bob and score a surprisingly narrow victory in the $387,100 Suburban Handicap yesterday at Belmont Park.


Massachusetts Town Objects To Air Force Plans for Tower
LEAD: About 200 residents have passed two resolutions against the Air Force's plan to build a military communications tower here that would be part of a nationwide network to be used in a nuclear war.


POSTINGS: 'Buy-and-Fix-It' Loans; Novel Mortgages
LEAD: To help revive its older housing stock, New Jersey is encouraging adventurous home buyers to take on ''handyman specials'' through a novel mortgage program.


YUGOSLAV GRANDMASTER ACHEIVES TWO FOR ONE IN A SINGLE TOURNEY
LEAD: LJUBOMIR Ljubojevic achieved the distinction of receiving two best-played-game prizes in the same tournament.


POSTINGS: At Battery Park City; Opulent Marina
LEAD: ''St.
Tropez wouldn't be St.
Tropez if it weren't for the huge yachts in the center of town,'' said George Nicholson, a partner in Watermark Associates.
The developer recently received the go-ahead from the Battery Park City Authority to concoct a similar tourist attraction in the Mediterranean mode for the mixed-use development on the Hudson in lower


Mexico City
LEAD: To the Editor: Larry Rohter's ''What's Doing in Mexico City'' (Travel, April 5) brings to mind an experience we had there recently.


A Father and Daughter Die in a Brooklyn Fall
LEAD: A father and his 4-year-old daughter died early yesterday when the man, after a dispute with his estranged wife, jumped or fell from a Brooklyn apartment building while holding the girl, the police said.


JELLIED SALADS, STAPLE OF THE 50'S, SHOULD NOT BE FORGOTTEN
LEAD: DO you remember tomato aspic?
Look into your cookbooks from the 1950's and early 1960's and you may find recipes for this once-popular jellied salad.
Serious recipes called for fresh or canned tomatoes; the shortcuts used tomato juice.


JACKIE GLEASON: A YARDSTICK OF THE COMMON MAN
LEAD: IT HAS NEVER FAILED TO REDUCE me to tears: Ralph and Alice Kramden exchange Christmas presents in ''The Honeymooners'' version of ''The Gift of the Magi.'' Ralph has hocked his bowling ball in order to purchase a suitable gift for Alice; she, in turn, gives him a bowling bag.
They stare at each other, in that mythic Brooklyn flat - the unadorned table and chairs, the bureau, the icebox, the sink, as imprinted on our memories as the particulars of our own first homes, maybe more so - and for a moment there is embarrassment.


Trade in Doubt
LEAD: THE Portland Trail Blazers might invalidate the trade that brought them Keith Lee, a forward from the Cleveland Cavaliers, in exchange for Jim Paxson, a guard.
Dr.
Robert Cook, the Blazers' team doctor, said Lee's physical examination in Portland did not go well, that Lee's knees were ''a high risk.


SHE TOOK THE AIDS TEST
LEAD: I AM A WHITE, heterosexual female who has never used intravenous drugs.
I am 36 years old, divorced, and have never knowingly ''exchanged bodily fluids'' with a bisexual.


JAZZ AND DANCE AT SUMMERFARE FESTIVAL
LEAD: IT is not the oldest summer festival in Westchester, or the longest or the one in the most glamorous setting, but Pepsico's Summerfare at the State University of New York at Purchase continues to be one of the most innovative and imaginative.
Not to mention busiest.
More than 80 events in at least six performing spaces will crowd the schedule between Friday's opening and the final performances Aug.


INVOKING AMERICA: A GITCHE GUMEE MEMOIR
LEAD: WHEN I was a kid growing up in a New York City slum, the public schools I attended put a lot of emphasis on memorizing. ''By the rude bridge that arched the flood,'' we chanted, and my blood tingled.
Nothing in my experience, bounded by the Flatbush Extension or, later, by Southern Boulevard, connected me to that rural image I barely comprehended.


AT THE HEAD OF THE SENIOR CLASS
LEAD: IN a pro-am outing not long ago, Greg Norman was in a group on the third tee that waited for the golfers ahead of them to move along.
It seemed to be taking longer than usual.


HOW DOES A PLAYER QUALIFY AS AN ALL-STAR?
LEAD: The starting lineups for baseball's All-Star Game should be picked solely on performance in the first half of the season.
That's why they play the game every year - to honor players who have performed like all-stars during the current season.


Ocean Pier Collapses; 16 in N. Carolina Hurt
LEAD: A section of a pier jammed with revelers watching a Fourth of July fireworks show collapsed tonight, plunging about 40 people into the ocean and injuring at least 16, officials and witnesses said.


MY NEIGHBOR, MY ENEMY
LEAD: MERON BENVENISTI lives in a sprawling old Jerusalem stone house in a mixed neighborhood of Arabs and Jews.


Fred Astaire on Video
LEAD: The video cassette industry has not been laggard in putting the late Fred Astaire's films on tape.
Most of them have been issued and reissued over the last few years and most are ''in print'' -if that is the proper term for video.
However, as with all ''catalogue'' videos, as opposed to the latest releases, finding a particular title in a particular video store is more problematical.


PEACE BREAKS OUT ON TROUBLED METS
LEAD: The dissension that surfaced on the Mets again here Friday will be put in the past, according to the three players involved - Darryl Strawberry, Lee Mazzilli and Wally Backman.


Congressmen Abroad For Holiday Weekend
LEAD: While most Congressmen return to their home districts for the Independence Day weekend, some were overseas on business.


AN OLD-TIME FOURTH: FLAGS, FOOD , FUN
LEAD: It was a day for old-fashioned things: musket fire and a concert on the village green, a thundering parade on Main Street, a picnic down by the river and, in the evening, cascades of fireworks across the black velvet sky.


Dr. Donna Rosen Marries A Fellow Dentist in Jersey
LEAD: Dr.
Donna Ellen Rosen and Dr.
Jeffrey Alan Sedor, both dentists, were married yesterday at the Meadowlands Hilton Hotel in Secaucus, N.J.
Arthur J. Simpson, a retired judge of the Appellate Division of New Jersey Superior Court, officiated.


WHAT'S GOING ON AT EIGHTH SUMMERFARE
LEAD: WITH all the steamy photographs and titillating blurbs in the Pepsico Summerfare brochures - referring to a performance of ''human sensuality'' by a ''sensual iconoclast,'' ''a compellingly sensual'' dance piece or a ''vibrant and sexy musical'' - is the eighth annual international performing arts festival in Purchase to be interpreted as a cornucopia of erotica for the intelligentsia?


Correction
LEAD: A dispatch last Sunday from Corpus Christi, Tex., about the convention of the League of United Latin American Citizens misstated the Hispanic percentage of the nation's population.
It is 7.2 percent.


FORUM: 7 Democrats Grasp for the Distinctive Answer
LEAD: SEVEN contenders for the Democratic Presidential nomination, all trying to stand out from the pack, met in Houston Wednesday night for their first substantive - and nationally televised - exchange of opinions on public affairs.
The seven invited to take part - Bruce Babbitt, the former Governor of Arizona; Senators Joseph R.


Father, not Son
LEAD:  To the Editor:


NEWS SUMMARY SUNDAY, JULY 5, 1987
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL
3-11
2,5.7,q&gt;In South Korea, Roh Tae Woo, the chairman of the ruling party who altered the country's politics with proposals for democratic change, said that he had acted because he felt Koreans wanted ''sweeping, epoch-making, bold measures.''
Page 1


THE NAME IS THE GAME
LEAD: A BRIEF TOUR OF THE CLOS Du Val winery in Napa, Calif., had just ended, and Bernard Portet, who runs the place, was putting together a little tasting that included his 1981, 1982 and 1983 cabernets and something called simply 1982 Reserve ''Don't ask me what the blend in the Reserve is,'' Mr.
Portet said with a grin.


REMEMBERING A 'FORGOTTEN WAR'
LEAD: DAY BY DAY, SOUTH KOREA'S turbulence marches across current headlines and through the news broadcasts.
Half forgotten is that war in the early 1950's that established a viable country and laid the foundations of its present prosperity. ''Korea: The Forgotten War,'' a two-hour independently produced documentary that can be seen locally on WABC-TV this afternoon at 2, should remind Americans of that war's victories and defeats.


NEW YORK BACK-OFFICE JOB SURGE HAS PITFALLS
LEAD: The New York region is spawning thousands of back-office jobs that provide new opportunity for young and relatively unskilled workers.
But experts warn that this is a precarious boom: these are jobs that could be moved elsewhere, phased out through technology or cut abruptly in a business downturn.


THINKING ABOUT THE CRITIC
LEAD:  THINKING ABOUT THE PLAYWRIGHT  Comments From Four Decades.
By Eric Bentley. 364 pp.
Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press.
Cloth, $38.95.
Paper, $14.95.


WHEN BALLETIC DREAMS DOUBLE FOR REALITY
LEAD: THE VERSION OF ''CINDEREL-la'' that Rudolf Nureyev has choreographed for the Paris Opera Ballet to Prokofiev's well-known ballet score, and that recently played to packed houses at the Metropolitan Opera House, is set in the Hollywood of the past.
With a Cinderella who dreams of becoming a film star, who captures the heart of a leading man and who is under the tutelage of a producer - standing in as her fairy godmother - Mr.


Time to Hang Up the Old Sports Cliches
LEAD: AMERICANS are, on the whole, simple and direct people.
We do not incline toward nuances or subtleties, in either our lives or our work.
We opt inevitably for the concrete over the abstract.
We are also extremely competitive, relishing opponents' losses as we boast of our own victories.
For these reasons, sports are not only our favorite form of entertainment but the principal model and metaphor for our own lives.


TUNING TAKES A TURN
LEAD: TUNING IS PERHAPS THE subtlest of musical fundamentals and the least understood, and our vocabulary for describing tuning differences is a limited one.
Most of the time, one has to choose between technical jargon (''equal temperament,'' ''just-intonation'') and mere descriptive adjectives (''this tuning sounds different; it sounds weird'').


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  THE VOICE IN THE WELL  Here's a fine account of how modern poetry works.
It's Laurence Lieberman on W. S. Merwin, quoted in ''W.
S.
Merwin: Essays on the Poetry'' (University of Illinois), edited by Cary Nelson and Ed Folsom.


BAROQUE CONCERTS AT THE ATHENEUM
LEAD: THE Aston Magna Festival, the oldest Baroque performance summer music festival in the United States, will give three Sunday afternoon concerts on instruments of the period, at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford on July 12, 19 and 26 at 3 P.M.


Cook, Executive, Married to Ms. Jacoby
LEAD: The marriage of Justine dePeyster Jacoby, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Jacoby of Boston and Peterborough, N.H., to Douglas Simpson Cook, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Cook of New York, took place yesterday at the Unitarian Church in Peterborough.


Sense of Fairness
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Thriving Light Verse
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Rubbermaid's Sad Succession Tale
LEAD: THEORY has it that the best way for a chief executive to assure an orderly transition at retirement is to identify and groom an heir apparent a few years ahead of time so that he or she is comfortable with all aspects of the company when the critical time comes.
If he has been running a division, bring him into headquarters.


ROSS'S TRIAL PUTS CAPITAL PUNISHMENT BACK IN SPOTLIGHT
LEAD: THE imposition of the death sentence on Michael B. Ross, scheduled for tomorrow in Superior Court in Bridgeport, is likely to intensify the debate over the capital punishment law and set off an appellate battle lasting years, according to state officials and legislators.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: 125TH STREET;
LEAD: HARLEM'S busiest shopping strip, 125th Street, will be under siege for the next three years as construction crews rip it apart to remove trolley tracks, install new water mains and rebuild basement vaults.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''We feel responsible for having troubled society.''


Why Your Doctor Is a Group
LEAD: It's a man's world.
We all know that.
Those who wish to keep it so may well take heart from your cover photograph of the Katonah Medical Group, its front rows all men; the back rows almost all women.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Heartburn  Starring Meryl Streep and Jack Nicholson.
Directed by Mike Nichols.
Screenplay by Nora Ephron. 1986.
Paramount Home Video. 109 minutes. $79.95.
Nora Ephron's novel, ''Heartburn,'' based on her difficult and ultimately unfortunate marriage to Carl Bernstein of Watergate fame, was deliciously wicked - catty, gossipy and witty.


Putting the PC Into Publishing
LEAD: FOR the past two years, desktop publishing has meant Macintosh desktop publishing.
But when Pagemaker became available for the IBM PC and its compatibles, the publishing outlook began to brighten for the MS-DOS world.
The arrival of Ventura from Xerox and now a desktop publishing package from Software Publishing, a company known for programs that are both easy to deal with and relatively low in cost, seems finally to have brought choice as well as capability to I


2 Bodies Found in Hudson
LEAD: The partly decomposed body of a man and part of another body were retrieved from the Hudson River within an hour and a half yesterday afternoon, the New York City police reported.
A spokesman, Sgt.
Raymond O'Donnell, said the body of a middle-aged white man was spotted at 4:56 P.M. in the river downtown at West and Watts Streets.


MOVIES
LEAD:  It's Always Fair Weather  Starring Gene Kelly, Cyd Charisse, Dan Dailey, Michael Kidd, Dolores Gray.
Directed by Gene Kelly and Stanley Donen. 1955.
MGM/UA Home Video. 102 minutes. $29.95.


VHS IMPROVES ITS IMAGE
LEAD: UNQUESTIONABLY THE most far-reaching new video development seen at last month's Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago was a new version of the VHS format called Super-VHS - S-VHS for short.
It represents a major improvement in picture quality attainable in the VHS format.


McGwire Hits 29th to Help Top Red Sox
LEAD: Jose Canseco drove in four runs and Mark McGwire hit his major league-leading 29th homer today as the Oakland Athletics held on for a 9-5 victory over the Boston Red Sox.


Slain Girl's Wounded Cousin Flags Down Car to Get Help
LEAD: A 13-year-old girl with several bullet wounds scrambled up a freeway embankment and flagged down a motorist after being left to die in the desert with her raped and murdered cousin, the authorities said Friday.


MONTCLAIR THEATREFEST OFFERS STIRRING 'CABERET'
LEAD: IT IS time again to come to ''Cabaret,'' or the ''Cabaret,'' as the title song goes.
In October, just a month before the 21st anniversary of the musical's startling Broadway opening, a revival reuniting the original director, Harold Prince, and the original star, Joel Grey, will begin performances at the Imperial


FIVE NORTHERN TOWNS TO SELECT A TRASH SITE
LEAD: AFTER months of grappling with residents' questions and opposition, seven northern Westchester towns are pushing ahead with plans to ease their growing garbage-removal problems.


Stage: Musical, 'Half a World Away'
LEAD: IT is hard to see how it could miss, this evocation of Sholom Aleichem and his delightfully eccentric East European Jewish town, Kasrilevke, that has opened at the Jewish Repertory Theater. ''Half a World Away'' is done by people who obviously appreciate the humorist and his writings and who have a demonstrably good track record with this type of show.


PTL Donors Seek to Expand Their Role and Oust Falwell
LEAD: About 500 contributors to the troubled PTL ministry marched, chanted and prayed today for a greater role in the organizaton's affairs.
Many of them called for the ouster of the Rev.
Jerry Falwell, who took over the group from its founder, Jim Bakker.


ABOUT LONG ISLAND
LEAD: UNFAMILIARITY can put stars in your eyes.
After decades of driving along Sunrise Highway and Merrick Road and North Village Avenue, I'm bored with them.
The stores change, and occasionally a new building goes up, but the overall appearance seems pretty much the same.


The Old West
LEAD: To the Editor: In April 1983 I took a research trip to Wyoming and visited many of the sites mentioned in ''Staking a Claim in the Old West of the Pioneers.'' I must say that my impressions were very different from those expressed in your paper.


Aliens Take a Death Train
LEAD: In a bungled smuggling effort, 18 of 19 illegal aliens from Mexico died in 120-degree heat last week, trapped in a locked steel-walled boxcar.
They had boarded an eastbound freight at El Paso; the boxcar was opened the next day at Sierra Blanca, Tex., because an aluminum identification tag was missing.


Headliners; Calling It Quits
LEAD: Seventy-two years after he went to work on the docks and 25 years after he became president of the International Longshoreman's Association, Thomas W. (Teddy) Gleason has come off the waterfront.
Mr.
Gleason, who is 86 years old, announced last week that he was stepping down as head of the I.L.A. because of his age.


Amy Gonseth Is Married
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of the Transfiguration in Tarrytown, N.Y., yesterday Amy Elizabeth Gonseth, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Gonseth of Tarrytown, was married to Michael Anthony Meyers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Meyers of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
John G. Long performed the ceremony.


WIN ONE FOR THE BUDDHA
LEAD:  THE CURIOUS CASE OF SIDD FINCH  By George Plimpton. 275 pp.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $14.95.


Clarinetist To Play At Free Outdoor Recital
LEAD: Richard Stoltzman, a clarinetist, will play music by Bach, Schubert, Poulenc, Reich and others, Tuesday at 7 P.M. in Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center, as part of the Free Sunset Music Series sponsored by New York City and radio station WQXR.


A FEAST FROM THE CAN: HONORS FOR SPAM AT 50
LEAD: Revelers here are paying tribute this weekend to a slice of Americana that somehow never made its way into a Norman Rockwell painting.


ANN BLUMENTHAL BECOMES THE BRIDE OF S.P. HEINEMAN
LEAD: The marriage of Ann Marie Blumenthal, the daughter of Mrs.
Albert H. Blumenhal of Larchmont, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Blumenthal, to Scott Philip Heineman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Heineman of Stamford, Conn., and Block Island, R.I., took place yesterday in Rye, N.Y.
Rabbi Charles Davidson officiated at Wainright


Panelized Construction Is Catching On
LEAD: BUILDING a house in the standard way ''just doesn't make sense'' to Martin Curnan of Bedford, who has discovered he can build a house in three months by using panelized construction.


PRIMO LEVI: RECONCILING THE MAN AND THE WRITER
LEAD: WHEN a writer commits suicide it is difficult not to reinterpret his books in light of his final act.


Superhero?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Woodrat (It's Handsome) Joins Endangered List
LEAD: Despite the odium that its name evokes, the eastern woodrat has been officially declared an endangered species in New York entitled to the full protection of the law.


AUGUST WEDDING FOR SUSAN LAMB
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Anthony Lamb of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Condie Lamb to Christopher West Bartlett, a son of Bishop Allen Lyman Bartlett Jr. of the Episcopal Diocese of Pennsylvania and Mrs.
Bartlett of Philadelphia.


A Pound of Brie, a Jug of Wine and Bargains
LEAD: On a recent visit to Los Angeles, in between the requisite touring around town, my hostess-cum-driver pulled up at a scenic view in the Hollywood hills and produced a picnic lunch that would have done credit to Fortnum &amp; Mason.
There was a delectable pate, crusty bread, a French brie ripened to perfection and a bottle of deliciously dry white wine.


American Pie
LEAD: TIME WAS, A COOK'S SKILL was measured by the lightness of her crust and the flavor of her fillings.
Flaky crusts fell apart at a fork's touch, fillings bubbled through domed crusts or quivered under piles of meringue. ''Can she bake a cherry pie?'' was the ultimate test of a woman's skills.
All that changed when pie-crust mix and frozen pies freed women from the kitchen.


IN QUEST OF HAWAII'S AUTHENTIC HULA
LEAD: KAU'I ZUTTERMEISTER SPOKE softly as she described the chants and classical hula of her Hawaiian ancestors: the retelling of knowledge seen, known and felt that travels through generations in oral and dance form. ''Chanting was the language of the gods,'' Mrs.
Zuttermeister said.


GOVENOR PONDERING CONSUMER MEASURE
LEAD: A BILL that would make it more difficult to sue manufacturers when their products cause harm has been passed by the Legislature and sent to Governor Kean.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD: WHITE BARN BENEFIT A preseason benefit performance at 7 P.M. next Sunday will be given for Lucille Lortel's White Barn Theater on Newtown Avenue in Westport.
The production is ''The Enchanted Island of Yew,'' based on a children's fairy tale by L. Frank Baum, who is better known as the author of ''The Wizard of Oz.


NUCLEAR FUEL SUIT REVIEW DUE
LEAD: FEDERAL District Court in Manhattan is to review on Friday a request to intervene in a suit seeking to force nuclear waste from the Brookhaven National Laboratory to be routed across Long Island Sound and Connecticut instead of through New York City.


EXPERIENCE COUNTS
LEAD: BRIDGE is perhaps the only competitive activity in which octogenarians, and their seniors, regularly take part in open tournaments.
Insufficient stress has been laid on the advantages the game offers to retired people, who usually need to maintain the level of social contact and brain activity that they were accustomed to in their working life.


THE PERILS OF PUTTING OLD DISKS ON CD
LEAD: WHEN THE COMPACT disk was introduced in 1983, doomsayers predicted that, as the LP vanished, so would a vast catalogue of classic recordings in every genre.
To a degree, their fears were understandable, since it had taken decades for many treasurable 78 r.p.m. recordings to find homes on LP.
And with sonic purity now a selling point, it seemed likely that many older recordings were marked for extinction.


'Packin' Into the Bob' in Montana
LEAD: No roads, no cars, no television, no hotels.
Just us, our horses and mules trudging along ancient Indian trails deep into the forest wilderness, just as it must have looked to the Indians who migrated from Asia some 10,000 years ago.


ILLS LINKED TO POOR LENS CARE
LEAD: Improper contact lens care, including the use of homemade rinses, was apparently the chief reason for a number of rare eye infections reported last year, according to Federal scientists.


MISS ROSEN, TUFTS ALUMNA, TO MARRY STEVEN S. STERN
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Rosen of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nancy Jane Rosen, to Steven Scott Stern, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Stern of New York.


HEIDI GOURLEY BECOMES BRIDE OF T.A. BURNS
LEAD: Adelaide Ann Gourley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robinson Burroughs Gourley of Skaneateles, N.Y., and St.
Thomas, V.I., and Timothy Angus Burns, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Warren Burns of Bay Shore, L.I., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
George Criak and the Rev.
Stephen Kish performed the ceremony at the Borodino Methodist Church in


TIME OUT FOR GOOD BEHAVIOR
LEAD: TIME off to enjoy the holiday weekend.
Questions/Answers  LAWNS/MUSHROOMS


JELLIED SALADS, STAPLE OF THE 50'S, SHOULD NOT BE FORGOTTEN
LEAD: DO you remember tomato aspic?
Look into your cookbooks from the 1950's and early 1960's and you may find recipes for this once-popular jellied salad.
Serious recipes called for fresh or canned tomatoes; the shortcuts used tomato juice.


LENDL CLOSES IN ON ULTIMATE GOAL
LEAD: Progress has come slowly, both on and off the court.
What is remarkable is that Ivan Lendl has been able to rise to the top of men's tennis and hold his position while the learning process continues.
He has been perhaps the least respected of recent champions, considered the interim No. 1 until the next natural comes along to capture the public's fancy.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Wilmington, Del.; Condo Tower Fails to Draw
LEAD: THE market for high-rise luxury urban living is proving hard to establish in this corporate community of 70,000, the largest city in Delaware.


KOREAN DECLARES 'SWEEPING' CHANGE IS THE 'ONLY WAY'
LEAD: Roh Tae Woo, the chairman of the ruling party, who altered South Korean politics this week with surprising proposals for democratic change, said today that he had acted because he felt Koreans wanted ''sweeping, epoch-making, bold measures.''


Albany Approves A Wide-Ranging Ethics Bill
LEAD: After weeks of increasingly bitter dispute, the State Legislature last week passed one of the broadest, strictest ethics codes in the country.


Fresh Air Fund Sends Children to Their 2d Homes
LEAD: At the Port Authority bus terminal in midtown Manhattan one recent morning, the raucus chatter of children punctuated the usual rush-hour din.
They were bound for the country - some to see spacious backyards and cows and chickens and long, winding roads for the first time - to spend from two weeks to all summer with Fresh Air


Seed Money to Help Met Museum 'Complete the Dream'
LEAD: New York City's Department of Cultural Affairs announced last week that it would give $13.5 million to the Metropolitan Museum of Art to help build a five-story wing to display European sculpture and decorative art.
The project, which is the last major component of the museum's 1970 master plan, is expected to cost $51 million (the rest must be raised from private sources) and will ''complete the dream of those who founded the museum in 1870,'' said Philippe de Montebello, the Metropolitan's director.


PRISCILLA B. GALPIN TO MARRY KENNETH TWOMBLY AUG. 15
LEAD: Priscilla Bliss Galpin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen K. Galpin of Southport, Conn., and Kenneth L. Twombly, a son of Ellen Brown of Burlington, Vt., and the late Louis Twombly, plan to marry Aug. 15, the future bride's parents have announced.


Miss Ruppel Is Affianced
LEAD: Elizabeth Anne Ruppel, a vice president in the retirement services department at Prudential-Bache Securities in New York, and Peter Charles Weinberg, a vice president in the financial advisory group of the Bankers Trust Company in New York, plan to be married Aug. 29.


WHEN THE FOURTH OF JULY WAS A (DANGEROUS) BLAST
LEAD: DON'T get me wrong: I'm a firm advocate of a safe and sane Fourth.


HOW DOES A PLAYER QUALIFY AS AN ALL-STAR?
LEAD: Each baseball fan who fills out an all-star ballot develops his own criteria for an all-star.
For some, the player must hit .320 and have 120 r.b.i.'s a year.
For others, the player must impress with his personality and showmanship.
This quality has made Reggie Jackson a perennial all-star, and has left George Bell far behind in the balloting.


Star Qualities
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Lisa Beth Belkin To Marry in Fall
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Myron D. Belkin of Merrick, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Beth Belkin to Dr.
Bruce David Gelb, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen G. Gelb of Westfield, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.


WHAT IS IT LIKE TO LIVE ON AN ISLAND?
LEAD: RECENTLY I shared a cab home from the airport with an amiable woman from Oklahoma who was visiting her niece on Long Island.
We spent the travel time chatting away pleasantly.
The effortless flow of our conversation was stopped when she asked what it was like to live on an island.


REAGAN HINTS AT BORK NOMINATION STRATEGY: STRESS CREDENTIALS, NOT VIEWS
LEAD: In his first public statement on Judge Robert H. Bork since nominating him for the Supreme Court, President Reagan today signaled the Administration's strategy in the fight over the nomination: to emphasize Judge Bork's qualifications as a scholar and judge while sidestepping a confrontation over ideology.


INTIMACY WASN'T PART OF THE DEAL
LEAD:  HIGH COTTON  Love and Death on Wall Street.
By Sherri Daley. 304 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $18.95.


Volunteers Are Sought For Test of AIDS Drug
LEAD: New tests on the AIDS drug AZT are scheduled to begin Monday at the University of Rochester Medical Center, but officials say they need at least 100 more volunteers for the trial.


NEW AT CARAMOOR: JAZZ
LEAD: THERE are certainly enough summer events to satisfy the most ardent music lover.
Still, the warm weather sometimes brings out the wanderlust in us, and it might be well to consider two major festivals across the Westchester County border.


OUR JUDGMENTS ARE OFTEN BUILT ON SAND
LEAD: THE OTHER DAY, WHILE RAN-sacking shelves for something completely different, I came across a recording of Berio's ''Sinfonia,'' a keystone work of the 1960's avant-garde that I remember having admired and reviewed glowingly when it came out.
To refresh my memory, as they say in Washington, I played it through and found it still bracingly brash and inventive.


TAKING THE RAP FOR BENEDICT ARNOLD
LEAD:  MAJOR ANDRE  By Anthony Bailey. 200 pp.
New York: Michael di Capua Books/ Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $15.95.


THE SOUNDS OF SUMMER
LEAD: ABALMY SUMMER EVENING AT the Tanglewood Music Festival - seated comfortably in the Shed or stretched out luxuriously on the lawn, listening to great music played by the Boston Symphony Orchestra - counts as one kind of heaven for a lover of classical music.
Tanglewood, which got under way this weekend and begins a four-year 50th-birthday celebration this summer, is America's prototypical summer music festival.


Florida Doctor Action Cuts Emergency Care
LEAD: Hospitals scaled back services after doctors protesting spiraling malpractice insurance rates refused to work in emergency rooms for the holiday weekend.


Barbie Found Guilty of Crimes Against Humanity
LEAD: For many, the two-month trial of Klaus Barbie was also ''the trial of France,'' a forum for confronting old questions about the guilt of Vichy collaborators as well as of Gestapo torturers.


CORRECTION
LEAD: The Investing column last week misstated the source of a fairness opinion for the 1986 buyout of the Easco Corporation.
Easco had retained Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company to evaluate an offer of $20.50 a share, but no investment banker evaluated the final price of $17.50.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  MRS.
RANDALL.
By Christopher T. Leland. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) Christopher Leland's second novel tells the story of the mysterious Mrs.
Randall, a young woman with a past she must conceal from the small Southern town of Franksville.
We see her through the infatuated eyes of her stepson, Gams Stevenson, whose observations include not only this femme fatale of a mom but all the details of small-town life in the early years of the century.


Fred Astaire on the Stairway to Paradise
LEAD: To the Editor:


One From 77th Gets Prison Term
LEAD: During his years on the force, Robert Rathbun, a 36-year-old police officer who served in Brooklyn's Bedford-Stuyvesant district, received 50 awards including 29 citations for ''Excellent Police Duty.'' Last week, he was sentenced to a prison term of 3 1/2 to 10 1/2 years after being convicted in May on 37 counts of conspiracy, burglary, theft, misconduct and possession and sale of drugs.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Auto Racing  Allison Takes the Firecracker: Bobby Allison overcame an early brush that knocked him off the pace, charged into the lead with two laps left and beat Buddy Baker amid a crashing finish to the Firecracker 400 yesterday at Daytona International Speedway.
As Allison's Buick crossed the finish line 1.5 seconds ahead of Baker's Oldsmobile in the 160-lap race, Ken Schrader and Harry Gant, both of whom were running with the leaders, crashed hard.


Days of Democracy
LEAD: The need for dissonance - the marching music of democracy - was affirmed the other day in Moscow by, of all people, Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet President.
Speaking to the Supreme Soviet, the former diplomat long known as ''Old Stone Face'' pleaded for dissent.
He complained that debates ''were over-organized and in many ways a formality'' and had to change.


PROCEDURES FOR WOOD PRESERVATIVES
LEAD: EVER since the Environmental Protection Agency banned certain wood preservatives in early 1985, there has been confusion about whether it is safe for do-it-yourselfers to use any of the chemical wood preservatives still on the market.


INSIDE
LEAD: Paying for the Pope's Visit
Catholic leaders are staging dinners, selling books and china and asking for donations to meet the $20 million cost of John Paul II's visit.
Page 12.


DEMOCRATS PRESENT BOARD CANDIDATES AND OUTLINE ISSUES
LEAD: COUNTY Democrats offered their slate of candidates for election to the Board of Legislators last week, along with a sampling of campaign issues and a pledge to wrest control of the legislative body from the Republicans.


PANAMA'S GOVERNMENT UNLEASHES DRIVE TO BLAME U.S. FOR TROUBLE
LEAD: For 40 years, a bronze statue of Franklin D. Roosevelt has been smiling down at pedestrians along one of Panama's main boulevards.
On Thursday, the statue was torn from its pedestal and smashed by anti-American demonstrators.


People Stress: Day in the Life of A Hectic Haven
LEAD: BY 11 o'clock on a typical weekend summer morning in Rocky Mountain National Park, all 820 campsites are filled.
More than 1,000 people are clambering up Longs Peak, the park's highest mountain at 14,255 feet.
About 500 visitors are filling the parking lot at Bear Lake and hundreds of others are arriving on a shuttle bus supplied by the National Park


TOURISTS BACK IN EUROPE AS TERRORIST FEARS FADE
LEAD: When the 105-member Spirit of America band marched on the lawn of the American Ambassador's residence here today playing ''The Star-Spangled Banner,'' the sense of national pride in the crowd was unsullied by any nervous glances.


Vietnam Reportedly Agrees To Meeting With U.S. Envoy
LEAD: A Vietnamese official said his Government had agreed to a meeting in Hanoi with John W. Vessey Jr., President Reagan's special envoy, to end an impasse in talks over the fate of missing American sevicemen, The Washington Post reported in its Sunday editions.


RESIDENTIAL RESALES
LEAD: Closings in the week ended June 20  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill  $515,000  1056 Fifth Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining area, Central Park views; maintenance $876, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Dwelling Sales)


HISTORY LESSON ON THE FOURTH OF JULY
LEAD: CHECK the standing in the American League West before today's games and note the team that is in first place.
Recent history says that team will not be in first place at the end of the season.
Look again and see if the team in third place is two or two and a half games from first.
Recent history says that team could be in first place at the end of the season.


'North Country': A Gallic Flavor
LEAD: So what if a marching band from St.
Paul de l'Ile aux Noix plays ''God Bless America'' or a choir from Notre Dame du Mont Carmel de Lacolle sings ''Yankee Doodle Dandy.''


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  ESOP's Edge Up


Still on the Outside Looking In
LEAD: JOSE ARRIOLA is angry.
It seems as if every time he turns around, he hears of another major corporation that wants to do more business with minority-owned companies.
Or of another conference aimed at bringing minority businessmen together with corporate purchasing agents.


Parents at Work
LEAD: 'Men are changing in what they want to be a part of in their lives.
It ought to be a macho idea: Real men support child care and parental leave.
Put it on a bumper sticker.
Real men care about their kids.'


ATHLETE PICKS WORSHIP OVER GLORY
LEAD: AS one of the team's best players, Maurice (Mo) Edwards could well have been one of Saturday's heroes for the Hartford Public High School football team for the last four years.
Although he was a member of the team and practiced all week, he never played in a game on Saturday.


WESTCHESTER OPINIONLITTLE LEAGUE, BIG SIGNIFICANCE
LEAD: SITTING on our patio the other day, I remembered why grass doesn't grow in five spots in our back yard: home plate, first, second and third base and the pitcher's mound.


MAN, 39, SHACKLED FOR FIRST AID, DIES LATER AT A HOSPITAL
LEAD: A 39-year-old man died late Friday at Harlem Hospital shortly after he was handcuffed by the police so an ambulance crew could administer first aid.


The Continuing Hemline Saga
LEAD: Bianca Jagger, Blaine Trump, Nancy Kissinger, Liza Minnelli, Grace Mirabella . . . this is your survey of real women?
What about the rest of us - the lawyers, secretaries, assembly-line workers and mothers?
BONNIE JEAN THOMAS  New York City


PASSENGER MISSING FROM QE2
LEAD: A passenger mysteriously vanished from his luxury cabin aboard the Queen Elizabeth 2, Coast Guard officials said yesterday.
He was believed to have fallen overboard several hundred miles off Bermuda.


Why Your Doctor Is a Group
LEAD: Childhood memories are often exaggerated by the passage of time, but my memories of our family doctor, Henry Ludemann of the Katonah Medical Group, correspond precisely with opinions of him given in Martha Fay's article.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  FRIDAY NIGHT JAZZ ON L.I.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I think I will be recorded in history as a person who made a substantial contribution to the democratic development of this country.'' - Roh Tae Woo, chairman of the ruling party in South Korea.  [ 8:1. ]


HOW DOES A PLAYER QUALIFY AS AN ALL-STAR?
LEAD: Although it is true that baseball belongs to its fans, it is unfortunate that all too many of them need coaching.
How can ''knowledgeable'' fans pick players like Gary Carter while ignoring New York's most deserving candidate, Willie Randolph.


Data Update: July 5, 1987
LEAD:  MEDIAN HOUSE PRICES
Apr. 87
May
Apr. 86
Nation
85,000
85,600
80,200
Northeast
129,400
128,200
105,100
Midwest
66,700
67,600
66,200
South
81,800
83,700
78,400
West
103,300
101,900
96,600
(Source: National Association of Realtors.)
*2*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


NEW YORK CITY OFFICIALS CITE 22 FOOD OUTLETS FOR VIOLATIONS
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 22 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


D. R. Ventura Fiance Of Leslie R. Birnbaum
LEAD: The engagement of Leslie Robin Birnbaum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin M. Birnbaum of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Charlestown, R.I., to Douglas R. Ventura, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jules C. Ventura of Port Washington and Shelter Island, L.I., has been announced by the future bride's parents.


WILL THE REAL IDENTITY PLEASE STAND UP
LEAD: ''I think; therefore, I am'' - Rene Descartes


MUSIC: A TANGLEWOOD ANNIVERSARY
LEAD: Art has been holding its breath at the Tanglewood music festival the past few days waiting for nature to make up its mind.
Poised to celebrate the opening of its 50th summer season -with balloons, streamers, banners, candles and 10,000 cupcakes - this distinguished institution of American music had been trying desparately to wish all the wetness and dark clouds away.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE MUSIC: Reflections on Jazz and Blues.
By Amiri Baraka (LeRoi Jones) and Amina Baraka. (Morrow, $22.95.) Before changing his name to Amiri Baraka, the poet and playwright LeRoi Jones had established himself as an eloquent jazz critic; his 1963 study, ''Blues People: Negro Music in White America,'' is a classic.


Haiti Erupts Over Military's Move
LEAD: Liberty may well be an unalienable right, but it is hardly ever a sure thing.
Haiti, which rid itself of an oppressive dictatorship 17 months ago and has been sputtering toward embryonic democracy, provided a case in point last week.


SEASONAL RIPOSTES FOR FLORIDA VISITORS
LEAD: AS you probably already know, something strange comes over former New Yorkers who move down to Florida.
With few exceptions, these transplants see everything wrong about New York and everything right about Florida.
Even when they come to visit you to escape Florida's blazing summers.


LET THE BEACHES BE TRULY PUBLIC
LEAD: I am writing this in regard to a growing problem that plagues Long Island, New Jersey and I'm sure other areas in our coastal United States.
The problem is that of access to public beaches.


FOR COLLECTORS: CANCELLATIONS AND NEW ISSUES
LEAD: THE United States Postal Service is offering collectors an opportunity to obtain 10 different pictorial cancellations on the new Capex wildlife stamps.
Collectors can prepare their own covers and obtain the cancellations from individual National Parks or order a set on postal cards provided by the Postal


Alston Chase: Saving Nature From Itself
LEAD: THE long-held philosophy of the National Park Service - maintain the parks as much as possible as ''a vignette of primitive America'' - has come under increasing attack.
Critics charge that a lack of active intervention in natural systems within the parks has led to a serious decline in animal species such as the mule deer of Yellowstone.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Archive of Sound Opens in London After Facelift


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:  BEYOND FORGET: Rediscovering the Prairies.
By Mark Abley. (Sierra Club Books, $16.95.) Hugh MacLennan, one of Canada's living natural resources, once described his country's literature as ''Boy meets girl in Winnipeg, and who cares?'' More recently, of course, Canadian writers - Robertson Davies, Margaret Atwood, Mordecai Richler, Farley Mowat, Alice Munro, Antonine Maillet and Mr.


Couple Held in Theft
LEAD: A couple arrested on a Dublin-bound plane as it was being prepared for takeoff Saturday pleaded not guilty to conspiracy charges stemming from the theft of $500,000 from the woman's invalid employer, Dorothy Wirth, Thursday night.
The woman, Barbara Joyce, 44 years old, an Irish-born United States citizen and her husband, John Patrick Joyce, 36, were each ordered held in $100,000 dollars bail.


EMILY ANN UHRY MARRIES R. B. RHEA IN CONNECTICUT
LEAD: Emily Ann Uhry and Russell Boon Rhea were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Fox Uhry, in Morris, Conn.
The Rev.
Donald Wilson, a Presbyterian minister, officiated.


STATE ASKS TO JOIN SUIT ON ROUTING ATOM-FUEL
LEAD: FEDERAL District Court in Manhattan is to review on Friday a request by Connecticut to intervene in a suit in which New York City is seeking to force nuclear waste to be routed across Long Island Sound and Connecticut instead of through the city.


SUTCLIFFE WINS 11TH WITH 10 STRIKEOUTS
LEAD: Rick Sutcliffe today became the first National League pitcher with 11 victories, and Bob Dernier went 3 for 4, including a homer, as the Chicago Cubs beat the San Francisco Giants, 5-3.


BEATLES' REAL MESSAGE
LEAD:  To the Editor:


HATS ON!
LEAD: ''THERE'S NO TRADITION WITH HATS ANYMORE.'' Burton Berinsky of Jay Lord Hatters, one of New York's premier hat makers, delivers his pronouncement ruefully.
To hear him tell it, few men these days sport a Panama with the dash or conviction of a Victor Lazlo.
But in case one should turn up, Mr.
Berinsky is ready.


BLUEBERRY SEASON REACHES ITS PEAK
LEAD: AT THE 4,000-acre farm of the Atlantic Blueberry Company here, 2,000 pickers and packers and 190 field and road vehicles are scurrying among the 1.5 million bushes, working against time to harvest one of agriculture's most highly perishable short-lived crops.


VALOR COULDN'T SAVE THEM
LEAD:  EMBATTLED COURAGE  The Experience of Combat in the American Civil War.
By Gerald F. Linderman.
Illustrated. 357 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.50.


Koreans Protest Light Sentences for Policemen
LEAD: Family members of students still in custody attacking the court in Seoul where five officers received sentences of from 5 to 15 years in prison for the death by torture of a student seven months ago.
Page 8. (Agence France-Presse)


POSTINGS: What's in a Name?; Title Fits to a Tee
LEAD: The names given to residential developments rarely bear any specific relation to their suburban locales; rather they tend to evoke a spurious sense of splendor or a hoked-up suggestion of rural life.
But a new 266-unit condominium community called Rolling Greens in Rocky Hill, Conn., will indeed have rolling greens - as well as open fairways and sunken sandtraps.


LAURA MECKE AND LANGFORD MIDGLEY ARE MARRIED
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of St.
James the Less in Scarsdale, N.Y., yesterday, Laura Kenly Mecke, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert E. Mecke of Hartsdale, N.Y., was married to Langford Midgley, a son of Mary Edie Midgley of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and C.Edward Midgley of Irvington, N.Y.


LYNETTE BARD IS MARRIED
LEAD: The marriage of Lynette Anne Bard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald V. Bard of Elkins, W.Va., and Tarpon Springs, Fla., to Paul Stuart Rix took place yesterday at the Davis and Elkins College Chapel in Elkins.
The Rev.
Meade Gutshall performed the United Methodist ceremony.
The bridegroom, a computer consultant in New York, is the son of Mrs.


LISA JANE MELONE TO BECOME BRIDE
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph J. Melone of Short Hills, N.J., of the engagement of their daughter Lisa Jane Melone to Robert C. Cloughen Jr., the son of Mr.
Cloughen of Boynton Beach, Fla., and Dolores Cloughen of West Palm Beach, Fla.


Jazz: Bill and George Simon Swing Group
LEAD: IN the slippery world of twilight jazz, where engagements are rare and usually ephemeral, the Bill and George Simon Swing Group is approaching its seventh anniversary of Wednesday sessions from 5:30 to 8:30 P.M., in a new location, its fourth.
After starting at Maggie's, an East Side bar and restaurant, the band moved to larger quarters at Eddie Condon's on West 54th Street until it was closed and torn down, and then to Jimmy Walker's on West 55th Street, until the new cabaret laws limited the rooms to three musicians.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  OPEN ROAD: A Celebration of the American Highway, by Phil Patton. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $7.95.) Phil Patton's account of highway history is an ''intriguing'' and ''lovely little book,'' Karal Ann Marling said in The Book Review in 1986.
The author deals with nostalgic roadside America as well as with ''roadways as expressive entities in their own right.


YANKEES HOLD ON AND TOP RANGERS, 4-3
LEAD: Willie Randolph, captain and surprising run producer, declined to assess the first half of the Yankees' season yesterday. ''I make assessments after the season is over - when the dust clears,'' the second baseman said. ''You have to do it over the course of the whole season.
Are we going to stop here?


A PARTY FOR EVERY FAILURE
LEAD:  CROOKED HEARTS  By Robert Boswell. 340 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.


Prohibition on Homosexual Ministers Faces a Test
LEAD: The United Methodist Church, citing a church law passed three years ago, has begun the process of defrocking a minister because she has acknowledged she was a practicing lesbian.


Study Predicts Significant Growth in Queens
LEAD: After several years of economic expansion, Queens is expected to be one of the New York region's fastest growing counties as the next decade begins, according to a new report issued by Queens College.


Safe Adventure Begins at Home
LEAD: Survivors of World War II downings of United States military aircraft over the desert said that it was not the water supply in the plane that saved them from death by dehydration but the water they drank before they took off.


MEKONG TOWN STRUGGLES TO RECOVER
LEAD: A monument has risen a few steps from the ferry landing, where 17 years ago the trussed-up bodies of thousands of Vietnamese residents in Phnom Penh floated down the Mekong, shot by forces of the American-backed Lon Nol Government.


AND THEY SAID IT COULDN'T BE DONE
LEAD:  SHOWDOWN AT GUCCI GULCH  Lawmakers, Lobbyists, and the Unlikely Triumph of Tax Reform.
By Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and Alan S. Murray.
Introduction by Albert R. Hunt. 309 pp.
New York: Random House. $18.95.


6-METER SAILS BACK INTO VIEW
LEAD: Each weekend on Long Island Sound, a small group of yachtsmen gather for any sort of racing they can organize.
Sometimes they use hand-held radios to set an imaginary starting line between an anchored fishing boat and a smokestack on shore.
Sometimes they simply spend their time trying out new sails, or speed-testing their boats.


BEST SELLERS: JULY 5, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
MISERY, by Stephen King. (Viking, $18.95.)
Injured and drugged, an author is held captive by a
psychotic fan.
2
2
8
THE HAUNTED MESA, by Louis L'Amour.
(Bantam, $18.95.) Unraveling the mystery of
Indian cliff dwellers who vanished centuries ago.


Ethnic Diversity and Uncle Sam
LEAD: With their American flag T-shirts, red, white and blue streamers wrapped around a tree near their picnic table and their two flags flapping in the breeze - one for the United States and one for Puerto Rico - the Velez family stood out.


When Main Street Belongs to the Japanese
LEAD: FROM the surge of Japanese buying on Wall Street, to Fujitsu's attempts to buy Fairchild, to Mitsui Real Estate's purchase of the Exxon headquarters in New York City, it appears that something extraordinary is going on.
There is.
A Japanese ''investment wave'' is breaking across the United States, bringing the possibility of greater cooperation but also the threat of a further heightening of tensions.


JULIA MEANEY TO WED STEPHEN OATWAY
LEAD: The engagement of Julia Anne Meaney to Stephen Francis Oatway, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Carlyle Oatway of New Canaan, Conn., and Pomfret, Vt., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Jay Meaney of New Canaan.
The couple plan to marry on Sept. 12.


Soviet Disavows The Disavowable
LEAD: Reagan Administration officials say they are waiting to hear more about what they described as an ''informal, disavowable'' Soviet suggestion for smoothing the way to a treaty limiting medium-range missiles.
They say Col.
Gen.
Nikolai F. Chervov, head of the Arms Control Directorate of the Soviet General Staff, offered the suggestion several weeks ago to Maynard W.


ONCE MORE, OPERETTA SINGS ITS HEAD OFF
LEAD: A CZAR IN MUFTI WOOS A naive shopgirl over a brimming stein of brew in a generic Viennese beer garden.


ALBANIA PLANNING WEST GERMAN TIES
LEAD: The Communist leadership of Albania, moving gradually out of a long period of self-imposed isolation, will establish diplomatic ties with West Germany this month, according to officials in Bonn and Washington.


A BAD WEEK IN THE 60'S BREEDS A COMEDY IN THE 80'S
LEAD: TO A COUPLE OF OUT-OF-work actors fed up with city life, poverty and the drugged-out debauchery of London in the final days of the 1960's, the advertisement in the Sunday paper sounded enticing. ''Idyllic country retreat for hire,'' it read. ''Get away and soothe yourselves.''


Teen-Agers Now Need Tax Planning 101
LEAD: STUDENT wage earners who plan to spend the summer flipping burgers or bagging groceries will find their finances have been complicated by the new tax law: More of them may be subject to tax, and the tax bite may be bigger.


Navratilova Wins Her Eighth Wimbledon Title
LEAD: Martina Navratilova celebrating her 7-5, 6-3 victory yesterday over Steffi Graf of West Germany.
It was her sixth consecutive singles championship at Wimbledon and her eighth over all.
Section 5. (AP)


ALIEN LAW SHOULD KEEP LIBERTY'S SPIRIT
LEAD: ON a recent trip to the Statue of Liberty with my 5-year-old daughter, I was reminded of the first glimpse my parents had of the New World on their separate arrivals from Europe.
True to form for a typical 5-year-old, my child was not interested in the family history.
Nor did Emma Lazarus's famous sonnet, inscribed on the


Gimme A Breakpoint
LEAD: WE HAVE NOW reached breakpoint,'' President Reagan told the nation in a televised address.
The word was obviously chosen with deliberation; later in the speech, while launching a crusade to hold down the deficit, he repeated the word that is not yet in most dictionaries and added his definition: ''The choice is now upon each of us - as I said, we've reached breakpoint; decision time.


MCCULLOUGH IN 3-WAY TIE FOR LEAD IN CANADA
LEAD: Mike McCullough, a 42-year-old native of Ohio now living in Arizona, has spent 16 years on the PGA Tour without a victory - longer than any other active non-winner.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Commack  $279,000  66 Harned Road  5-bedroom, 5-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1.3 acres, guest cottage, 1-car garage; taxes $3,000.
East Meadow  $175,000  2685 Lexington Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.


NAVRATILOVA WINS 6TH TITLE IN ROW
LEAD: There is a certain comfort that Martina Navratilova takes in being at Wimbledon.
The grass courts are like a security blanket to keep the doubts away.
The women's singles final is an appointment she has been keeping for several years, each special in its own way.
It is said that only the royal family has a permanent place on Centre Court, but


Iran Ends Its Blockade Of France's Embassy
LEAD: Iran lifted a five-day blockade of the French Embassy in Teheran today, but the French police maintained their vigil at the Iranian mission here, the Foreign Ministry said.


Sinking Too Much in the Navy
LEAD: Matching naval forces to missions is no easy task, as the problems in the Persian Gulf make clear.
This year, the Navy is spending $95 billion, a third of the Defense budget, toward its goal of a 600-ship fleet, but it has run into an embarrassing obstacle: Money.


U.S. AGENCY SEEKS WIDE RULE CHANGES ON NURSING HOMES
LEAD: Under pressure from Congress, the Department of Health and Human Services is proposing a sweeping revision of Federal rules for nursing homes to improve the quality of care and the protection of patients' rights.


DR. ZACKSON PLANS TO WED
LEAD: Dr.
Hannah Judith Zackson will be married Sept. 27 to Andrew Robert Wolk, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney M. Wolk of South Orange, N.J., her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Ephraim K. Zackson of New Hyde Park, L.I., have announced.


PROCEDURES FOR WOOD PRESERVTIVES
LEAD: EVER since the Environmental Protection Agency banned certain wood preservatives in early 1985, there has been confusion about whether it is safe for do-it-yourselfers to use any of the chemical wood preservatives still on the market.


Next Week; How Should Mets Handle The Rifts on Their Team?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


FROM ENGLAND
LEAD: THE British are coming.
Gieves &amp; Hawkes, the Savile Row tailor, is planning to open about 30 shops throughout this country by fall.
The sites have not been chosen yet.
Suits, sport coats, dinner clothes, topcoats and overcoats will be produced by Hickey-Freeman in its Rochester plant.
Suits will cost from $800 to $1,000, and for about 10 percent more they can be made to measure.


STACY B. VLADIMER MARRIED TO ROBERT A. MAGINN JR.
LEAD: At Trinity Episcopal Church in Boston yesterday, Stacy Beverly Vladimer, a daughter of Mrs.
Leonard Edwin Vladimer of West Hartford, Conn., and the late Mr.
Vladimer, was married to Robert Allen Maginn Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maginn of Dayton, Ohio.
The Rev.
Spencer Morgan Rice performed the ceremony.


Judiciary Joining City's Gallery of Corruption
LEAD: WHEN it comes to scandals, New York's judiciary is emerging as a co-equal branch of government.


HOW DOES A PLAYER QUALIFY AS AN ALL-STAR?
LEAD: All-stars should be chosen not by statistics such as batting and fielding averages and earned run average (they can be deceiving and unreliable), not by a vote by the fans or sportswriters (they can be fixed and prejudiced), but only by selection by one's peers.
As Casey Stengal might have said, ''It might not be the best way, but it's better than the worst.


Artists and Profits
LEAD:  To the Editor:


KOREAN WAR: MEMORIES, BUT ...
LEAD: NEARLY 34 years have elapsed since the end of the Korean War, but for Eli S. Belil, memories still linger.


Some Old Echoes In New Questions About Meese
LEAD: Questions about the legality and propriety of the connections between Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d and the Wedtech Corporation became more pointed last week with the release of a document suggesting that Mr.
Meese has misrepresented his personal financial holdings.


Teachers Union Backs Birth Control Program
LEAD: The nation's largest teachers union today endorsed the distribution of contraceptives to students at school health clinics in an effort to reduce the incidence of teen-age pregnancy.


A Sense of Adventure and Then Some
LEAD: There is the lurch of the dogs as the sled slashes through snow.
There is that too-sharp turn and the sudden sensation of being scattered, along with the supplies, by the side of the trail.
There is the bracing grip of a late-night dip through a hole in the ice of a northern Minnesota lake.


Debate at Duke Over $20 Million
LEAD: THERE was joy at Duke University - and then some hesitancy -when an alumnus offered $20 million to the school to ''establish a research institute on the human future.''


William Penn Mott Jr.: Searching for the Right Balance
LEAD: THE long-held philosophy of the National Park Service - maintain the parks as much as possible as ''a vignette of primitive America'' - has come under increasing attack.
Critics charge that a lack of active intervention in natural systems within the parks has led to a serious decline in animal species such as the mule deer of Yellowstone.


Q and A
LEAD:  Egypt  Question: For a visit to Egypt between January and March, when is the weather best?
Do you know of any tours with a small group under the guidance of an archeologist? -R.
R.
E., Salt Lake City  Answer: From November to early March, the cooler winter season, is the best time to visit Egypt.


ROBIN GALLAGHER WED TO MATTHEW HOFFMAN
LEAD: Robin Jane Gallagher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Rayworth Gallahger of Scarborough, N.Y., and Matthew Thomas Hoffman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Peter Hoffman of Winnetka, Ill., were married yesterday at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Scarborough by the Rev.
D.Williams McClurken.
The bride, until recently a product manager for Nabisco Brands Inc., graduated from Tufts University and received an M.B.A.


MISS BAINES TO MARRY STEPHEN W. SCHECTER
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Baines of Stoke-on-Trent, England, have announced the engagement of their daughter Tracey J. Baines to Stephen W. Schecter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence J. Schecter of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.


REDS GET 6 IN 4TH, TOP METS
LEAD: With their squabling supposedly quieted, the Mets approached tonight's game in the hopes of concentrating on the job at hand - keeping pace with the division-leading Cardinals.


'DREADED' BIRTHDAY SPICES MUSICAL
LEAD: PEOPLE who have chuckled over the verses of Judith Viorst - or who understand the trauma of turning 40 -may enjoy ''Happy Birthday and Other Humiliations,'' a new, bouncy musical with an all-female cast that uses the poems of Mrs.
Viorst as a text for its songs and dialogue.


Cindy Connolly Becomes Bride Of David Auth
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More was the setting in New York yesterday for the marriage of Cindy Ann Connolly, the daughter of Dr.
C.Stephen Connolly of New York and Janet Arminio Connolly of New York and Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., to David Nicholas Auth, a son of Joseph Aloysius Auth of Longmeadow, Mass., and the late Evelyn M.


The U.S. House That Never Was
LEAD: NOT all the United States Government's problems with new buildings have been in Moscow.
Even more tangled has been the case of the Ambassador's residence that the State Department set out to build on the Nile River in Cairo.


PARENTS FIND PEACE AS TEEN-AGERS ROCK
LEAD: Rock music reverberated through the ceiling, and in the room the parents came and went, speaking of Bryan Adams.


Q and A
LEAD:  Part-time Occupants  Question: We live in a rent-stabilized building that was recently coverted to a co-op.
We own an apartment in Florida where we spend most of each winter and fall and where we pay property tax.
We have always filed Federal, state and city income tax returns from our New York address and we continue to do so.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Spokane, Wash.; Walking on Air Downtown
LEAD: TO fight off retail competition from three shopping malls, this city of 180,000 near the Idaho border has linked most of its downtown buildings to a network of sky bridges, and is looking to expand the system even more.
While some cities have banned sky bridges, saying they are a threat to street-level activity, local officials say their sheltered street overpasses have kept business in the downtown area alive.


No Place Like Home, Even on a Yacht
LEAD: WHEN Robert Walther returns home from work each day, his wife, Narissa, never greets him at the front door.
Instead, she greets him at the gangplank.


SPLENDID GLASS
LEAD: IN SUMMERTIME, THE GOOD TABLEWARE CAN OFTEN stay in the closet because less precious objects seem more appropriate for entertaining.
Brightly colored glassware, which has been popular since the invention of blown glass in the first century B.C., is one solution.
Early glass was always faintly colored - either green or brown, depending on the amount of iron.


ARBITRATION GROWS AS TRIAL ALTERNATIVES
LEAD: TWO area arbitration organizations said they expected more calls for their services in the wake of the Supreme Court's ruling that an arbitration agreement signed by Eugene and Julia McMahon of Yonkers with Shearson-American Express and one of its vice presidents, Mary Ann McNulty of Scarsdale, was binding.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  LIVES AND TALENTS  The White Plains Public Library has acquired eight hourlong video-taped documentaries about noted artists and writers of the late 19th and 20th centuries.
They will be shown at 1:30 P.M.
Wednesdays beginning this week through Aug. 26 at the main branch, at 100 Martine Avenue.


PROBLEMS FOR AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE
LEAD: THE University of Connecticut was established in 1881 as an agricultural school, but some Connecticut farmers say the school is now ignoring its roots.


A Neighborhood Tour of Jakarta
LEAD: Jakarta is kaleidoscopic Indonesia in the making, a city of multiple cultures and moods that can defy you one day and haunt you the next.
For those who take the time to get acquainted, it is ''a city of serendipities,'' an Indonesian said; a city of neighborhoods that lead like stepping stones across hundreds of years of history.


The Old Vaudeville
LEAD:  THE SEVEN LITTLE FOYS  With Bob Hope (in photo, right), James Cagney, George Tobias, Milly Vitale. 1955.
RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video. 95 minutes. $69.95.


INCINERATORS NEED ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
LEAD: We greatly appreciate the information supplied in the recent article ''Hospital Incinerators Stir Concern.''


TURNING PAGES IN THE BOOK OF LIFE
LEAD: SOMEONE must have taken our wall calendar down and put it on the table, then spilled a sticky substance on it and rehung it.
The pages stick together now and, when pried apart, reveal that it is one dreadful-looking calendar, with dates obscured and pictures that look as though mashed potatoes had been thrown at them.


Whistle-Blowers and the Law
LEAD: Don Rosendale is being sentimental when he states that corporations are ''male-bonding fraternities'' and that is why they reject whistle-blowers.


Senate for Ban on Toshiba Exports
LEAD: Senators, already stung by Japanese commercial exploits that have helped produce the towering United States trade deficit, found a new target for anger last week.
They voted, 92 to 5, for a two-to-five-year ban on importing the products of Toshiba Corporation, a giant Japanese company that had illegally sold sophisticated machinery for making submarine propellers to the Soviet


Ocean Kayaking Off Baja California
LEAD: On the fifth day of our Baja expedition, we shoved off from a white beach nature had created from millions of crushed shells.
We paddled our kayaks quietly out of the cove, the turquoise water beneath our boats dissolving into a royal blue.


Don't Let Us Down In Russia, Billy Joel
LEAD:  Dear Billy:


Was Pinochet's Campaign Message a Dozen Killings?
LEAD: THE killing of 12 people in a 20-hour period in Chile last month may not stand out in the annals of violence committed in conflicts between Latin American governments and guerrillas.
But in a country where the Government is known to apply its violence with relative selectivity and expertise, the chain of deaths of the dozen presumed leftist rebels has special significance.


THE LIFE OF A DANCER
LEAD:  To the Editor:


The Night the Satellite Flew
LEAD: TWENTY-FIVE years ago this week, Telstar I, an experimental satellite not much larger than a beach ball, was tossed into an awkward, elliptical orbit.
By the standards of modern communications satellites, it was a crude device, functional for only a few minutes a day and capable of handling a limited number of one-way telephone and television signals.


NEW MAGIC MAKES THE AUDIENCE APPEAR
LEAD: STANDING SILENTLY IN A LAS Vegas boardroom, Penn &amp; Teller, the new-wave co-conspirators, are facing the ordeal of their lives.


'YOU START THE DAY FEELING GOOD'
LEAD: THERE'S a little slice of China in Chester.
Free public lessons in tai chi, the ancient Chinese system of exercises, are being offered by the National Theater of the Deaf, which is based in the Connecticut River Valley town.


MISS HULL TO WED RICHARD S. SHARP
LEAD: Victoria Susan Hull, a consultant in London for Russell Reynolds Associates, international executive recruiters, and Richard Simon Sharp, a vice president and the syndicate manager at Goldman Sachs International in London, plan to be married Aug. 29.
The future bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lloyd Nelson Hull of Greenwich, Conn., who have announced her engagement to the son of Sir Eric and Lady Sharp of London and of Stanmore, Middlesex,


Bias Charges Cloud New York Boy's Return From Foster Care
LEAD: A judge in Manhattan has awarded custody of an 11-year-old boy to his Christian mother, despite pleas from his Orthodox Jewish foster parents that the boy remain with them for at least another year.


Miss Lawrence to Wed Marc D. Zegans
LEAD: A Sept. 6 wedding is planned by Jennifer Faith Lawrence and Marc David Zegans, who received masters' degrees last month from Harvard University, she in business administration and he in public policy.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Eli S. Lawrence of Ambler, Pa., and Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard S.


CANADIAN CREW DEFEATS HARVARD
LEAD: Harvard's varsity heavyweight crew was eliminated today by the Canadian national team in a heat of the Henley Royal Regatta's oldest and most prestigious event, the Grand Challenge Cup.


JELLIED SALADS, STAPLE OF THE 50'S, SHOULD NOT BE FORGOTTEN
LEAD: DO you remember tomato aspic?
Look into your cookbooks from the 1950's and early 1960's and you may find recipes for this once-popular jellied salad.
Serious recipes called for fresh or canned tomatoes; the shortcuts used tomato juice.


THE LIFE OF A DANCER
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Add the Pettys To Celebrity List
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


ROGER KENT MUMMERT ENGAGED TO MS. DWEIR
LEAD: The engagement of Robin Alyse Dweir to Roger Kent Mummert, a son of Mrs.
Frank Mummert of Lancaster, Pa., and the late Mr.
Mummert, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Irv Dweir of Woodbury, L.I.
The couple plan to marry Aug. 16.


AT 'AMERICA'S SOAPBOX,' FREE SPEECH HAS A LIMIT
LEAD: Out on the grassy rectangle of Independence Mall this morning, as long lines snaked toward the Liberty Bell, pilgrims from near and far mounted what is called ''America's Soapbox'' to deliver free opinions on anything under the summer sun.


Making Arms
LEAD: To the Editor:


Inexperienced Korea Takes Bold Step Toward Democracy
LEAD: FOR all the drama and talk of political miracles, democracy did not come to South Korea last week.
Nor is it likely to come next week or the week after.
Korea - accustomed to centuries of royal dynasty, Japanese colonial rule and postwar division into a Communist North and a usually authoritarian South - will need a lot more time to develop the traditions associated with modern democracies.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Hackensack  $114,900  980 Main Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old condominium apartment; newly renovated, wall-to-wall carpeting, modern kitchen; monthly maintenance $148, taxes $1,680.
River Edge  $225,000  786 Oak Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old contemporary; fireplace, hardwood floors, central air-conditioning, den; taxes $2,436.


SAVING LAKE RONKONKOMA'S SHORES
LEAD: AFTER decades of decline, Lake Ronkonkoma is undergoing a resurgence.


FOR SPECIAL NEEDS
LEAD: LAST month I had a chance to shoot two rolls of a remarkably speedy new color film, Konica SR-V3200.
As the name suggests, it has an ISO/ASA rating of 3200.
To put that speed in meaningful terms, it is a full five stops faster than garden-variety 100-speed film.


By MICHAEL BRENSON
LEAD: LARGE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBI-tions of contemporary art have become a large international art problem.
In Europe at the beginning of June there were four massive art events - Documenta 8, in Kassel, West Germany; the Sculpture Project in Munster, a few hours northwest of Kassel by car; a 10-year anniversary show surveying the art of the last decade at the Pompidou Center in Paris, and the annual art fair in Basel, Switzerland.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  THE GAVEL COMES DOWN


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.81
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.22
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.60
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.52
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


Chicken Truck Damages Police Car
LEAD: Two slightly injured New York City police officers in their car late Friday after they were hit by a truck carrying a load of chickens.
The car was involved in a chase on Lenox Avenue and was crossing 122d Street when the accident occurred.
The two officers were treated at a hospital and released.


Rocky Mountain: Flora, Fauna -- and Trauma
LEAD: Here are some factors in the balance of nature and people in Rocky Mountain National Park.
Elk


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Milford, Conn.  $160,000  18 Chapel Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, apartment-style condominium, converted in 1984; central air-conditioning; taxes $1,773.
Orange, Conn.  $290,000  487 Skyline Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, first-floor family room, 200- by 275-foot lot; taxes $2,460.


Alien Family: The Wait of a Lifetime
LEAD: Early Wednesday morning Mario Marquez put on his best shirt, climbed into his old brown station wagon and drove two hours to St.
Albans for the interview that would help shape the rest of his life.


Drug-Testing Measure Is Vetoed in Rochester
LEAD: Mayor Thomas P. Ryan Jr. has vetoed a controversial bill that would have made Rochester the second municipality in the nation to regulate drug testing in the workplace.


CAN'T WE TALK THIS OVER?
LEAD:  IMPROPER BEHAVIOR  By Elizabeth Janeway. 240 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $15.95.


KEEPING DIVERSITY IN THE THEATER DISTRICT
LEAD: IN an 11th-hour effort to reshape more than a dozen skyscrapers envisioned for Manhattan's theater district, city planners have drafted several zoning amendments, including a mandate to set aside 5 percent of all new floor space for ''entertainment-related uses.''


Thriving Light Verse
LEAD:  To the Editor:


RAGE IN SEOUL COURT OVER THE SENTENCES FOR POLICE
LEAD: A wall of guards stood between Park Jong Ki and the policemen who tortured his son to death.
As a court pronounced the policemen guilty on Saturday, Mr.
Park lunged at the guards in a futile, frantic effort to reach his son's killers.
Behind him, screams of rage and grief echoed in the crowded courtroom.


SCUFFING UP THE RULE ON ILLEGAL PITCHES
LEAD: BOBBY BROWN, president of the American League, recently wrote a letter to Rick Rhoden, the Yankee pitcher, warning him that his suspected practice of scuffing the baseball in order to improve the movement of his pitches was a violation of major league rule 8:02.
To wit:


Great Swamp: Why a Pipeline?
LEAD: LONG before the first Earth Day or the passage of landmark legislation protecting our environment, the Great Swamp in northern New Jersey was permanently protected as a National Wildlife Refuge.


Susan Utley Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
George Dexter Utley 2d of Pound Ridge, N.Y., of the engagement of their daughter Susan Elizabeth Utley to Timothy Proctor Schieffelin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Jay Schieffelin 3d of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
An Aug. 29 wedding is planned.


RESEARCH CENTER IS SET FOR BUFFALO
LEAD: The State University of New York at Buffalo will form an institute to study practical applications of recent developments in superconductivity.


CHERRY FARMERS WORRY AS PRICES FALL
LEAD: The annual sour cherry harvest is here, but Lee D. Brown has not even set up his production line to wash, pit and pack the fruit he grows at his Cherry Ridge Farm overlooking the Hudson River.


A Closed Revival House That May Itself Be Revived
LEAD: WHEN the Thalia Theater closed in May many people thought the two-story building at West 95th Street and Broadway, which housed the famed revival house and a performing-arts center, would be demolished.
It would have been a fairly typical tale of new development on the Upper West Side.


THE 80'S SEEN THROUGH A POSTMODERN LENS
LEAD: TEN YEARS AGO THIS SUMMER Cindy Sherman moved to New York.
Art has not been the same since.
Then 23 and fresh out of college, where she had studied photography, Sherman began a series of pictures that would bring her phenomenal popular and critical success.
Called ''Untitled Film Stills,'' and depicting the artist dressed up in a variety of guises, these unprepossessing black-and-white images helped usher in a new kind of art for the 80's - the self-conscious, intentionally ambiguous, pop-culture oriented practice that has become known as


Why Your Doctor Is a Group
LEAD: In the article, Dr.
James W. Hanway asserts that much of what is labeled medical malpractice involves ''honest mistakes made by decent doctors - and we are all human.'' As a lawyer specializing in the area of malpractice, I realize that most doctors are motivated by the desire to do good.
The issue, however, is not the mental state of the doctor; it's the physical state of the patient.


The Continuing Hemline Saga
LEAD: Shorts and miniskirts may be appropriate for play (Fashion, ''The Continuing Hemline Saga,'' by Carrie Donovan, June 7).
However, women are being told to bare their legs not only at work but also in getting there (and this in winter, when such outfits are unfit for the cold and snow of city streets).


THE BLOSSOMING OF CIVIC COALITIONS
LEAD: WHAT is this antediluvian phenomenon, the civic association?
Why are such groups re-emerging like wildflowers across Long Island?


The Old West
LEAD: To the Editor: We enjoyed the articles on the Old West (Travel, May 24), especially Andrew H. Malcolm's article, ''Where Wagons Heading West Left Their Mark,'' which brought back fond memories of our visit to that area two years ago.
Register Rock and the ruts at Gurnsey are well worth the effort required to see them, as are nearby Scotts Bluff National Monument, Chimney Rock, Courthouse Rock and Ash


Prince Charles Assails Government on Slums
LEAD: Prince Charles, in veiled criticism of the Government of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, says that not enough is being done to relieve the plight of Britain's decaying inner cities.


A Booming Celebration of Freedom
LEAD: Members of the Veteran Corps of Artillery firing a 50-gun salute at noon in Battery Park as delighted spectators held their ears.
Independence Day festivities in much of the country were generally of the old-fashioned variety except in Philadelphia, where the Constitution's bicentennial was celebrated.


REFERENDUM ON JAIL IS URGED
LEAD: WHILE county government leaders consider 59 recommendations contained in the latest task force report on prison overcrowding, the chairman of the Task Force on Corrections Overcrowding said last week that county residents would have to determine the future of their prison system.


A Humbled Toshiba Takes Its Lumps
LEAD: Toshiba is quietly accepting the punishment meted out by the United States for the Japanese company's shipments of sensitive material to the Soviet Union.
The day after the Senate backed a ban on imports of Toshiba products, the chairman of Toshiba, Shoichi Saba, and the president, Sugiichiro Watari, resigned.


DANCE CLUB GIVES YOUTHS PLACE TO BELONG
LEAD: EVERY Saturday night hundreds of teen-agers throng the second floor of a century-old Greenwich church to be a part of the Cafe, a non-alcoholic video dance club.
For many of them, the dancing and music that originally attracted them has become less important than the acceptance they find.


GRANDMOTHER LEARNS THE FORWARD PASS
LEAD: THE blue football flew perilously near the table lamp.


HEALTHY, WEALTHY AND WORRIED TOO
LEAD:  THE EMBARRASSMENT OF RICHES  An Interpretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden Age.
By Simon Schama.
Illustrated. 698 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $39.95.


Leaden Dollar
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Garage Sale To End All Sales
LEAD: IT began in 1971 as a sale in a city garage in Evanston, Ill., and word of it spread.
It was not long before the sponsors were claiming a world title.


The Greening Of Brussels
LEAD: The people of Brussels will tell you that their city has more green space than any other major European capital.
A partisan view, perhaps, but an understandable one.
In this city of parks, the biggest one -the 12,000-acre Foret de Soignes - is nearly six times as large as the sprawling Bois de Boulogne in


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:  ENTERTAINING ANGELS: A Guide to Heaven for Atheists and True Believers.
By F. Forrester Church. (Harper &amp; Row, $13.95.) Angels, according to G. K. Chesterton, are able to fly ''because they take themselves lightly'' - unlike the devil, who, in F. Forrester Church's words, ''fell on account of his gravity.


HUBERT SUMLIN: HIS BLUES ARE CAUSE FOR CHEER
LEAD: DURING THE GOLDEN AGE OF Chicago blues, two men towered over the field: Muddy Waters and Howlin' Wolf.
Both of them had succeeded in adapting the deep, acoustic blues of the Mississippi Delta to the big-city style of electric guitars and amplifiers.
Both were dynamic, jubilant and occasionally foreboding performers.


Unique Abigail Adams
LEAD:  To the Editor:


HOW DOES A PLAYER QUALIFY AS AN ALL-STAR?
LEAD: How does a player qualify as an all-star?
Very simple, change his name to Darryl Strawberry.
With a cool-sounding name like that, he's bound to be voted on.
How else can you explain Darryl Strawberry's being named to the all star team year after year.
WILLIAM A. DUENAS  Tappan, N.Y.


A Homecoming in Connecticut
LEAD: Some journeyed from as far away as Louisiana and California.
Others only crossed from Massachusetts or New York.
Many simply ambled a few blocks to the city green.


LAURA KURLANDER ENGAGED TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence T. Kurlander of Manhattan and Latham, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura Beth Kurlander to William Lourie Rittenberg, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alvin L. Rittenberg of Charleston, S.C.
An Aug. 30 wedding is planned.


Army LSD Ruling Turns Bicentennial Into Farce
LEAD: To the Editor:


Police Are Caught Eavesdropping
LEAD: New York City was confronted last week by the unwelcome specter of the sort of racially motivated police surveillance that was thought to have disappeared years ago.


Headliners; Heartthrob
LEAD: No matter where Hiroshi Itsuki performed during his 14-day North American tour, the Japanese crooner could be pretty sure at least 180 members of the audience would clap their hearts out for him.
Mr.
Itsuki, who is known as the Frank Sinatra of Japan, was trailed by 180 of his most devoted Japanese fans, mostly unmarried middle-aged women, who paid $5,500 each to make the trip.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  3 Women


Toward Bigger Money
LEAD: The Fund for New Leadership, Washington's young and upwardly mobile political action committee for young and upwardly mobile Democrats, is showing signs of, well, age.


THE DANCE: JIM SELF
LEAD: Central Park's Summerstage and Creative Time presented a program on Friday at the park's band shell that was just about perfect for a balmy summer night.
There was subtle commentary on movement and text from Jim Self, humor from Lauri Nagel and fantasy from Jo Andres -all of it light but not lightweight.


DEADLINE FOR DIRECTORS' PACT
LEAD: Movie and television directors today gave the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers a deadline of 6 P.M.
Friday to present a final offer.
According to Gilbert Cates, president of the Directors Guild of America, the producers have not yet responded to a guild counterproposal that was offered last Wednesday, and guild negotiators, who had expected to meet with the producers today, were left to wait outside the deliberations.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: WHEN RABBIT HOWLS.
By the Troops for Truddi Chase.
Introduction and epilogue by Robert A. Phillips Jr., Ph.D. 415 pages.
Dutton. $18.95.


LIMELIGHT SHINES AGAIN ON SONNY CARSON
LEAD: For years, Sonny Carson was synonymous with black protest, sit-ins and the struggle for community control of the city's schools.


JAZZ: MARIO BUAZA ORCHESTRA
LEAD: Mario Bauza and his Afro-Cuban Jazz Orchestra made a mightily musical tumult at S.O.B.'s on Thursday.
Mr.
Bauza, a Cuban reed man and trumpeter who played with Cab Calloway and Chick Webb before spending 35 years as musical director for Machito's Latin jazz orchestra, certainly knows how to mold a collection of capable musicians into a first-class band.


EXPERIMENTAL USE OF BLOOD PUMP IS PLANNED
LEAD: An electrically powered blood pump may be safer than the Jarvik artificial heart for keeping some patients alive while they await heart transplants, says a surgeon who plans to start using the device.


IN KWANGJU, RAGE AND NEW CYNICISM
LEAD: Seven years have passed since his eldest son was killed by the police, but Chun Kae Ryang is not the type to forgive and forget.


Miss Rosenblum Is Married to Philip N. Warburg
LEAD: The marriage of Tamar Rosenblum, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Herbery Rosenblum of Wilkes-Barre, Pa., to Philip Neff Warburg, a son of Joan Melber Warburg of Greenwich, Conn., and the late James P. Warburg, took place yesterday at Temple Emanuel in Newton Centre, Mass.
The bride's father, the rabbi of Temple Israel in Wilkes


Two Great Teachers
LEAD: As economists, Arthur Burns and Walter Heller had fundamentally different philosophies, the one conservative and the other liberal.
But as public servants, each brought skill, compassion and integrity to the making of national policy.
Both died recently, having served Presidents, nation and their profession with a distinction that few economists can match today.


'Glasphalt' To Sparkle On Streets
LEAD: Next spring, three blocks in Brooklyn will glisten with a new kind of asphalt, known as ''glasphalt,'' that is 40 percent glass.


FROM BOY WONDER TO MAN OF THE HOUR: PATRICK CASH
LEAD: There are probably colleagues in Australia who would argue that some of the white hairs on Ian Barclay's head are a result of his dealings with Patrick Cash, the one-time temperamental teen-ager who overcame chronic injuries and bouts of bad humor to become the men's singles champion at Wimbledon today.


Don't Cast Kuwait as Villain of the Persian Gulf
LEAD: To the Editor:


RUSSIANS DOMINATE AT HENLEY REGATTA
LEAD: Soviet crews, racing here for the first time since 1974, captured five finals today at the Henley Royal Regatta.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  After 5 Stages, Swiss Leads Tour: Marc Sergeant of Belgium won the 70-mile fifth stage of the Tour de France from Pforzheim, West Germany, to Strasbourg, France, yesterday while Erich Maechler of Switzerland kept the overall lead.
Another Belgian cyclist, Herman Frison, won the fourth leg of the race, a 47.4-mile course run earlier in the day from Stuttgart, West Germany, to Pforzheim.


Shortage of Workers Seen
LEAD: With the baby-boom genertion now fully absorbed into the labor force, the Government is projecting that employers will have a more difficult time finding qualified workers to fill new jobs over the next 14 years.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Jerry Hostetter appointed vice president, corporate communications, at Triangle Industries.


A Model of French Justice
LEAD: According to the elaborate French procedure, the jury and the judges had to answer 341 specific questions on the guilt of Klaus Barbie.
To 340, they said yes.
The last question asked whether there were mitigating circumstances, and that answer was no.
Then sentence was pronounced, permanent imprisonment for crimes against humanity.


10 Killed in Montana Plane Crash
LEAD: Firefighters hosing down the wreckage of a twin-engine plane that crashed Saturday night at Flathead Lake.
All six members of the Montana Band, a bluegrass group, were killed in the crash, along with the pilot, a friend of the pilot, the band's road manager and the 12-year-old son of a band member.


FOR NAVRATILOVA, VICTORIES GET SWEETER
LEAD: She now shares the stage with Helen Wills Moody as the most successful Wimbledon champion of all time, with eight singles titles, and stands alone after winning her sixth in a row Saturday.
But when Martina Navratilova returns to the tennis tour after a brief vacation at her home in Fort Worth, she will find Steffi Graf waiting to continue their joust for the No.


Advertising; BBDO Leaves Madison Ave.
LEAD: BBDO International, parent of Batten, Barton, Durstine &amp; Osborn and one of the reasons that Madison Avenue is synonymous with advertising, has left that fabled strip after 64 years to take up residence at 1285 Avenue of the Americas.
At its new location, near 51st


GOOD YEAR IN HOUSING NOW SEEN
LEAD: In spite of the housing market's startlingly dismal showing in May, a number of economists and industry executives expect sales to be healthy through the rest of the year - just as long as there is not an unexpected jump in mortgage rates.


ERNEST BLOCH'S 'AMERICA,' AT WATERLOO
LEAD: Ernest Bloch came to America from Switzerland in 1916 and became a citizen eight years later.
As most immigrant composers do sooner or later, he conceived a musical response to his new home; in his case it was sooner -1926 - and the feelings American history aroused in him were perhaps somewhat undigested.


Odometer Shift Cited at G.M.
LEAD: As many as 2,000 odometers on General Motors Corporation trucks and utility vehicles were replaced or turned back during the last four years to conceal mileage accumulated on the vehicles by managers, The Oakland Press reported today.


TOSHIBA DEVISES A PLAN TO CALM AMERICANS ...
LEAD: The Toshiba Corporation, stung and bewildered by the political uproar here over disclosures that its subsidiary sold sensitive technology to the Soviet Union, will begin a quiet campaign of damage control on Capitol Hill this week.


POLITICAL ACTIVISTS WEIGH U.S. 'GREEN' MOVEMENT
LEAD: Political activists representing a broad spectrum of ideological shadings have assembled here to raise a new Green political banner.


Cash Upsets Lendl to Win Wimbledon Championship
LEAD: Pat Cash climbing into the stands to greet his father, Pat Sr., in cap at right; his sister Renee, center, and his coach, Ian Barclay, left, after beating Ivan Lendl, 7-6, 6-2, 7-5, in the final yesterday at Wimbledon.


Bridge: A Deal in Wartime England Was Occasion of a Rare Bid
LEAD: Very early in this century one of the inimitable English characters created by ''Saki'' considered the possibility of giving up bridge for a month, as a mark of respect to a deceased relative.
He rejected the idea, and satisfied his conscience by bidding only in black suits for the same period.


THIS WEEK'S AUCTION LIMITED TO BILLS
LEAD: Treasury sales this week are confined to the bill market, where the only activity will be centered on today's $13.2 billion auction of three- and six-month bills.
The bulk of the proceeds will be used to pay off securities reaching maturity, with only $1.13 billion in new cash to be realized.


When Japan-Bashing Goes Too Far
LEAD: Sales of submarine propeller equipment to the Soviet Union by companies in Japan and Norway rightly arouses Congressional fury.
The crime was outrageous and the punishment by Tokyo and Oslo seemed paltry by comparison.
But imposing American sanctions, as a Senate amendment to the trade bill would do, is not the answer.


MORE HOMELESS SEEK HARBOR AT AIRPORTS
LEAD: The elderly man, stretched out on newspapers in a quiet corner of one of the arrival buildings at Kennedy International Airport, insisted that he was waiting for a sister-in-law who would be flying in soon.


The Graduate
LEAD: Senator Wendell H. Ford, a Kentucky Democrat who never graduated from college, finally got a college degree the other day.
Not only that, he was named commencement speaker and president of the graduating class - at the University of Hard Knocks.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Bork and the Social Issues


Investment in Korea Up
LEAD: South Korea reported a sharp rise today in foreign investments in the country during the first half of this year.
The Ministry of Finance said investments increased more than fourfold, to $411 million, from the first six months of last year.
Foreign investment for all of 1986 totaled $343 million, the


AS HOSPITALS CLOSE, RURAL AMERICA TRIES TO COPE WITH A VOID
LEAD: The Knox County Hospital survived the terrible tornado of 1963, but it could not withstand the fierce winds of medical and economic change of the 1980's.


RATINGS DISPUTE DELAYS TV AD SALES
LEAD: A small beige plastic box known as a ''people meter'' has thrown the television networks' advance, or up-front, advertising sales into disarray, with negotiations at a virtual standstill between the three leading networks and the top advertising agencies.


QUESTION BOX
LEAD: QUESTION: Has there ever been a major league game in which a team scored in every inning?


Investing Loss in Alberta
LEAD: Investors in two failed Alberta investment companies owned by the privately held trust company Principal Group Ltd. could lose at least $60 million, Principal Group's president, Don M. Cormie, said.
Mr.
Cormie said the companies, the First Investors Corporation and Associated Investors of Canada, had their licenses canceled by the Alberta government on Tuesday.


IN THE ARCTIC TUNDRA, THUNDER OF OTTAWA'S MILITARY BUILDUP
LEAD: More than four centuries after the English adventurer Sir Martin Frobisher found this place, new intruders are disturbhg the Arctic peace.


ON EVE OF NEW HAITI PROTEST, BISHOPS PLEAD FOR RESTRAINT
LEAD: With tension growing on the eve of a planned resumption of anti-Government protests, Haiti's Roman Catholic bishops appealed today for restraint and warned of ''the specter of anarchy and civil war.''


Business and the Law; Legal Ads Still Stir a Debate
LEAD: WHEN the United States Supreme Court ruled a decade ago that the First Amendment protects certain advertisements by lawyers, three dissenting justices said the decision would ''effect profound changes in the practice of law.''


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, JULY 6, 1987
LEAD:  International 2-6  An end to farm export subsidies and trade barriers to agricultural products of the United States and other nations by the end of President Reagan's term will be sought, the Administration will announce today.


Seoul Says It Freed 177 Political Prisoners
LEAD: The Government today released 177 political prisoners, the first group to be freed under democratic changes approved last week by President Chun Doo Hwan.


ELLERY HUNTINGTON Jr.
LEAD: Ellery C. Huntington Jr., a retired lawyer and corporate executive who was a United States liaison officer with Marshal Tito's partisans during World War II, died Thursday at Alexandria (Va.) Hospital.
He was 94 years old and lived in Alexandria.


BITTERSWEET NEW YORK RETURN FOR N.A.A.C.P. CONVENTION
LEAD: The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People returned to New York City for its annual convention yesterday, with words of praise and criticism for the home the organization reluctantly abandoned one year ago.


I.B. SINGER PROFILED ON PBS
LEAD: Anyone who has seen Isaac Bashevis Singer perform in public knows he is a natural, delivering high wit in a down-to-earth way, answering questions from an audience as though they were plants for punch lines.
By now, at the age of 83, he has been on the circuit so long that he has heard most of the questions - ''Do you believe in free will?


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Equifax Inc., Atlanta, whose business is information-based administrative services, named C. B. Rogers Jr., who is retiring as a senior vice president at International Business Machines Corp., president and chief operating officer, succeeding J. V. White as president.
Mr.
White continues as chief executive and was named vice chairman.


'Workaholic Is Really Too Bland'
LEAD: They circled each other for weeks, like sumo wrestlers straining for leverage.


LaRouche Set to Surrender
LEAD: Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., the perennial Presidential candidate who favors conspiracy theories, said this weekend that his indictment by a Federal grand jury in Boston was a ''political dirty trick.'' But he said he would surrender to the authorities in the United States this week.
He denied that he ordered his followers to impede an investigation of fraud.


STEINBRENNER MISSPEAKS
LEAD: George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' owner, referred to his team's chief accountant, Warren Atkinson, as a ''young black boy'' in a televised discussion today on racism in sports.


Metro Matters; Owning a Co-op: Bid for Stability By Black Tenants
LEAD: They were all there, the eight buyers, all crowded into Verna Sledge's living room on the second floor with the open windows an invitation to the voice of the city below.


Young Artists
LEAD: To encourage young artists, the Congressional Art Caucus sponsors an annual competition for high school students.
Winners have their works exhibited at the Capitol.


THE 900 NUMBER AS AUDIENCE POLLSTER
LEAD: Television is using the telephone as an instrument of audience opinion, asking for votes on everything from whether Bernhard Goetz is guilty, to who will win the Super Bowl, to whether a particular television pilot would succeed or fail, but opinion among television executives is divided.
The ballots are cast by calling numbers with a 900 prefix; the opinion calls are counted rather than answered.


Tax Lawyer Negotiates For Netherlands Antilles
LEAD: Stephen A. Nauheim, a Washington tax lawyer, has been spending his time trying to negotiate a new tax treaty between the United States and the Netherlands Antilles that affects the Eurobond market, bondholders and American corporations.


YONKERS COUNCIL FACES HOUSING PLAN DEADLINE
LEAD: When Oscar Newman began several months ago to look for sites in Yonkers for subsidized housing, a move ordered by a Federal judge to correct 40 years of housing segregation, he said he found little help from city officials.


PATENT A VINDICATION FOR GENETICS CHIEF
LEAD: Last week, when Genetics Institute Inc. beat its biotech rival, the Amgen Corporation, to get the first patent on erythropoietin, or EPO, many analysts and investors were surprised.
And for Gabriel Schmergel, president and chief executive of Genetics, who has maintained a low profile for the Cambridge,


7-ELEVEN OWNER IN $5 BILLION DEAL TO SELL COMPANY
LEAD: The Southland Corporation, which operates the 7-Eleven stores, said yesterday that it would be taken over by a company owned by Southland's founding Thompson family in a deal valued at about $5.1 billion.


GROUP FOR RETIRED TO PRESS '88 HOPEFULS ON CONCERNS OF ELDERLY
LEAD: The American Association of Retired Persons, whose 25 million members make it one of the largest nonreligious organizations in the country, is moving into Presidential politics for the first time.


PAUL FROMM, CLASSICAL-MUSIC PATRON, IS DEAD
LEAD: Paul Fromm, a German-born wine importer who became the most active and distinguished private patron of contemporary classical music in the United States, died Saturday at the Bernard Mitchell Hospital of the University of Chicago after a series of heart attacks.
He was 80 years old and had lived in Chicago.


... WHILE THE JAPANESE RETHINK TRADE STANCE
LEAD: A Japanese-American confrontation over the illegal sale of high-technology propeller-milling equipment to the Soviet Union by the Toshiba Machine Company has provoked a national debate in Japan on many international trade and security issues.


SPECTATOR AT FIREWORKS KILLED IN FALL INTO RIVER
LEAD: A man watching the Manhattan fireworks display Saturday night from a friend's boat in the East River died after he fell overboard and his left arm was severed by a boat's propeller, the police said yesterday.


BLUE JAYS SUFFER 8TH STRAIGHT LOSS
LEAD: George Brett's single into center field scored Willie Wilson from second base in the 10th inning today as the Kansas City Royals beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 4-3.
The Blue Jays lost their eighth game in a row and remained five games behind the first-place Yankees in the American League East.
The Yankees lost to the Texas


Advertising; Ney Elected Chairman Of Advertising Council
LEAD: The board of the Advertising Council, the industry's most important public-service effort, last week elected Edward N. Ney as its chairman for the coming year.
Mr.
Ney had been vice chairman.


OIL SHOCK CHANGING VENEZUELA
LEAD: At an elegant reception here one recent evening, a local businessman looked delighted when a foreign visitor tasted a piece of cheese and nodded his approval. ''It's Venezuelan,'' the businessman interjected proudly. ''We make cheese now.'' In its television spots inviting the public to attend, the annual toy fair in Caracas added a twist to its message this year: The toys on display were all manufactured in


TRUMP FEUD: BARBS SHOW DEEPER SPLIT
LEAD: The feud between Mayor Koch and Donald J. Trump, viewed primarily as a personal spat between two powerful public figures, is more importantly a rupture in one of New York City's key economic-development partnerships, experts say.


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: * Playboy Licensing Group to Chillingworth/Radding.


HOMETOWN MOURNS 7 FOUND IN BOXCAR
LEAD: A black bow hung on City Hall in this central Mexican farm town that was home for seven of the 18 illegal aliens who suffocated in a boxcar in Texas.


AN 'OLYMPICS OF THE MIND' DRAWS BLACKS
LEAD: Seventeen-year-old Brian Hooker came away from last year's ''olympics of the mind'' with a gold medal in mathematics, a silver medal in chemistry, a new personal computer and the inspiration to continue pursuing academic interests.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''There was one thing I wanted to do in my career and I did it today.''  - Pat Cash, Wimbledon champion.  [ 17:6. ]


At Odds With the Rest of the World - in Their Absence
LEAD: A lone visitor to Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center yesterday took a contrary attitude to the conventional seating arrangement but found no one in the vicinity to dispute his view of the universe. (The New York Times/Dith Pran)


CARNEGIE FUND HONORS DEEDS OF HEROISM BY 19
LEAD: When Darrell Van Etten Sr. saw a man slumped at the wheel of a burning car, he moved instantly to save him, ''just as any other American, any other human being, would have done,'' he said.


MUSEUMS AND CLASSROOMS
LEAD: HE is the president of the University of Oklahoma, presumably intelligent enough not to insult other people's intelligence.
But in trying to justify big-time college sports at the National Collegiate Athletic Association's special convention last week, Frank E. Horton talked about how the attraction of football and basketball games provides spectators with the opportunity to visit campus museums.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


SLOWDOWN IN GROWTH REPORTED
LEAD: The nation's industrial economy continued to expand in June, with increases in production, orders and employment, but the overall rate of growth was slower than in the prior two months, the National Association of Purchasing Managers said in its latest report, released today.


OUTDOORS: CASTING ON STILL WATERS
LEAD: HEAVY rain and his daughter Cathy's wedding caused Vic Pomiecko of Claremont, N.H., and me to modify our annual June trout-fishing excursion in northern New England.


SMALL STUDIOS' TOUGH SEASON
LEAD: The summer movie season has been a smash for some of Hollywood's big studios.
Hits such as Paramount's ''Beverly Hills Cop II'' and Warner's ''Witches of Eastwick'' have spun turnstiles nationwide and pleased investors in the studios' parent companies, Gulf and Western and Warner Communications.


BURN VICTIM IN CHILE CONFRONTS ARMY
LEAD: Carmen Gloria Quintana, back in Chile for the prosecution of the soldiers who she says set her afire during anti-Government protests a year ago, says the military prosecutor tried to prevent her from identifying the patrol leader.


Sticky Situation
LEAD: If a fan is ever lucky (or unlucky) enough to stand in a baseball team's dugout after a game, he or she may ask, ''Why are my feet sticking to the floor?''


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, JULY 6, 1987
LEAD:  Washington


Interior Dept. Puts in Effect Plan on Offshore Oil Leasing
LEAD: Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel has put into effect his department's new five-year leasing plan for oil and gas on the Outer Continental Shelf.


SWEET GROWTH: WINERIES THRIVE IN FINGER LAKES
LEAD: Outside this town near the western shore of Cayuga Lake, fresh paint shines on the new road signs that invite motorists to visit the Hosmer Winery.


BORK COULD TILT LAW AT ONCE IF SEATED
LEAD: An examination of cases pending before the Supreme Court suggests that Judge Robert H. Bork could begin tilting the law to the right on key social issues as early as the Court's fall term.


Advertising; Fall Debut for Premiere
LEAD: Peter Eldridge, recently named publisher of Premiere magazine, a joint venture of Murdoch Magazines and Hachette, the French publisher, has announced that the first issue of the magazine of the movies will be its October issue, due on the newsstands Sept. 5.
Its circulation rate base is set at 250,000, with four-color advertising pages selling for $9,500 and black and white at $6,750.


2, Delayed Reaching Care, Die
LEAD: Two people died here over the Fourth of July weekend after ambulance rides prolonged by hospital emergency room service cutbacks linked to Florida's medical malpractice crunch.


FIESTA GAL SHOWS SHE ISN'T OVERRATED
LEAD: Fiesta Gal proved that she is clearly the nation's best 3-year-old filly by scoring a 3 1/2-length victory over Mint Cooler in the $287,500 Coaching Club American Oaks yesterday at Belmont Park.


MANSELL REPEATS VICTORY IN FRANCE
LEAD: Nigel Mansell of Great Britain won his second straight French Grand Prix today as Alain Prost of France missed another chance for a record 28th career Formula One victory.


Our Trees Are Dying
LEAD: To the Editor:


RANDOLPH: BIG BROTHER OF YANKEE FAMILY
LEAD: HE was a young player with a new team.
He was not a rookie, although one of the older players on the club, Thurman Munson, liked to call him that every so often.
Just to needle the kid, just to see how much he could take around the batting cage.


Give Campaign Reform a Chance
LEAD: Mayor Koch and other members of New York City's Board of Estimate accepted $9 million in campaign gifts in 1985.
Fully half the money came from only 175 donors - real estate developers, brokerage houses and others doing business with the city.
One way or another, that kind of money inevitably purchases influence.


GOODEN ROCKED EARLY IN 7-5 LOSS
LEAD: Despite his insistence that the Mets' off-field problems had been resolved, Manager Dave Johnson held another team meeting before this afternoon's game.


BERNARD U. TAYLOR
LEAD: Bernard U. Taylor, a voice teacher who was a former chairman of the voice department at the Juilliard School of Music, died Saturday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 90 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Public Housing Returns Good Value for Money
LEAD: To the Editor:


JAPANESE TAKEOVERS 'A TRICKLE'
LEAD: Enough conditions seem to be in place for a wave of Japanese takeovers of American companies.


WATERLOO VILLAGE TO GET PAVILION
LEAD: A multimillion-dollar performance pavalion that represents state-of-the-art architectural and acoustic design is being planned for Waterloo Village in Allamuchy Mountain State Park here, officials said.


WHY NEW YORK CITY MUST PAY MORE ATTENTION TO DAY CARE
LEAD: To the Editor:


BALLET: THE BOLSHOI, IN ''HIGHLIGHTS' PROGRAMS
LEAD: The ''Highlights'' ballet program was popularized, if not invented, as a genre by the Bolshoi Ballet when the company from Moscow made its American debut in New York in 1959.


Nancy Bess Edelstein Is Bride of Richard G. Spiro
LEAD: Nancy Bess Edelstein and Richard Glenn Spiro, magna cum laude graduates of Princeton University, were married yesterday at Temple Emanuel of Great Neck, L.I., by Rabbi Jack Tauber.


Bombs Kill 10 in Pakistan
LEAD: Three bomb explosions about noon at the city's rail and bus stations killed 10 people and injured about 50 today, the 10th anniversary of the coup that installed Gen.
Mohammad Zia ul-Haq as President.
Officers said that the first bomb went off on a platform of the main rail station, and that a second exploded near a taxi stand outside.


Romney, Recalling 1968, Explains It All
LEAD: Having gathered more than three dozen family members in a White House reception room, the white-haired patriarch seemed suddenly to sense that this was the perfect occasion to explain why he did not become President.


FREER FARM TRADE BY THE END OF '88 SET AS REAGAN AIM
LEAD: The Administration will announce on Monday that it intends to seek agreements by the end of President Reagan's term to phase out farm export subsidies and trade barriers to the agricultural products of the United States and other nations, officials said today.


ECONOMIC CALENDAR
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  None  Friday  Producer Prices ...
June


YOUNG CAMBODIANS IN VERMONT TRY TO COPE
LEAD: Libbet Downs tells the story of the Cambodian boy whose American foster parents took the light bulb from his room because they had run out of spare bulbs.
The boy immediately stopped talking to his foster family and would not eat meals with them.
The silence went on for weeks.


Willie Nelson Plans A Benefit for Farmers
LEAD: Willie Nelson, the country singer, told more than 25,000 people who attended his 12th annual Fourth of July picnic that his next project would be a third benefit concert for the nation's farmers.


CHILDREN IN DEBT TO PARENTS
LEAD: ''NEITHER a borrower, nor a lender be.'' Fine for Shakespeare to say, but then Shakespeare didn't have the down payment on a house to make or a parent willing to help him make it.
Still, given the dicey issues of independence and control that often stand between parent and adult child, when money is added to the mix, psychologists say, caution is advised.


'THE UNTOUCHABLES': DE PALMA'S DEPARTURE
LEAD: As Brian De Palma movies go, ''The Untouchables'' is kind of tame.
Quite a lot of blood is splattered on various walls in the course of the film, but for the director of such movie milestones as the chainsaw execution in ''Scarface'' and the electric drill murder in ''Body Double,'' that's small change.


SCOTT AND HATCHER HELP ASTROS TOP PHILS
LEAD: Billy Hatcher had four singles, drove in one run and scored twice today as Mike Scott and the Houston Astros defeated the Philadelphia Phillies, 8-2.


GIANTS AND THE PADRES MAKE 7-PLAYER TRADE
LEAD: The seven-player trade between the San Francisco Giants and San Diego Padres left both teams contending today that they had gotten just what they wanted.


Why New York City Must Pay More Attention to Day Care
LEAD: To the Editor:


Blacks Settle Bias Suit Filed Against L.I.R.R. and 14 Unions
LEAD: After 15 years of legal wrangling, the Long Island Rail Road has reached an out-of-court settlement in a class-action suit that had charged the commuter line and 14 of its unions with discrimination against blacks in hiring and promotion.


STRANGE SETS MARK TO WIN IN CANADA
LEAD: With one of the most efficient winning rounds of the year on the PGA Tour, Curtis Strange captured the 78th Canadian Open by three shots today.
He said the most rewarding part of his victory was that he virtually assured himself a spot on the 1987 United States Ryder Cup team.


Advertising; Katsoff Is Publisher Of Psychology Today
LEAD: Sherwood (Woody) Katsoff, one-time publisher of Hearst's Science Digest, has become publisher of Psychology Today, now published by the American Psychological Association.


Waite Reported Dead; Officials Doubt Rumor
LEAD: A local newspaper reported today that the missing hostage negotiator Terry Waite had died of natural causes, but Lebanese and Syrian officials in Beirut discounted the report.


HONORS FOR DOBY
LEAD: It was 40 years ago yesterday that Larry Doby followed Jackie Robinson to become the second black player, and first in the American League, to play major league baseball.
Doby, now a New Jersey resident, is not being forgotten in his home state.


ALGERIA MARKS 25 YEARS AND LOOKS TO ITS YOUTH
LEAD: This North African nation today celebrated the 25th anniversary of its independence from France.


Calm Summer Is Anticipated
LEAD: The calm that descended on the credit markets a few weeks ago could continue well into the summer, analysts and traders say, setting the stage for steady to modest declines in interest rates.


Advertising; Ex-Chief Of DYR To Ogilvy
LEAD: TWO days after his retirement from the DYR agency became official, Alexander Brody became president-international of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, the fifth-largest American agency.


FURY AND TURMOIL: DAYS THAT SHOOK KOREA
LEAD: On Friday, June 19, after a night of violent demonstrations that saw riot policemen lose control of the streets to anti-Government protesters, President Chun Doo Hwan was ready to call troops into Seoul and other embattled cities.


ON MIDDLE EAST POLICY, A MAJOR INFLUENCE
LEAD: After several decades of growth in size and sophistication, the leading pro-Israel lobby in Washington, the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, has become a major force in shaping United States policy in the Middle East.


KINGMAN TO JOIN GIANTS' FARM CLUB
LEAD: Dave Kingman, who is 58 home runs shy of the 500 mark, is ready to join the Class AAA Phoenix Firebirds in hopes of returning to the big leagues.


British Editor Retires
LEAD: Lord Hartwell, chairman and editor-in-chief of Britain's Daily Telegraph and Sunday Telegraph newspapers, is retiring after a 30-year career, The Sunday Telegraph announced.
He will be succeeded by Conrad Black, a Canadian businessman who owns a majority interest in The Daily Telegraph Ltd.
Lord Hartwell, 76 years old, will remain a director of the company.


Sale of Maker Of 'Mr. Coffee'
LEAD: North American Systems Inc., which manufactures the ''Mr.
Coffee'' automatic coffee maker, said yesterday that it had agreed to be acquired in a leveraged buyout through a partnership formed by McKinley Allsopp Inc.
The terms of the transaction were not disclosed.


YANKS' ARMS HAVE TOO SHORT A REACH
LEAD: The Yankees' starting pitchers are giving Manager Lou Piniella a headache and the Yankees' relief pitchers tired arms.
The result is a vicious circle that first-place teams shouldn't have to worry about.


GEORGE E. SPARGO
LEAD: George E. Spargo, former general manager of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority in New York City, died Saturday at the Miami Heart Institute.
He was 84 years old.


Air Afrique Warns Debtors
LEAD: The multinational airline Air Afrique is in grave danger of folding unless debts owed to it are paid soon, Auxence Ickonga, the director general, said at a shareholders meeting.


2 KILLERS AND 5 OTHERS ESCAPE FROM NEW MEXICO PRISON
LEAD: Two convicted murderers and five other inmates escaped Saturday night from a state prison south of here by pulling a gun on a guard and pole-vaulting over a barbed-wire fence.


FATE OF MUSEUM ON SLAVERY IN DOUBT
LEAD: With a hand-stitched mouth and button eyes, a mammy doll made by a slave for the 16-year-old child of her master lies in a display case here, a mute reminder of the peculiar institution slavery once was.


WHAT DO YOU CALL ART'S NEWEST TREND: 'NEO-GEO'... MAYBE
LEAD: There was Abstract Expressionism, followed by Pop, Op, Color Field, Minimalism, Conceptual art and Neo-Expressionism.
Each of the succession of trends that has characterized American art since the end of World War II has had its brand name.
And yet the newest one - well established and shown at the hottest galleries -still has no real handle.


MAKING IT TO EVEREST'S SUMMIT
LEAD: When Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay made the first ascent to the summit of Mount Everest in May 1953, it was unthinkable for a woman to attempt such a feat.


I.R.S. Shuffles Its Top Ranks
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service is reorganizing its top ranks, which will result in the promotion of Michael J. Murphy of Philadelphia to the No. 2 job in the agency.
Mr.
Murphy, who began his


Ingrid D. Baker, a Teacher, and Dr. Jack Bloom Are Wed
LEAD: Ingrid Daube Baker, the dean of students and a teacher of German at the Ridgefield (Conn.) High School, was married yesterday to Dr.
Jack H. Bloom, a psychologist in Fairfield, Conn.
Rabbi Joseph Glaser officiated at the couple's home in Fairfield.


Panama Sends Envoy To Meet U.S. Aides
LEAD: Panama has sent a special envoy here to meet with American officials in an effort to reduce tensions between the Reagan Administration and the Panamanian Government headed by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noreiga, according to Panamanian officials.


PRESSED INTO SERVICE
LEAD: When Jose Birriel was recently named pitcher of the week in the Class AA Eastern League, some eyebrows rose.
Understandably so, because Birriel is a first baseman.


Siemens Cites Lower Profits
LEAD: Siemens A.G., the West German electronics giant, said Saturday that profits for its current fiscal year would fall.


BLACK RADICALS WERE KEY TOPIC IN POLICE SESSION
LEAD: About 450 New York City police commanders received briefings on a group of self-proclaimed black revolutionaries as part of training sessions they attended in the last two months on how to deal with demonstrations and riots, police officials said yesterday.


Creation Science Staggers Under Load of Ironies
LEAD: To the Editor:


GEDDES SHOOTS 67 TO WIN IN TOLEDO
LEAD: Jane Geddes, who started the day in sixth place, shot a five-under-par 67 today for a two-stroke victory over two rookies on the Ladies Professional Golf Association Tour, Nancy Taylor and Jill Briles, in the $225,000 Jamie Farr Toledo Classic.


CASH OVERPOWERS LENDL TO WIN WIMBLEDON
LEAD: He is a rogue among tennis players, dashing in his familiar checked bandana, blunt to a fault, looking forward, he said, to the day when he will sit with his friends in a neighborhood pub, telling stories, getting fat on beer.
But Pat Cash had another dream as well while growing up in Australia, one that was finally realized today on the dusty, pockmarked remains of a grass court at


It's Enough to Make a Strong Dog Weep
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. SETS TERMS FOR REASSESSING ITS ROLE IN GULF
LEAD: Howard H. Baker Jr., the White House chief of staff, said today that the United States might ''take a fresh look'' at withdrawing its warships from the Persian Gulf if the Soviet Union removed its naval vessels from the area.


IN THIS 'GAME OF WAR,' THE RACE IS TO THE CUNNING
LEAD: At midnight the heat of a Tuscan summer day is just passing.
Usually the steep little streets of this hilltown are dark and empty.
But just before the Palio, Siena is awake with expectations and plotting.


Say No to the Pharaonic Tank
LEAD: The Defense Department has agreed in principle to let Egypt build a plant to produce the M1-A1, the most modern version of the U.S.
Army's new main battle tank.
Even though America, after the Camp David peace accords, became a principal source of arms for Egypt, co-producing the M-1 makes little sense either for Cairo or Washington.


IVAN LENDL'S DOUBLE FAULT
LEAD: Oooooh!


Lisp Computer
LEAD: Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman Inc. said its BBN Advanced Computers Inc. unit had introduced Butterfly Lisp, the first large-scale, multiprocessor computer system based on the Lisp programming language.
The Lisp language is used widely for the development of artificial intelligence programs, which attempt to emulate the human thought process in solving problems.


SOVIET AUTHORS TO PUBLISH IN U.S.
LEAD: After years of false starts and dashed hopes, American publishers are again to begin publishing books from the Soviet Union - not books by emigre or dissident authors, but novels and short stories by authors who continue to live in the Soviet Union and who are relatively unknown in the West.


Leo D. Goulet, Leader Of Gerber Foods, Dies
LEAD: Leo D. Goulet, president and chief executive officer of the Gerber Products Company, died Sunday after suffering a heart attack while playing golf near his home in Fremont, Mich.
He was 61 years old.


SANTA MONICA BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANTA MONICA BANK (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,990,278
1,694,501
Per share
.59
.50
6mo net inc
3,875,780
3,368,272
Per share
1.15
1.00
Share earnings reflect a 20-percent stock dividend paid in February.


WALTERS OPENS TALKS WITH SYRIA
LEAD: Vernon A. Walters, the United States representative at the United Nations, arrived in Damascus today on a mission designed to repair American relations with Syria.


ALL-STAR COACHES
LEAD: Manager Dave Johnson of the Mets has chosen his National League coaches for next Tuesday's All-Star Game.
They include three members of his staff and one former Met.
Hal Lanier, manager of the Houston Astros, and Roger Craig, a former Met who is now manager of the San Francisco Giants, are the assistant coaches.


CCR VIDEO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CCR VIDEO CORP
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,747,163
961,571
Net inc
66,275
b154,162
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
3,867,190
2,628,479
Net inc
713,665
b230,129
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss


Dainippon May Lift Bid for Reichhold
LEAD: Dainippon Ink and Chemicals Inc. said today that it might increase its $52.50-a-share takeover offer for Reichhold Chemicals Inc.


High-Level Shift at Northrop
LEAD: In a move indicating the Stealth bomber is nearing production, the Northrop Corporation today named a high-level corporate official to the No. 2 spot in its secret Advanced Systems division.


First Chicago Names Officer
LEAD: J. Mikesell Thomas, senior vice president and treasurer of the First Chicago Corporation, has been named chief financial officer and executive vice president of the nation's 11th-largest bank holding company.


THE FALL OF A SPARROW
LEAD: The last pure dusky sparrow died recently in Florida, the sole survivor of a species that lost its habitat to humans bent on owning the sky.
The once-thriving birds were elbowed aside by construction of the Kennedy Space Center.
When they dwindled to five males eight years ago, extinction was guaranteed.


N.F.L. TV PACT UNDER SCRUTINY
LEAD: The National Football League, the three major networks and at least two other television companies have received subpoenas as part of a Federal investigation into whether any antitrust laws were broken in negotiations over broadcast rights to league games.


HABLA ESPANOL
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Charges Are Filed On Hijacking Suspect
LEAD: New charges, including murder and air piracy, were filed today against a Lebanese man arrested in connection with the 1985 hijacking of a Trans World Airlines jet, a justice official reported.


Gephardt v. Dukakis
LEAD: Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts seem to be trying to make the Democratic Presidential contest look like a two-man race - between themselves.


Careers; Consulting Marked by Changes
LEAD: MANAGEMENT consulting, a favorite career with its high salaries, is changing in many ways, a partner of a large accounting firm and the managing director of a consulting firm agree.


PRO-ISRAEL GROUP EXERTS QUIET MIGHT AS IT RALLIES SUPPORTERS IN CONGRESS
LEAD: The Reagan Administration notified Congress at 5:57 P.M. on Friday, May 29, of its intention to sell 1,600 Maverick antitank missiles to Saudi Arabia Within half an hour, lobbyists from the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, the only group registered to lobby Congress on legislation affecting


'Star Wars' Isn't Here, and It's Far From Irrevocable
LEAD: To the Editor:


Convicts Awarded $781,125 for Rights Abuse
LEAD: The New York State Commissioner of Correctional Services violated the constitutional rights of 15 inmates in Duchess County when he transferred them to other prisons in 1980, a Federal jury in Manhattan held yesterday.


G.O.P. SEEKS OUT TRUMP
LEAD: New York Republican leaders, stung by the record re-election victory of Governor Cuomo last year, are already searching for a 1990 standard-bearer and have approached Donald J. Trump, a top Republican strategist said today.


2 FOR THE SEESAW THAT PASSES FOR TURKISH POLITICS
LEAD: In Turkey's great cycles of democracy and its suspension, two men who once wielded power, and who sparred as chaos seized their land, are waiting a recall to political life that may never come.


BRAIN DEFECT TIED TO UTTER AMORALITY OF THE PSYHCOPATH
LEAD: PSYCHOLOGICAL researchers are finding evidence of fundamental differences in the brain that may lie behind the inhuman behavior of the psychopath.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: The Weather Report in the Late Edition on June 14 and 15 carried outdated figures for temperatures, precipitation and forecasts in most of the section on United States and foreign cities.
Readers wishing corrected listings may write to the News Desk, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y.


U.S. ASSERTS BAKER MISSPOKE ON GULF
LEAD: The White House and the State Department moved today to dispel the impression created over the weekend by the White House chief of staff, Howard H. Baker Jr., that United States warships could be withdrawn from the Persian Gulf in response to a Soviet pullout.


HITTERS NO HELP TO A DEFT GUIDRY
LEAD: Ron Guidry gave his manager what he wanted last night: nine quality innings.
But Frank Viola, like Guidry a quality left-hander, wouldn't let the Yankee hitters give Guidry what he needed for a victory.


PAYING VICTIMS, FREEING PRISONERS
LEAD: In the Middle Ages, restitution was a common way to settle a criminal case.
The offender was ordered to do the victim's work, pay medical costs or give him money.
Then the state grew more involved.
Fines went to the king, not the victim.
Restitution faded and survives largely as a vestige of old-time justice.


Decision Lost By Shearson
LEAD: A Federal jury decided yesterday that three arbitration agreements between Shearson/American Express Inc. and a corporate customer were not binding.


Mixed Pattern Prevails For Gold and the Dollar
LEAD: The dollar was mixed in relation to other currencies in quiet trading yesterday, rising against the Japanese yen and weakening against the West German mark and British pound.


PROBED MYSTERIES OF SPACE
LEAD: Prof.
Bengt Georg Daniel Stromgren, an internationally renowned astronomer and former director of the University of Chicago's Yerkes Observatory, died of heart failure Saturday at Hvidovre Hospital in Copenhagen.
He was 79 years old and had been living and teaching in the Danish capital for the past 20 years.


Advertising; Lowe Marschalk Gets Antonovich Furs Work
LEAD: Antonovich Furs announced yesterday afternoon that it was assigning its advertising creative work to Lowe Marschalk.
Earlier in the day Jerry Della Femina, chairman of Della Femina, Travisano &amp; Partners, reported that the agency had resigned the Antonovich Furs account that was being handled by the Della Femina,


Teachers Unit Voices Its Opposition to Bork
LEAD: The nation's largest teachers union has voted to fight the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the United States Supreme Court and to challenge efforts to make English the official language of the United States.


THE GOOD WOMAN OF BENXI, A SUCCESS
LEAD: Guan Guangmei, former peasant and former meat counter clerk, is a ''phenomenon'' to her fellow Chinese.


Diamond Sales Up in First Half
LEAD: Diamond sales climbed sharply in the first half of 1987, carrying through on a recovery that started last year when inflation and the weak dollar helped the gem market out of its lows, according to industry sources.


NBC STRIKE DELAYS WORK ON AN ABC SHOW
LEAD: A strike by NBC technicians affected another network today when at least 15 employees refused to cross picket lines for the ABC soap opera ''General Hospital,'' union and network officials said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto, said it had agreed in principle to acquire up to 40 percent of the voting shares of the Consolidated Bank and Trust Corp. of the Philippines.
Terms were not disclosed.


Oil Surges to Near $21 While Coffee Prices Fall
LEAD: Energy futures surged ahead yesterday with crude oil approaching the $21-a-barrel mark on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


38 HINDU PASSENGERS ARE KILLED
LEAD: Gunmen thought to be militant Sikhs forced a crowded bus off a highway near this northern Indian city and opened fire with submachine guns, killing at least 38 Hindu passengers, the police said today.


AFGHAN AIR WAR: U.S. MISSILE SCORES ON RUSSIANS
LEAD: Afghan guerrillas have been destroying Soviet and Afghan aircraft at the rate of more than one a day since the insurgents started using Stinger missiles supplied by the United States, according to State Department assessments and intelligence reports.


Judge Blocks U.S. Sale Of Low-Income Units
LEAD: A Federal judge today blocked the Reagan Administration's planned sale of 257 Federal mortgages of low-income housing around the country, saying the effect on residents had been overlooked.


Friend or Foe? Bullfrogs Can Tell
LEAD: MALE bullfrogs can distinguish between familiar and unfamiliar bullfrogs by the pattern and location of their croaks, a biologist has found.


PRAYER IS OFFERED FOR TUMBLING METS
LEAD: The telephone rang twice before Dave Johnson answered it.
The caller was phoning long distance, she said, to inform the Mets' manager that his problems would soon be resolved.
She was offering a prayer.


AUTO JOB GUARANTEES SOUGHT
LEAD: By Christmas David Sole expects to lose the job he has held for 16 years at the General Motors Corporation's antiquated Fleetwood plant in southwest Detroit.
G.M. is closing the 70-year-old auto plant and laying off 3,000 workers as part of its effort to eliminate older, inefficient factories.


HEALTHVEST reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTHVEST (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,387,000
-
Net inc
5,546,000
-
Share earns
.48
-
Shares outst
11,639,000
-
6mo rev
14,265,000
-
Net inc
9,007,000
-
Share earns
.95
-
Shares outst
9,455,000
-


U.S. JUDGE LIMITS DETENTION PERIOD AFTER AN ARREST
LEAD: A Federal judge has ruled that New York City can no longer detain arrested suspects for more than 24 hours without a court determining that there was probable cause for the arrest.


Our Towns; Invoking Cicero So the Children Can Be Protected
LEAD: A busy week for Superior Judge Paul R. Huot.
The judge has been sentencing teachers to jail, about 30 a day.
He is doing it for the children, he says.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''Lack of adequate safeguards and protection for workers dealing with substances as dangerous as lead and arsenic cannot be tolerated.''
- John A. Pendergrass of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, on ruling against Chrysler.  [ A1:6. ]


ALIEN SANCUTARY MOVEMENT'S STATE UNCLEAR A YEAR AFTER COURT CASE
LEAD: A year after eight church workers were placed on probation for helping to give sanctuary to Central American illegal aliens, there is disagreement over the status of the movement.


Diamond Seeking Deal for Salt Unit
LEAD: A family-controlled Michigan salt producer is narrowing its search for a buyer that can compete in an industry where the typical business has a capital-rich corporate parent, a company official said. ''Perhaps within the next 30 days we will know whether there is somebody out there who will be making us a firm offer,'' said Frank Hayes, vice president for finance at the Diamond Crystal Salt


California Growers Deal
LEAD: California Growers Winery Inc. today said it had paid $35 million to buy a winery and 7,000 acres of grape orchards from the Getty Oil Company, making the winery company the largest combined vineyard owner and wine processor in the state.
Getty's Paramount subsidiary, with holdings in Kern and Fresno counties, was the biggest vineyard owner.


RIVER CITY IS PLANNED FOR JERSEY
LEAD: The biggest landowner on New Jersey's Hudson River waterfront has joined one of that state's most active builders in an agreement to develop a mini-city of residences, stores and 2.1 million square feet of office space on a milelong stretch of the waterfront in Weehawken, N.J.


SOUTHLAND'S MOVE TIED TO INVESTOR
LEAD: Samuel Belzberg, the Canadian investor, touched off the $5.1 billion offer from Southland Corporation senior executives to buy the company, Wall Street professionals said yesterday.


THE LATEST MCPHAIL
LEAD: As a teen-ager he worked in the concession catacombs of Yankee Stadium, checking out the souvenir hawkers.
Yearbooks, caps, T-shirts, dolls.
In those years, Andy MacPhail earned about $25 a game.
If the crowd was small and sales were slow, he would watch a few innings from the lower right-field stands.


HIGHER COST PREDICTED FOR SPACE STATION
LEAD: A panel of experts convened by the National Research Council estimated today that the proposed space station would cost about $27.5 billion, the highest figure yet cited in an escalating series of estimates.


'Yogic Flying'
LEAD: Followers of the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi will demonstrate a different kind of solution to international economic problems today in the auditorium of the World Bank, before officials of that organization and the International Monetary Fund.
What they will demonstrate is ''yogic flying,'' a kind of hopping levitation that believers contend will ''put an end to violence and negative tendencies on earth, remove the basis of terrorism and war and create a permanent state of world peace.


London Stocks Spurt
LEAD: Stock prices continued their record-breaking run today, with The Financial Times-Stock Exchange index of 100 leading shares up a strong 23.8 points, to 2,351.9.
The recent rally has been fueled by overseas buying.
A firmer British pound and a rise in British Government bonds have also helped stocks, dealers said.


Japan and Europeans Cautious on U.S. Plan
LEAD: Japan and the European Community reacted cautiously today to the Reagan Administration's call for eliminating price subsidies and import barriers in agricultural trade, but Australia and several other key food-exporting nations welcomed the proposal.


CBS CANCELS ITS CONTRACT WITH NIELSON FOR RATINGS
LEAD: CBS announced the cancellation of its contract with the A. C. Nielsen Company today, saying the network was not satisifed with the ''people meter'' ratings system that is to go into operation this fall.


UNATTENDANCE DAY
LEAD: Last year in New York City, a friend recalls, she watched the Tall Ships from somebody's high-floored apartment.
Then she walked along West Street, weaving her way through what was truly a million lovers of Liberty: walkers, watchers, picnickers.
Many peered through the wire fences at assorted yachts.


U S Sprint Asks Rate Cut
LEAD: The U S Sprint Communications Company said today that it had filed for an across-the-board rate reduction of 4.25 percent to keep its rates lower than those of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


WORD PROCESSOR QUEST
LEAD: AT cocktail parties a question I'm often asked is ''What word processor do you use?'' Much to my questioners' disappointment - and I suppose often to their disbelief - my answer remains, ''A cheap ballpoint and narrow-lined yellow paper.''


U.S. Seeking Coffee Accord
LEAD: In an effort to resolve differences between coffee-consuming nations and producers, the United States is ready to seek a compromise with Brazil and other producers to regulate the coffee trade, the chief United States negotiator, Jon Rosenbaum, said today.


North's Turn Arrives
LEAD: In public Congressional testimony that begins today, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North will have the chance he has said he wants more than anyone else in America - ''to tell the story'' of the Iran-contra affair.
Page A3. (AP)


Market Place; Phelps Dodge's Turnaround
LEAD: LAST July, when shares of the Phelps Dodge Corporation were selling at $16.875, J. Clarence Morrison of Dean Witter Reynolds recommended the stock to clients as ''a turnaround story.''


ONE FOR AUSTRALIA
LEAD: Pat Cash, in upsetting Ivan Lendl on Sunday, became the first Australian to win the Wimbledon men's singles championship since John Newcombe took his third title in 1971.
Cash, the 11th men's champion from Australia, ran his country's total of men's singles titles to 20.
A total of 14 Englishmen have won 34 All-England titles, while 19 men from the United States have won the crown 25 times.


New Mr. Coffee Owner Has Dream Come True
LEAD: John M. Eikenberg is the new Mr. Coffee.


LESSONS FOR RUSSIANS ON NEW YORK STREETS
LEAD: The four Soviet doctors were wearing their formal clothes when J. W. Canty, their American host, drove them to Tompkins Square Park.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's search for solutions to alcoholism in the Soviet Union - in the form of the first delegation sent to study drinking and drug abuse in the United States - was headed for the outdoor flophouse of the Lower East


300 MISSING
LEAD: More than 300 people here feared to have drowned in northern Zambia after their river barge hit a sandbar in what police called a navigational error.


KNICK COACH HUNT HITS SNAG
LEAD: The issue of compensation has stymied the Knicks in their bid to hire Jimmy Rodgers as their coach, according to sources close to the negotiations.
Unless the Knicks sweeten their offer, something the Boston Celtics do not expect, Rodgers will be back on the Celtic bench next season as K. C. Jones's assistant and the director of player personnel.


INDIAN MUSEUM LEADERS SEEM DETERMINED TO LEAVE NEW YORK
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, JULY 7, 1987
LEAD: International A2-11


SURGERY FOR WALTON
LEAD: Bill Walton, who has undergone foot surgery six times, forcing him to miss almost five National Basketball Association seasons, is scheduled to undergo a seventh operation today at Presbyterian Hospital in Whittier, Calif.
Dr.
F.
William Wagner and Dr.
Tony Daly, who have operated on the Boston Celtics' 6-foot-11-inch center in the past, will perform the surgery on Walton's right foot.


FUTURE TENNIS KINGS FACE TURF QUESTION
LEAD: In Boris Becker and Pat Cash, Wimbledon has provided men's tennis with two marketable personalities that the game may need if it is to remain popular in the post-Jimmy Connors and John McEnroe era, although Connors apparently plans to go along for the ride.


DREW INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DREW INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,878,000
21,098,000
Net inc
745,000
d884,000
Share earns
.02
.02
Shares outst
48,563,000
48,830,000
9mos rev
61,309,000
51,713,000
Net inc
b899,000
cd2,016,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
48,559,000
43,694,000


AFTER EIGHT LOSSES, BLUE JAYS WIN ONE
LEAD: George Bell and Ernie Whitt hit consecutive homers in the fifth inning and Jimmy Key pitched a six-hitter for seven innings as the Toronto Blue Jays snapped an eight-game losing streak tonight, defeating the Texas Rangers, 6-4.


Books: Portrait in Prose
LEAD: ROBERT LOWELL: Collected Prose.


Officer's Accuser Denounced as Liar
LEAD: The lawyer for a suspended police officer on trial in the 77th Precinct corruption case argued in closing yesterday that the prosecution's main witness was a liar and that nothing he had said was corroborated independently.


SUDDEN NURSE SHORTAGE THREATENS HOSPITAL CARE
LEAD: Over the last year a sudden - and dangerous - nursing shortage has begun to hamper hospitals all over the country.


CHANGE IN SHIFTS TO ADD RUSH-HOUR CABS
LEAD: That most elusive of urban quarries, the rush-hour taxicab, may soon be more common.


A Piano Series At Rutgers
LEAD: The Rutgers Summerfest Piano Institute will begin a three-week series of performances, master classes, individual instruction, panels and workshops on Monday.
At 8 P.M., the Summerfest director, Ilana Vered, will head a group of pianists in a performance of works for multiple pianos by Mozart, Liszt, Brahms and


FREE-FORM HAIR STYLES: CURLS ARE TAKING OVER
LEAD: These days free-form hair styles are setting the pace, inspired by stars like Cyndi Lauper.
Young women with long hair are adopting a hang-loose curly or frizzy look that is most becoming, even on the stickiest days.
They sweep their hair back from the face and neck, but instead of trying to tuck every strand neatly into place they simply fasten the hair at the top of the head with a clamp and let the locks cascade down the back.


Bond Prices Gain Modestly
LEAD: Bond prices ended modestly higher in slow trading yesterday, lifted by a stronger performance by the dollar on foreign currency markets.


Steel Output Down
LEAD: Steel production dipped to 1.695 million tons in the week ended last Saturday, a decrease of three-tenths of 1 percent from the previous week's 1.700 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute said yesterday.
Production amounted to 79.2 percent of capacity during the week, compared with 79 percent in the previous week.


BIONOMIC SCIENCES INTERNAIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIONOMIC SCIENCES INTERNAIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Revenue
492,000
159,200
Net loss
68,900
c79,700
9mo rev
1,048,000
228,400
Net inc
b96,700
c488,800
b-After an extraordinary gain of $396,000 from the sale of assets and an extraordinary charge of $10,000.


TRACK TEAM PICKED
LEAD: Carl Lewis, winner of four gold medals at the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles, and Jackie Joyner-Kersee, a Sullivan Award winner who set the world record in the heptathlon twice last year, top the list of athletes named to the United States track and field team for next month's Pan American Games in Indianapolis.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Armor Elevator Inc., Louisville, Ky., announced the promotion of William O. Lippman Jr. to president and chief executive.


HOME LOAN RATES RISE, BUT SLOWLY
LEAD: Home mortgage rates rose in early June but at a much slower pace than the steep climb of early May.


Foreign Cars Up in Japan
LEAD: Sales of foreign cars and trucks in Japan jumped 37.9 percent in the first half of 1987, to a record 44,456 vehicles, from 32,244 a year ago, the Japan Automobile Importers Association said today.
The increase reflected a narrowed price gap between foreign and Japanese-made cars and lower loan rates provided by foreign car dealers, the association said.


HAITIAN GENERAL STRIKE IS PEACEFUL AS SOLDIERS AVOID CONFRONTATIONS
LEAD: Government soldiers who last week killed more than 20 protesters and wounded more than 100 others stayed off the streets today as anti-Government protests resumed around the country without violence.


Bearing Down
LEAD: Gerardo Moncada of Colombia leading Raul Alcala of Mexico, right, and Niki Ruttiman of Switzerland during sixth stage of the Tour de France.
Christophe Lavainne of France won the stage, but Erich Maechler of Switzerland remained the overall leader.
Page A25. (AP)


U.S. May Add Limits on Japan
LEAD: The Defense Department may impose sanctions against two Japanese companies, C. Itoh and Wako Trading, for selling high-technology systems to the Soviet Union, U.S.
News &amp; World Report reported.
The sanctions may include a suspension of authority to export certain defense-related equipment.
Itoh is one of Japan's largest trading companies and Wako is a small concern, the magazine said in its


SCIENTISTS FIND LONG-SOUGHT KEY TO HOW BLOOD CLOTS
LEAD: THE master molecule governing the formation of blood clots has been isolated and cloned, ending a century-long effort to understand how blood coagulates and promising powerful new ways to combat major causes of death, including heart attacks, strokes and possibly even cancer.


HOW TO REDUCE THE ANARCHY IN LEBANON
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. NOT TOLD OF MONITORING OF BLACKS, OFFICIAL SAYS
LEAD: One of the top Federal probation officials in New York City said yesterday that the New York Police Department had not informed him of any planned crimes by eight black radicals who have been under surveillance by police intelligence officers.


VETO OF AIDS TESTING BILLS IS URGED IN ILLINOIS
LEAD: Health officials and gay rights groups are appealing to Gov.
James R. Thompson to veto a measure that would mandate the testing for infection with the AIDS virus of prison inmates, hospital patients and couples seeking marriage licenses.


Ex-Chief at Gerber Is Back for a While
LEAD: Carl G. Smith, former chief executive and chairman of the Gerber Products Company, was named acting chief executive of the baby food company yesterday.


London Project Loses Backers
LEAD: Two important backers of a $4.8 billion project to build one of the world's largest office developments, in London's dock area, a part of the waterfront now undergoing redevelopment, have pulled out, sources close to the project said today.


MARINE'S RAPE CONVICTION VOIDED AS COURT CALLS DEFENSE INADEQUATE
LEAD: The nation's highest military court today reversed the conviction of a Marine Corps corporal for rape and attempted murder because his civilian lawyer fell ''far short of reasonable competence'' in not investigating the defendant's alibi.


Israelis Demand Rabbi Raze Holocaust Memorial at Wall
LEAD: The Jerusalem city authorities filed a lawsuit today against Rabbi Shlomo Goren, former Chief Rabbi, demanding that he remove a Holocaust monument erected on a yeshiva near the Wailing Wall.


Siegel Sentencing Delay
LEAD: Sentencing has been delayed a third time for Martin A. Siegel, the former investment banker who pleaded guilty to criminal charges arising from Wall Street's insider-trading scandal.
He is cooperating in the Government's investigation.
Charles M. Carberry, assistant United States attorney for securities and commodities fraud, said that no new sentencing date had been set.


SEARCH FOR KILLER OF 37 IN SEATTLE AREA CUT BACK
LEAD: The authorities say they know a lot about the man given the name ''the Green River Killer,'' but that they do not know his identity or where to find him.


Talking Business/with Currey of Greyhound; The Proposal For Trailways
LEAD: The Greyhound Lines bus company, which is now owned by a group of Dallas investors, received tentative permission late last week to take over the money-losing Trailways Corporation, its main competitor.
Greyhound had asked for quick approval, warning that Trailways was in poor shape and that if the Interstate Commerce Commission took its time there would be little of value to take over.


FBX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FBX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,664,000
3,029,000
Net inc
102,000
99,000
Share earns
.02
.03
Shares outst
4,400,000
2,800,000
6mo rev
6,960,000
6,174,000
Net inc
185,000
177,000
Share earns
.04
.06
Shares outst
4,197,802
2,800,000


BRONX SEES A LION, AND NOT IN ZOO
LEAD: First the drive was made with a parent at the wheel, and eventually Gene Larkin drove himself.
A half-dozen times each baseball season, maybe more, he would make the trip from the Larkin home in North Bellmore, L.I., to the Bronx to watch the Yankees.
Yesterday, the parents and the son made the trip in separate cars because Larkin had a reason to arrive early.


BASEBALL GERIATRICS: JOHN VS. JOE NIEKRO
LEAD: Tommy John thought the idea made sense. ''Joe and I should pitch Wednesday,'' he said, adding, ''the old son of a gun.''


U.S. AND SOVIET JOURNALISM EXPLORED
LEAD: SPACE BRIDGES have their uses; ''U.S.A.-U.S.S.R.
Space Bridge'' is an example.
If nothing else, only one participant blows a kiss.
Meanwhile, there is no group singing.
This particular space bridge, on Channel 13 at 11 o'clock tonight, is more serious than that, and also more genuinely entertaining.


MONEY FOR POLITICS: ONE MAN'S RELENTLESS PURSUIT
LEAD: Terry McAuliffe was rooting out checks, a grand here, a grand there.


CHARLES C. MACLEAN
LEAD: Charles C. MacLean, a senior partner with the Manhattan law firm Dewey, Ballantine, Bushby, Palmer &amp; Wood, died of lung cancer Sunday at his home in Lloyd Neck, L.I.
He was 80 years old.


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, JULY 7, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


Corrections
LEAD: The text of the United States Constitution on Saturday rendered a word incorrectly in the last sentence of Amendment 14, Section 4.
Or, not of, should precede emancipation; thus the sentence should read: ''But neither the United States nor any State shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against the United States, or any claim for the loss or emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations and claims shall be held illegal and void.


CONVICTED KILLER IS PUT TO DEATH IN VIRGINIA
LEAD: A man convicted of strangling and slashing the throat of an elderly neighbor and sexually assaulting her corpse was electrocuted today, the first execution in Virginia in almost a year.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Alan V. Schwartz has been named executive vice president, chief operating officer and financial officer of Bernard Hodes Advertising.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Two by Two


PANAMA PROTESTERS INSIST ON OUSTER OF GENERAL AS KEY TO TALKS
LEAD: Anti-Government leaders in Panama have rejected a call for compromise with the regime, insisting that they would agree to talks only to discuss the departure of the military commander, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Chicago Utility Audit Planned
LEAD: The Commonwealth Edison Company, in an attempt to win regulatory approval to form a generating subsidiary of three nuclear power plants, agreed today to submit to an independent audit.


The Short Life of the Success Story
LEAD: WHY don't the news media ever report good things about the schools?


Dinosaur Egg Fossils Found
LEAD: Scientists have discovered nests of dinosaur eggs bearing unhatched, fossilized dinosaurs, the second such find in the world.


ACID SOIL
LEAD: Acidity inhibits the binding of nitrogen-producing bacteria to plant cells, according to scientists at the University of Michigan.
They said they feared that soil tainted by acid rain might hinder or halt the necessary synthesis of nitrogen in legumes, such as beans, peas and many forage crops.
These play important roles in restoring nitrogen, a crucial nutrient for plant growth, to soils.


COMSAT'S MERGER CALLED OFF
LEAD: The Contel Corporation and Comsat yesterday broke off their proposed $2.4 billion merger.


Sallie Mae Issue
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, which generally issues short-term floating-rate notes each month, offered $250 million of the short-term securities through various securities dealers yesterday.
Interest on the Sallie Mae floating-rate notes, which are due Jan. 14, 1988, was initially set at 55-hundredths of a percentage point more than the bond equivalent yield of the 91-day Treasury bill.


COMPAQ COMPUTERS GET SAME SYSTEM AS I.B.M.
LEAD: The Compaq Computer Corporation, responding to the early success of a new line of personal computers from the International Business Machines Corporation, announced yesterday that its computers would use the same operating system.


16 Hurt in Stagecoach Crash
LEAD: Sixteen people were injured today when a stagecoach operated by a concessionaire tipped over inside Yellowstone National Park.
A park spokesman, Greg Kroll, said the stagecoach tipped over after the two lead horses of its four-horse team bolted and went off the road.
He said four of those hurt were hospitalized with broken bones.


HOME WORKER GUILTY IN KILLING OF TWO WOMEN
LEAD: A 28-year-old former home-care attendant pleaded guilty yesterday to the murder of two elderly, infirm women found slashed to death in their Bronx apartments last year.
The victims had both been in her care.


HOT ITEMS OF SUMMER
LEAD: THERE'S nothing quite like a pile of computer magazines to help one pass the time at Dallas-Fort Worth airport.
Here are some of the more obscure and bizarre items gleaned from half a dozen of the July issues.
Batter Up!


LEADER OF CLUB FOR THOSE SEEKING WEALTH GETS LIFE TERM FOR KILLNG
LEAD: The leader of a group of wealthy young men, the Billionaire Boys Club, was sentenced today to life in prison without possibility of parole on his conviction for murder.


NEW-CAR SALES FOR JUNE DOWN 10.2% FROM '86
LEAD: Last month's sales of new cars fell 10.2 percent from the June 1986 level, on a daily rate basis, American manufacturers and importers said today.


Suffolk Transfers Head of Its Bias Unit
LEAD: The head of the Suffolk County Police Department's racial and religious bias unit began a new job yesterday after being transferred from the unit because of pressure from the Jewish community, the police commissioner said.


Peru Affirms Stand on Debt
LEAD: President Alan Garcia, saying he will stand firm on a decision to limit foreign debt payments to up to 10 percent of Peru's export earnings, has announced new financial measures that include large wage increases.


ESCAPEE CAPTURED BY POLICE NEAR PRISON IN NEW MEXICO
LEAD: A prisoner was recaptured today near a race track less than two miles from the penitentiary from which he and six others escaped Saturday.
Hundreds of officers continued a search for the others.


TRANSACTIONS
LEAD: BASEBALL CINCINNATI (NL) - Placed Ron Oester, second baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Max Venable, outfielder, from Nashville of the American Association.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE ENCHANTED WANDERER.
Selected Tales by Nikolai Leskov.
Translated by David Margarshak. 300 pages.


COMINGS AND GOINGS
LEAD: Dickie Thon, the Houston Astros shortstop who has been plagued by vision problems since being hit by a pitch in 1984, said he was not ready to retire but doubts he will ever play for the Astros again.
Thon left the team Friday and returned to Houston because of his eye problems. ''I feel sad because I wish I could have done more for the team,'' Thon said at a news conference at the Astrodome.


Bridge; The Far East Championship Was Notable for Close Finish
LEAD: Several international championships have been cliffhangers, hinging on the final deal or two, but the closest ever occurred last month in Shanghai, when the 30th Far East Championship ended in an exact tie after nine days of play in a nine-day round robin.


Advertising; A Magazine Called Divorce
LEAD: A lawyer, who while going through his own divorce wished for an information magazine on the subject, is in the midst of starting just such a publication.


BEAM, DEVELOPMENT FOR BATTLEFIELD, DETECTS ON SET OF HEART ATTACKS
LEAD: SCIENTISTS at the Georgia Institute of Technology say they have developed a radar device so sensitive it can detect irregularities in the beating of a heart up to 300 feet away.


Advertising; Chevron Sets Move To Y.&amp;R.
LEAD: J. WALTER THOMPSON, San Francisco, is losing the retail advertising assignment for Chevron U.S.A., which is going to Young &amp; Rubicam in that city.
Billings are more than $20 million.


LED LOCKHEED IN TURBULENT TIMES
LEAD: Daniel J. Haughton, who rose from systems analyst to chairman of the board in 37 years with the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, died Sunday of complications from heart and gall bladder surgery at the Kennestone Hospital in Marietta, Ga.
He was 75 years old and lived in Marietta.


OHIO MATTRESS CO reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OHIO MATTRESS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
143,793,000
66,019,000
Net inc
5,607,000
2,394,000
Share earns
.27
.15
Shares outst
20,950,000
16,231,000
6mo sales
260,976,000
133,138,000
Net inc
8,014,000
4,787,000
Share earns
.43
.30
Shares outst
18,587,000
16,218,000


Army Acts Against 8 In Recruiting Inquiry
LEAD: Eight Army recruiters in the Chicago area have been relieved of their duties and nine others are being investigated in an inquiry into drug abuse and falsification of recruits' records, the Army reported today.


MERCHANDISE IS MISSING FROM JAIL COMMISSARIES
LEAD: Are the thieves thieves?
Or are jailers perhaps responsible for $150,000 worth of merchandise that City Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin says is missing from commissaries at city jails?


Arizona Group Begins Drive For Recall of G.O.P. Governor
LEAD: Opponents of Gov.
Evan Mecham began a petition drive today seeking a recall election, saying the Governor ''has embarrassed Arizonans nationally'' with his statements and appointments.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


5 YOUNG LAWYERS WHO WOULD BE HEROS... AND A MARINE WHO WEARS A HERO'S RIBBONS
LEAD: As Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's uniform declares his military service, its decorations encapsulate his career.
Assuming he appears in uniform, they are certain to be on full display Tuesday when he raises his right hand and, for the first time, publicly answers questions about the Iran-contra affair.


ROYAL BUSINESS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROYAL BUSINESS GROUP
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,343,000
154,000
Share earns
3.48
.10
Net inc
b5,124,000
210,000
Share earns
3.95
.11
b-Includes a net gain of approximately $4.5 million from the sale of the business forms division.


Carson Pirie Scott
LEAD: The Mutual Shares Corporation, a New York-based investment firm, and a group of its affiliates have purchased the equivalent of 6.8 percent of Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Company's 10.5 million shares outstanding.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mutual said that it had purchased the shares of the Chicago-based retailer ''for the purpose of investment'' only.


HOW TO JUDGE JUDGE BORK
LEAD: Americans hold the Supreme Court in such reverence that they are sometimes persuaded, haplessly, to try taking the politics out of politics.
As President Reagan's nomination of Judge Robert Bork to the Court reverberates, it becomes clear that this is such a time.


LEVIATION: SCIENCE BRINGS MAGIC TO LIFE
LEAD: A PHYSICIST imagines that he is momentarily annoyed by the big conference table occupying the middle of his office.


SPECIALIZED SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPECIALIZED SYSTEMS INC
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,350,400
746,500
Net loss
185,200
492,000
The company said it earned an operating profit in the first quarter of 1987 and that it expects results to continue to improve for the balance of the year.


ADIRONDACKS CAMP BLENDS BASKETBALL AND EVANGELISM
LEAD: On a recent Thursday morning, the Rev.
Dr.
Tony Evans stood before his congregation - 100 adolescent boys wearing Jams and high-top leather sneakers - in the gymnasium chapel at the Camp-of-the-Woods basketball clinic.


Mubarak Backed for 2d Term
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak was nominated today by Parliament for a second six-year term, with only minor political parties opposing him.
The main opposition grouping, led by the Moslem Brotherhood and the Labor Party, which is Socialist, supported Mr.
Mubarak but urged him to govern Egypt under strict Islamic law.


Boy, 16, Found Fatally Shot In an Alley Near Hollis Home
LEAD: A 16-year-old Queens youth was found shot to death in an alley near his home yesterday afternoon as the result of an ''ongoing dispute,'' possibly with another neighborhood youth, the police said.


ZZZZ BEST TO FILE FOR CHAPTER 11
LEAD: The ZZZZ Best Company said today that it would seek bankruptcy protection, and it accused its 21-year-old founder and former chairman of misappropriating $23 million of company funds.


EVERGOOD PRODUCTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EVERGOOD PRODUCTS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,691,000
3,592,000
Net inc
9,375
b45,170
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


HECTIC ROUTE TO MOSTLY MOZART
LEAD: ''It's a three-ring circus 24 hours before countdown,'' said William Lockwood, who was so busy he didn't even have time to straighten out his metaphors.


Savannah Police Suit Settled
LEAD: A man wounded by two police officers in a confrontation last year outside a bank agreed today to settle his $8.7 million lawsuit against the city.
Details of the settlement were not released immediately, but The Savannah Evening Press reported that Otis H. Parker will receive more than $700,000 from the city.


FOR CAMBODIA, STILL MISERY AND WAR
LEAD: More than eight years after the Vietnamese invasion that freed Cambodia from destructive tyranny, the country has recovered enough only to live a drastically impoverished life under a less draconian but still oppressive regime.


CAROLINA FREIGHT CORP reports earnings for 12wks to June 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAROLINA FREIGHT CORP (NYSE)
12wks to June 20
1987
1986
Revenue
133,489,101
138,247,807
Net inc
2,963,932
4,989,827
Share earns
.44
.76
Shares outst
6,567,804
6,532,442
24wk rev
266,428,944
261,276,886
Net inc
5,513,475
7,438,896
Share earns
.83
1.13
Shares outst
6,560,112
6,523,271


Genoa Archbishop Resigns
LEAD: Pope John Paul II accepted the resignation today of Giuseppe Cardinal Siri as Archbishop of Genoa and named Msgr.
Giovanni Canestri to succeed him, the Vatican announced.
Monsignor Canestri, 69 years old, was Archbishop of Cagliari, on Sardinia.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.69
6.59
6.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
n.a.
5.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.80
n.a.
5.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.14
n.a.
7.23
30-YR.


TOUR DE FRANCE
LEAD: Frenchman Wins Sixth Leg: Christophe Lavainne of France won the sixth leg of the Tour de France yesterday in 4 hours 12 minutes 57 seconds, while Erich Maechler of Switzerland retained the overall lead.
The 105-mile leg between Strasbourg and Epinal, France, took the cyclists across passes in the Vosges Mountains.


ROBERTSON BID RELYING ON CAUCUS AND FERVOR
LEAD: The Rev.
Pat Robertson's political advisers are basing his pending bid for the Republican Presidential nomination on a strategy that stresses gathering delegates in caucus states and counts on a strong showing among Southerners in the regional primary March 8.


BLOCKING TRAFFIC
LEAD: State Senator Roy Goodman of Manhattan declares it would be ''cruel and unusual punishment'' to raise New York City parking fines and penalties to $70 from a top of $50.
Bowing to pressure from the Automobile Club of New York, Mr.
Goodman withdrew as a sponsor of legislation to allow the increase, thereby killing any chance of action this year.


Street Battles Rage Anew in South Korea
LEAD: Students retreating from a tear gas attack by riot policemen yesterday in Seoul.
A demonstrator carried a portrait of Lee Han Yol, who died Sunday from injuries suffered in a demonstration last month.
Page A3. (Reuters)


R.J. Reynolds Sells 2 Tobacco Brands
LEAD: R. J. Reynolds Tobacco USA sold its Top and Our Advertiser smoking tobacco brands to Republic Tobacco Inc. of Chicago, a distributor of smoking tobacco and cigarette rolling papers.
The sale, terms of which were not announced, completed Reynolds Tobacco USA's plans to sell its smoking tobacco and little cigar businesses, a decision announced in


Dow Off 7.17 on Inflation Concerns
LEAD: The stock market fell yesterday, as small gains in the bond market and the dollar's firmness were not enough to overcome a growing concern about inflation.


NOTES ON FASHION
LEAD: SOME designers are taking a stand against the high cost of high-style clothing. ''Fashion is so expensive,'' said Randolph Duke. ''When a T-shirt costs $295, the price exceeds fairness.
I think there should be a middle ground.''


Man Shot for Playing His Radio Too Loud
LEAD: A dispute Sunday night between three homeless men in Central Park over a radio that was being played too loud ended when one of the men shot another five times, a police official said yesterday.


Rig Count Up in Week
LEAD: The number of working domestic oil and gas rigs in the United States this week rose to 872 from 813 in the previous week, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
The count totaled 672 a year ago, the oil toolmaker said.


AUSTRALIAN LEADER IN TOUGH RE-ELECTION FIGHT
LEAD: When Prime Minister Bob Hawke called the national election that is scheduled next Saturday, he had some fairly grim economic news for the voters.
They could expect more of the same from his Labor Party, he said.


THAT OLD BRILLIANCE AGAIN
LEAD: Once again Messrs.
Reagan and Meese are working the old brilliant-mind scam on the Senate.
Last time they used it the aim was to get Justice Rehnquist the title of Chief Justice of the United States.
Now the beneficiary is to be Judge Robert Bork, possessor of a mind so brilliant, we are told, that no one who loves justice can decently oppose putting him on the Supreme Court.


Coca-Cola Division Buys Five Bottlers
LEAD: Coca-Cola Enterprises announced it had purchased five Rainwater Coca-Cola bottling companies from the Coca-Cola Company.
Coca-Cola Enterprises, the publicly traded bottling subsidiary, in which Coca-Cola holds a 49 percent stake, bought the companies for $173 million.


DAVID E. WEINLAND
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
David E. Weinland, a minister of the United Church of Christ who served as president of the Moravian Seminary and College for Women in Bethlehem, Pa., died of a heart attack Sunday.
He lived in Southbury, Conn., and was 74 years old.


Chess; Shamkovich Posts a Victory The Gentle, Positional Way
LEAD: Three Eastern grandmasters, Joel Benjamin of Brooklyn, Sergey Kudrin of Stamford, Conn., and Leonid Shamkovich of Queens, tied for first place in the Fifth Midwest Masters Invitational Tournament in Lincolnwood, Ill.


Advertising; Sea World Penguin Pair Join Welcome to Scali
LEAD: One does not generally think of the announcement of an advertising account assignment as a photo opportunity.
But then how many accounts have the picture possibilities of Sea World of Florida?


Industrial Equity Sells Resorts Stake
LEAD: Industrial Equity (Pacific) Ltd., a unit of an investment concern controlled by a New Zealand businessman, Ron Brierley, has sold its entire 5.2 percent stake in Resorts International Inc. on the open market for $17 million.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Industrial Equity said that it had sold the 299,100 shares of the casino and resort hotel concern in three transactions, between June 19 and


A GLOSSARY OF RUSSIA'S THIRD REVOLUTION
LEAD: As the West contemplates the unfolding of Russia's third revolution in this century, we must make as much of an effort to understand what is not happening as we make to understand what is happening.


Warburg Pincus
LEAD: An investment group led by Warburg Pincus Capital Partners, a New-York based investment firm, has raised its stake in Mattel Inc. to the equivalent of 20.1 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Warburg Pincus group said that it ''may from time to time acquire additional shares'' of the toy company, which is based in Hawthorne, Calif.


CONCERT: PHILHARMONIC IN THE PARK
LEAD: THE New York Philharmonic moved onto the Great Lawn in Central Park last night for a performance that drew a crowd estimated by the police to be 90,000, the largest for a parks concert so far this year.
A pleasant, cool evening helped bring out the assortment of picnickers and music lovers who sprawled along the dusty baseball fields and scattered across the adjacent paths.


NATIONAL COMMUNITY BANK OF NJ reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL COMMUNITY BANK OF NJ
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
8,500,000
6,600,000
Per share
.83
.64
6mo net inc
16,700,000
13,000,000
Per share
1.62
1.26
Share earnings for 1986 have been restated to reflect a 4-for-1 stock split paid in May.


NEW VIOLENCE FLARES IN SEOUL AS POLICE HALT MARCH
LEAD: Thousands of students clashed with the police today in the worst confrontation since the Government announced major political concessions a week ago.


Children Play a Game Older Than Its Nautical Setting
LEAD: Youngsters from Davidson Avenue Community Day Care Center in the Bronx playing ring-around-the-rosie on visit to the South Street Seaport. (NYT/Dith Pran)


METS, BRAVES RAINED OUT
LEAD: Somewhere between torrents, the Mets and the Atlanta Braves played one inning of baseball tonight.
But it was an inning -and a game - washed away by rain, and now the two teams will play a twilight-night doubleheader Tuesday beginning at 5:40 P.M.


Chip Inquiry In Europe
LEAD: The commission of the European Community said today that it was investigating charges that Japanese companies were selling semiconductors at unfairly low prices in the European market.


NORTH: FROM 'NATIONAL HERO' TO RELUCTANT WITNESS
LEAD: At a hearing of the House Foreign Affairs Committee last December, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North proclaimed, ''I don't think there is another person in America that wants to tell the story as much as I do.''


Treatments for Sweating
LEAD: People who sweat excessively may be helped by medication usually prescribed for heart patients or by exposing a hand or foot immersed in water to a mild electric shock, researchers say.


The Critical Questions
LEAD: When Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North begins testifying Tuesday before the select Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair, investigators hope he can answer these critical questions:


INQUIRY SOUGHT ON CATTLE VIRUS LINK TO AIDS
LEAD: Jeremy Rifkin, an outspoken critic of genetic engineering and other biotechnologies, today asked three Federal agencies to determine whether cattle viruses play a role in causing AIDS.


REDISCOVERING HISTORY OF CHINA IN RARE BOOKS
LEAD: Zhang Jiaqu was moving slowly through the ceiling-high shelves of Chinese books in the New York Public Library when he spotted a 16th-century history of Nanjing that he recognized as rare and important.


European Notes In U.S. Market
LEAD: The European Investment Bank, the European Community's bank for long-term finance, yesterday announced the beginning of a $500 million medium-term note program in the United States.


Opposition Seen To Robins Merger
LEAD: Women injured by the A. H. Robins Company's Dalkon Shield contraceptive device are likely to oppose the Rorer Group Inc.'s proposed takeover of the drug company, a lawyer representing the health claimants said.


European Jobless Drop
LEAD: The average unemployment rate for the European Community fell to 10.7 percent in May, from 11 percent in April, according to Eurostat, the trading bloc's statistical service.
Figures released today by Eurostat show that the total number of unemployed people in the nine member countries fell to 12.32 million people in May, from 12.69 million in April.


REAGAN URGES FARM CHANGES
LEAD: The Reagan Administration today proposed a ''total phase-out'' over the next 10 years of agricultural subsidies around the world that affect the international trade of farm products.


SKIPPER'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 14
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SKIPPER'S INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 14
1987
1986
Revenue
17,678,000
18,529,000
Net inc
304,000
b502,000
Share earns
.11
-
6mo rev
35,455,000
36,722,000
Net inc
716,000
b260,000
Share earns
.26
-
b-Net loss and results include a pre- tax charge of $975,000 from the sale of three Zackly's Restaurants in Florida.


Mrs. North Interviewed
LEAD: Life Magazine declines to say who conducted an interview with Betsy North, the wife of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, in the new issue.
The magazine will identify its reporter only as a ''friend'' of the North family who has a background in journalism and wishes to remain anonymous.


RESORT: FENDI, ARMANI, VALENTINO
LEAD: Giorgio Armani likes divided skirts, in thin silks or light wools, to go with his classic jackets.
Karl Lagerfeld, in his ready-to-wear collection for Fendi, shows a lot of easy chemise dresses along with boxy jackets.
Valentino's new clothes are snug and sexy, with belted waistlines and tilted hemlines.


Networks Will Carry Washington Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 9 A.M. on Channels 2, 4, 7, 13 and 49, and on CNN.
Other channels may pre-empt or interrupt programming for live or taped coverage.


AGE NO BARRIER FOR THREE SISTERS
LEAD: The gold medal 75-year-old Sylvia Swartz brought back home from St.
Louis was not decorative jewelry.
The great-grandmother from Forest Hills, Queens, won it for finishing first in her age division of the women's shot-put at the first United States Senior Olympics.
The event, contested by 2,700 athletes over 55 years of age, was held last week at Washington University, the site of the 1904 St.


Cellular Phone Pact
LEAD: The Washington Post Company said it had agreed to sell its Florida cellular telephone properties to the McCaw Communications Companies.
The Washington Post Company owns 100 percent of the Miami-Fort Lauderdale cellular system and about 13 percent of the Palm Beach system.
The sale price was not disclosed, but The Washington Post Company said the sale was expected to produce an after-tax gain of about $110 million.


MEESE LAWYERS ASSAIL ETHICS OFFICIAL ON WEDTECH STATEMENT
LEAD: Lawyers for Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d attacked the director of the Office of Government Ethics today as they released documents detailing Mr.
Meese's financial partnership with a consultant to the Wedtech Corporation.


Tinning Jury to Hear Testimony on Deaths
LEAD: Reversing an earlier ruling, the judge in the murder trial of Mary Beth Tinning, who is accused of smothering her infant daughter, ruled today that testimony about the deaths of the woman's eight other children can be given at the trial.


ARCO Rating Rise Studied
LEAD: The long-term rating on about $6.8 billion of debt issued by ARCO is under review for possible upgrading, Moody's Investors Service said yesterday.


5 YOUNG LAWYERS WHO WOULD BE HEROS... AND A MARINE WHO WEARS A HERO'S RIBBONS
LEAD: For talented young prosecutors, it is the best assignment since the fall of Richard M. Nixon.


U.S. FINES CHRYSLER $1.5 MILLION, CITING WOKERS' EXPOSURE TO PERIL
LEAD: The Federal Government today fined the Chrysler Corporation more than $1.5 million, the largest penalty it has ever imposed for job health and safety violations.


Sidewalk Selling For a City Aquarium
LEAD: Children at a lemonade stand in New Orleans.
The proceeds from the stand are to benefit a city aquarium, whose construction was approved by voters in a referendum Nov. 4.


SOME VICTIMS' KIN SUSPICIOUS OF BOXCAR SURVIVOR
LEAD: Families of some of the 18 Mexicans who suffocated in a boxcar say that the sole survivor helped recruit some of the group for the trip to Dallas, a Mexican state official said today.


WARHOL AND WARSHIPS
LEAD: The purchase order was for $800 worth of spare parts for a submarine.
But the package that was delivered to the Charleston Naval Base contained an Andy Warhol painting of Queen Elizabeth II.


FOOTBALL BUSINESS
LEAD: Not only does a profitable big-time college football program help support other university varsity sports programs, the chances are good that it will also bring a hefty shot of economic properity to area business.


COURT AFFIRMS BAN ON LEADING ROLES FOR WOMEN IN SCOUTING
LEAD: The Connecticut Supreme Court affirmed today the right of the Boy Scouts of America to bar women from leadership positions.


Antilles Move Expected To Increase Offerings
LEAD: More American companies than previously expected may soon be tapping the United States debt market for funds because of the Treasury's decision to end a 40-year-old tax treaty with the Netherlands Antilles next Jan. 1, according to some securities analysts.


Advest Aide Is Suspended
LEAD: The former head of the mutual funds department at Advest Inc., a Hartford-based brokerage firm, was ordered suspended today after the firm was censured for overcharging mutual funds customers on sales commissions.


IN CHILE, THE POLITICS OF REGISTERING TO VOTE
LEAD: To the Editor:


Joy Technologies
LEAD: Joy Technologies Inc. of Pittsburgh, said it had signed a definitive agreement to sell its compressor business, I. C. Group Inc., to Cooper Industries for $140 million.
Cooper is a diversified worldwide manufacturer.
I.C.'s operations include centrifugal compressor operations in Buffalo and rotary screw and reciprocating compressor facilities in Michigan City, Ind., and Grove, Okla.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Why do some people's body joints ache in bad weather?


INSIDE
LEAD:  Lobby's Skill a Model


ALICE KAVOOKJIAN
LEAD: Alice Kavookjian, a philanthropist and a prominent member of the Armenian community, died of heart failure Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 86 years old.


AT JACOB'S PILLOW FESTIVAL, ACCENT IS ON THE AUDACIOUS
LEAD: The Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, under way in Becket, Mass., traces its roots to 1930, when Ted Shawn, the American modern dance pioneer, bought a hardscrabble farm in the Berkshire woods.
Three years later, Mr.
Shawn launched his Men Dancers company at the farm.
The concept of an all-male troupe was audacious.


McCall Pattern's Head Pleased by New Owner
LEAD: The McCall Pattern Company has been through several ownership changes that were not all good for its business.
But being sold to its new owner, a British company called the John Crowther Group, ''is probably the best thing that ever happened to us,'' said Robert L. Hermann.


Bill Signed in Connecticut Permits Drug Testing
LEAD: As Gov.
William A. O'Neill signed a bill permitting drug testing in the workplace, a top official in the labor movement in Connecticut said it should be used as a model by other states.


Tamil Rebels Kill At Least 20 In Raid on a Sri Lanka Camp
LEAD: Tamil separatist guerrillas blew up a Sri Lankan army camp on the Jaffna peninsula today and killed at least 20 soldiers, the Government reported.


INSURANCE SALESMAN SENTENCED TO DEATH IN THE SLAYING OF 4 GIRLS
LEAD: Michael B. Ross, standing silently and without expression, was sentenced today to death in the electric chair for the murder of four teen-age girls in eastern Connecticut in 1983 and 1984.


DYNAMICS RESEARCH CORP reports earnings for 12wks to June 13
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYNAMICS RESEARCH CORP (OTC)
12wks to June 13
1987
1986
Revenue
21,541,000
17,819,000
Net inc
781,000
546,000
Share earns
.19
.14
24wk rev
39,904,000
34,979,000
Net inc
1,454,000
1,060,000
Share earns
.36
.26


Club Med Returning To Ammirati &amp; Puris
LEAD: Club Med is returning to Ammirati &amp; Puris, the agency that developed the line ''Club Med Vacation.
The Antidote For Civilization.'' And its ad budget is $11 million.
The antidote for agency management depression.


Graphic AIDS-Prevention Film Ready for Airing
LEAD: A 27-minute documentary graphically showing ways of preventing AIDS will be distributed this week by a nonprofit organization that hopes the film will reach millions of Americans.


BOND PRICES CONTINUE CLIMB
LEAD: Bond prices moved moderately higher in light trading yesterday, helped by another strong performance by the dollar on foreign currency markets.


Travels of a Diner
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE RESTAURANT GAME: A FRENETIC TALE OF SURVIVAL
LEAD: FOR 10 years Zeus Goldberg presided over Woods, a popular restaurant on Madison Avenue in the 60's that managed to be elegant but not intimidating.
Three weeks ago Mr.
Goldberg presided over the restaurant's closing, watching from a barstool as an auctioneer disposed of dishes, cutlery and kitchen equipment.


BERENTER GREENHOUSE GETS H-O HOT CEREALS
LEAD: Nutrition Industries of Cresskill, N.J., which specializes in the resuscitation of widely known but not necessarily healthy brands, has turned to the Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster agency for help with H-O hot cereals.


Health Care for All Is a Public Responsibility
LEAD: To the Editor:


BLACK OFFICIALS SIDE WITH BARRY
LEAD: Several groups of black elected officials charge in court papers that a Federal inquiry into possible contract corruption in the District of Columbia government is part of a widespread effort by the nation's ''white power structure'' to discredit black leaders.


Washington Talk: Commission of Fine Arts; Arbiters of Monumental Taste
LEAD: One cannot, it is said, legislate taste.
But for most of this century, a little-known Federal agency has been at least regulating taste by judging the esthetic values of proposals for monuments, memorials and statues that seem forever to be springing up here.


DISCOVERIES
LEAD:  1.A Chocolate Zoo For a weekend house gift, consider this wide-eyed alligator.
Its mouth is filled with Manon's gold-wrapped chocolate coins.
The alligator is part of a collection of whimsical chocolate-filled animal boxes that includes a tiger, a bear, a zebra and a giraffe.
The price is $25 at Le Chocolatier Manon, 872 Madison Avenue (near 71st Street).


SOUTHLAND SUITS FILED
LEAD: The Thompson family, which plans to take the Southland Corporation private, said that some of its shareholders have filed suit to prevent the $5.1 billion leveraged buyout.
The Thompsons declined to provide details, but said the lawsuits lacked merit.


GERBER LIFTED BY CONJECTURE
LEAD: IN the midst of a search for top executives, the Gerber Products Company found itself the center of takeover conjecture yesterday.
After jumping $4 on Monday, its stock rose $1.50, to $54, after selling at $55.
The record price of $57.625 was set in April 1986 for the world's largest producer of baby foods.


An Air of Confusion Lifts Veil of Secrecy
LEAD: Throughout the joint congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair, investigators and witnesses have taken pains to protect the identities of other countries involved in the case.
It hasn't always worked.


NAVISTAR PROGRAM IS SECURED BY LIEN
LEAD: The Navistar Financial Corporation has established a $100 million Euro-commercial paper program to be secured by a lien on the company's accounts receivable, said Morgan Guaranty Ltd., the dealer and paying agent.


Rain Delays State Golf
LEAD: Persistent rain delayed the start of the Michelob New York State Open tournament today at Grossinger's Hotel and Spa.
As a result, 24 of the 147 competitors did not complete their rounds and will resume play early Wednesday by using Tuesday's pin placements.


AT LEAST 30 DIE IN WEST GERMANY IN EXPLOSION OF A GASOLINE TRUCK
LEAD: A tank truck loaded with gasoline crashed into an ice cream parlor Tuesday night, blew up and set off other explosions, killing at least 30 people and injuring 29, officials said.
The truck driver survived.


FRANCE AND BRITAIN UNEASY WITH U.S. GULF POLICY
LEAD: France and Britain, with considerable experience in the Persian Gulf, are watching the Reagan Administration's activities there with some anxiety while also offering Washington support for a United Nations Security Council resolution intended to put new pressure on Iran.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A Washington dispatch yesterday about the American Israel Public Affairs Committee misstated Jonathan S. Kessler's position with the Presidential campaign of Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr..
Mr.
Kessler is deputy national finance director for the campaign.


PERKS, BUT NO POWER, BEHIND RED VELVET THRONE
LEAD: In the cool silence of his mud-walled, 500-year-old palace here, Alhaji Shehu Idris, 18th Emir of Zaria, paused in conversation, searching for a word to define his link to his 2.5 million subjects.


PRESIDENT'S TRADE ROLE RESTRAINED
LEAD: In one of the key tests for the future of trade legislation this year, the Senate tonight voted to limit Presidential discretion in deciding to grant relief to domestic industries hurt by imports.


IN AUSTRALIA, ECOLOGISTS MAP OUT THE CAMPAIGN
LEAD: In the midst of his current campaign for a third term as Prime Minister, Bob Hawke flew 3,000 miles to the northern tip of the continent to inspect a belt of pristine tropical rain forests.


STOCK MANIPULATION CHARGED
LEAD: One of the nation's biggest players in a fairly new industry - Pre-Paid Legal Services Inc. of Ada, Okla. -says it is being victimized by investors who have been manipulating its stock price.


FOR THE 'CAN DO' COLONEL, ADMISSIONS, NO APOLOGY
LEAD: Through the smirks and winks and teary eyes, through the ''Peck's Bad Boy'' grins and the earnest altar-boy gazes, Oliver North seemed, as always, to be starring in his own movie.


Chernobyl Officials Go on Trial in Soviet Union
LEAD: Viktor P. Bryukhanov, left, former director of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, and its chief engineer, Nikolai M. Fomin, seated, at court yesterday as trial began.
They and four other officials are charged with violating ''the rules of technical security'' in the world's worst nuclear accident.


18 Arrested at Stony Brook
LEAD: Eighteen students at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, L.I., were arrested last night for refusing to take down tents they had set up on campus to protest student housing conditions.
The students were issued summonses by campus police for obstructing governmental administration, according to Kevin Ireland, a university spokesman.


TYSON IS CHARGED
LEAD: Misdemeanor charges of assault with a deadly weapon (hands) and battery have been filed in Los Angeles against Mike Tyson, the World Boxing Council-World Boxing Association heavyweight champion.
The charges stem from a June 21 incident in the parking lot of the Greek Theater, following a concert there.


Poll Hints at Bork Support
LEAD: Forty-nine percent of all Americans believe that a nominee to the Supreme Court should be confirmed by the Senate even though some senators disagree with his ideology, according to a poll for U.S.
News &amp; World Report.
The telephone survey of 1,010 people was conducted June 30 and July 1, just before President Reagan nominated of Judge Robert H.


THOMPSON FAMILY OUTSIDE DALLAS MOLD
LEAD: In Dallas, a city renowned for wealthy families, the Thompson family, which owns the nation's largest convenience store chain, 7-Eleven, does not fit the mold.
The Thompsons are apparently one of the few families that made their fortune with no help from oil and gas, although they did later buy a big stake in


Courts to Speed Up Arrest Reviews
LEAD: Judges in New York City's criminal courts will review the probable cause for all arrests within 24 hours after a suspect has been apprehended, under an agreement reached yesterday between city officials and state administrative judges.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: ADVANCES
LEAD: THE automated body welding line has come to symbolize the modern automobile assembly plant: clusters of robot arms moving like giant insects over bare metal car bodies with sparks flying from welding guns.


PARISH FINED $5,000
LEAD: Robert Parish, starting center for the Boston Celtics, has been fined $5,000 for missing court appearances in a child-support case in Oakland, Calif.
Alameda County Superior Court Judge Alice Sullivan held Parish in contempt Monday for failing to appear for hearings in the case in March 1986 and April 1987 and ordered him to spend five days in jail or pay a fine.


G.O.P. Senators Balk at Accord On Prison Space
LEAD: A major legislative agreement on steps to relieve prison overcrowding was thrown into doubt late tonight by vigorous opposition from dissident Republican Senators who argued that elements of the legislation might grant early parole to dangerous criminals.


ATTRACTING EDUCATED FIGHTER
LEAD: Boxing has long been the fast track for ghetto youth - a way for the kid with slim prospects to make his way in society.


Korean Riot Policemen Allow Peaceful March
LEAD: Riot policemen moved back from the site of clashes with students on Monday, allowing thousands of university students to march peacefully today in honor of a student killed during a recent demonstration.


FASTEST MILES
LEAD: Said Aouita of Morocco came within 44-hundredths of a second of the world record for the mile run early last week at Helsinki, and his effort seemed likely to spur Steve Cram of Britain, the record holder, in the Dream Mile at Oslo last Saturday.
But Cram, although he was two seconds ahead of the record pace after almost three-quarters of a mile, faltered and finished in 3:50.08, not even fast enough to rank among the 10 best miles: Time, runner, country year 3:46.32, Steve Cram, Britain1985 3:46.76, Said Aouita, Morocco1987 3:46.92, Aouita1985 3:47.33, Sebastian Coe, Britain1981 3:47.69,


SEVEN EJECTED IN BEANBALL EXCHANGE
LEAD: Andre Dawson and Benito Santiago were hit by pitches in a beanball exchange today during a game between the San Diego Padres and Chicago Cubs.


I.B.M. ADDS MODEL TO COMPUTER LINE
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation added a new model to its PC Convertible line of portable personal computers.
I.B.M. said the new Model 3 weighs 12.4 pounds and features a backlit screen that is easier to read than the screen on the Model 2.
Priced at $1,695, the Model 3 is available immediately.


NEW MET CASUALTY: DYKSTRA'S MORALE
LEAD: The case of the unhappy center fielders is not likely to be resolved this season, Al Harazin, the Mets' executive vice president, said today, even though Mookie Wilson has asked for a trade and Lenny Dykstra has begun to express his unhappiness with sitting on the bench.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: YOU'RE off to the great outdoors - maybe to hike, canoe, camp or fish.
You've got your bird book and binoculars, a Swiss Army knife, a poncho, a canteen and enough dried food, you think, for three.
But are you really prepared?
Probably not.
Indeed, according to a 1982 telephone survey, even the most experienced outdoors enthusiasts can be injured and not know what to do.


NEVADA DISTRICT'S SCHOOL BONDS SOLD
LEAD: In the tax-exempt market, Nevada's Washoe County School District offered $90.8 million of bonds yesterday through an underwriting group led by the First Boston Corporation.


CALIFORNIA TAXPAYERS TO GET $1 BILLION IN REBATES
LEAD: The taxpayer revolt ignited here almost a decade ago burned bright today for Californians who will get more than $1 billion in rebates under a budget signed by the Governor.


DRIVING IN STYLE
LEAD: When Philippe de Henning and two driving partners won the C-2 class for lighter cars at the Le Mans 24-hour auto race in France last month, it might have been appropriate to describe the rookie's sixth-place overall finish in one of the sport's most grueling tests of skill and endurance as being achieved ''in fine fashion.


Kiwanis International Votes To Let Women Join Its Clubs
LEAD: Kiwanis International, a service organization with clubs all over the world, ended a 72-year policy in a matter of minutes Tuesday with an overwhelming vote allowing its 8,200 clubs to admit women.


Washington Talk: Office of Government Ethics; Taking Lots of Heat From and About Meese
LEAD: Almost a decade ago, in the aftermath of the Watergate scandals, President Carter signed the Ethics in Government Act, a bill designed to help restore the nation's faith in its highest officials by insuring that those officials were in fact deserving of the public trust.


TAKEOVER BID FOR FERMENTA
LEAD: Fermenta A.B., a troubled Swedish biotechnology company, said it had received a takeover offer from Trans-Resources Inc., a New York chemical concern.


Honduran Authorities Ban the Film 'Salvador'
LEAD: The Honduran authoritites have banned the showing of the film ''Salvador,'' directed by Oliver Stone, on the ground that its grim portrayal of El Salvador's civil war threatened state security, according to government sources.


Court Tells Michigan V.F.W. To Pay Tax on Sales of Cards
LEAD: The Michigan department of the Veterans of Foreign Wars must pay taxes on part of the income it earned from selling Christmas cards to members, the United States Tax Court has ruled.


LaROUCHE DENIES GUILT IN PLOT CASE AND RETAINS HIS PASSPORT
LEAD: Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., the frequent Presidential candidate, pleaded not guilty at his arraignment before a Federal magistrate here today on felony charges of conspiracy to obstruct justice.
He was released on $20,000 cash bail put up by an 82-year-old supporter he had never met and a $200,000 unsecured personal bond.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.70
6.73
6.83
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.59
5.68
5.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.80
5.98
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.09
8.14
7.40
30-YR.


Stage: 'Hard Times'
LEAD: ''HARD TIMES'' is not one of Charles Dickens's big novels and may not be one of his best, but as demonstrated by the Berkeley Repertory Theater's dramatization on a welcome visit to Theater 890, it can generate plenty of vitality.
Although the Royal Shakespeare Company's prodigious ''Nicholas Nickleby'' cannot have been absent from the mind of the director, Richard E.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  SARTRE: A Life.
By Annie Cohen-Solal.
Illustrated. 591 pages.
Pantheon Books. $24.95.


BAUSCH &amp; LOMB
LEAD: Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc., the Rochester-based eye-care company, said it had agreed to buy Pharmafair Inc. for $40 million.
Pharmafair, based in Hauppauge, L.I., makes generic pharmaceuticals for eye and ear treatment.
In its fiscal year ended March 31, the privately held company earned $18.4 million, a 55 percent increase from the previous year.


Hunt for Colossus Yields Just a Lump of Rock
LEAD: A quest initiated by a clairvoyant for one of the seven wonders of antiquity came to an abrupt end today when experts decided that a lump of rock, once thought to be part of the Colossus of Rhodes, was no more than, well, a lump of rock.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article yesterday about a visit to the New York area by Soviet experts on alcoholism misstated the Soviet Government's policy regarding Alcoholics Anonymous.
There is no official barrier to the group's activity.


One Rescued and One Missing After Pennsylvania Raft Accident
LEAD: Joseph Wesley Seegars clinging to the skid of a State Police helicopter as he was pulled from the Susquehanna River in Harrisburg Monday night.
His companion, Leonard Evans, is believed to have drowned.
The two men were floating down the river in an inflatable raft when it went over a small dam and capsized.


FROM POLAND, EMIGREES ADD SPIRIT TO ARTS
LEAD: Liliana Komorowka cannot forget a haunting scene from the evening of Dec. 13, 1981 - the day the Polish Government declared martial law and crushed Solidarity.
Tanks and soldiers roamed the streets.
At the Moscow Theater near her Warsaw apartment, the title on the movie marquee seemed to say everything, ''Apocalypse Now.


TODD SHIPYARDS IN SHIFT AT TOP
LEAD: The financially troubled Todd Shipyards Corporation said yesterday that its chairman and chief executive, Hans K. Schaefer, had resigned from those posts and taken a lesser role with the company.


YANKS, DOWN BY 7, RALLY TO BEAT TWINS
LEAD: The events of June 7 were making less and less sense as Joe Niekro fluttered successfully along at the Stadium last night.
Niekro, the 42-year-old pitcher who was dispatched by the Yankees to the Minnesota Twins that day, went to the seventh inning with a seven-run lead against his former teammates.


DARLING STOPS 2 1/2-MONTH SLUMP
LEAD: Their seasons have stood in contrast.
Terry Leach cannot seem to lose; Ron Darling could not seem to win.
But tonight, the two Met pitchers merged at a critical point.


CHERNOBYL TRIAL BEGINS IN SOVIET
LEAD: Six former officials and technicians at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant went on trial today on charges of ''blatant violation'' of safety regulations that caused the world's worst nuclear accident.


Tentative Contract Reached With Jersey Garbage Haulers
LEAD: A tentative contract agreement was reached last night between union and management negotiators, ending the threat of a strike that had been called for 12:01 A.M. today by garbage collectors in 13 northern and central New Jersey counties.


ABORTION, BORK AND THE '88 CAMPAIGN
LEAD: President Reagan's nomination of Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court is pushing the abortion issue back to the center stage of American politics by threatening to unsettle what has been an uneasy truce on the question for the last decade.


PENALTY PROPOSED ON SPORTS AGENTS
LEAD: A sports agent proposed yesterday that all agents accredited by the National Football League Players Association post a $1 million performance bond that would be forfeited if the agent were caught violating National Collegiate Athletic Association regulations.


NORTHERN TELECOM
LEAD: Northern Telecom Inc. introduced a computerized telephone switch that would give local phone companies the ability to provide their customers with advanced information services.
Using the DMS-Supernode switch, phone companies could enable customers to screen calls, identify calling parties, provide a single phone number for users regardless of where they make their calls, and use telephones as part of alarm or energy-management systems, the Nashville phone equipment maker said.


Film: Vietnamese Side Of the War in 'Karma'
LEAD: UNLIKE the Western-made films that have regarded Vietnam as a hellish, bewildering landscape, a terra incognita in which American soldiers are set adrift, Ho Quang Minh's ''Karma'' regards it as home.
The Hanoi-born Mr.
Minh, now a naturalized Swiss citizen, made his film in and around Ho Chi Minh City, as Saigon is now named, working with a Vietnamese cast and crew.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A report in the Executive Changes column of Business Day on Monday about the International Business Machines Corporation incorrectly described a promotion.
David E. McKinney was named to head the corporate operations staff; he also joins the company's management committee and corporate management board.


WINE TALK
LEAD: TO finance some of the wines we'll look at today, bring what is in your wallet; to finance the others, bring a Rockefeller.
Our tour d'horizon takes us through what I think are the first wines made by Greeks that do not taste of retsina (resin), through chardonnays under $10 and then to the wines of La Romanee, a crown jewel among Burgundy's vineyards.


CUOMO ASSAILS WHITE HOUSE ON ITS RECORD ON CIVIL RIGHTS
LEAD: Governor Cuomo criticized the Reagan Administration's record on civil and human rights yesterday as a ''policy of chaos.''


Ballet: New Bolshoi Cast
LEAD: ANOTHER night, another show.
And it was certainly a very different show when the Bolshoi Ballet's Andris Liepa and Lyudmila Semenyaka stepped into the leading roles of ''The Golden Age'' Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.


PROTECTION FOR JOURNALISTS
LEAD: Following is the portion of the New York State shield law that was interpreted yesterday in the Court of Appeals ruling:


SMITHKLINE RAISES SIZE OF OFFERING
LEAD: The SmithKline Beckman Corporation is offering $150 million of 8 3/4 percent notes due in 1994 at 99.70 to yield 8.808 percent through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The offering was increased from $125 million because of strong demand.


South African Blacks Still Need American Help
LEAD: To the Editor:


LONG-DISTANCE CALLS MAY GO UP IN PRICE IN NEW F.C.C. PLAN
LEAD: The era of declining prices for long-distance telephone calls may be nearing an end.


Nields, 'Good Cop,' Chafes in Exchanges
LEAD: John W. Nields Jr., the man who led off the questioning of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, typically plays the role of the ''good cop'' in the committee's interrogation of witnesses.


390 DEATHS FEARED AS BARGE CAPSIZES IN A RIVER IN AFRICA
LEAD: Rescue teams said today that the death toll could be as high as 390 in the sinking of a barge in the Luapula River between Zaire and Zambia.


Let's Stop Reneging on Our U.N. Dues
LEAD: To the Editor:


DANCE IS MORE THAN EXERCISE, NEW JERSEY YOUNGSTERS LEARN
LEAD: FOR 25 years, children here have been stomping through the doors of the Center for Modern Dance Education and gliding out.
Many are enrolled by parents eager for their children to receive a dose of culture.
Others, children with disciplinary problems, are referred by counselors in the Hackensack public-school system.


CORPORATIONS' CHANGES OF NAMES INCREASE
LEAD: More United States corporations changed their names in the first half of this year than in any similar period for the last 18 years, according to Anspach Grossman Portugal, identity consultants of New York and San Francisco.


Advertising; MAGAZINE'S IMAGE CAMPAIGN
LEAD: ON cable TV Sunday night, Changing Times magazine began its first image campaign to deliver the message that it is ''a magazine that helps you manage yourself and your money in a changing world.''


START-UP'S CHALLENGE: RAPID GROWTH
LEAD: THE Convex Computer Corporation struggled for more than three years before making money, using $32 million in venture capital.


Plastic Debris Poses A Threat to Wildlife
LEAD: To the Editor:


AT WHITE HOUSE, THE TV IS TURNED OFF
LEAD: As Administration officials tell it, the White House might have been the only place in the capital today where workers were not focused on the televised testimony of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.


Opera: 'Boris Godunov' in Washington
LEAD: As the final step in a rehearsal process leading to the recording, starting Wednesday, of an album and film soundtrack, Mstislav Rostropovich and his National Symphony presented a concert performance of ''Boris Godunov'' Monday night at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
The nearly five-hour event had its failings and eccentricities.


Windfall for New York
LEAD: To the Editor:


TV Reviews; In Shopping Games, the Bargain Is All
LEAD: IT is a phenomenon, too big to be called just a fad.
Some 25 home-shopping services across the country now operate on cable television.
They sell; we buy.
The transactions are matter of fact.
Come now two programs that go a step further; it's not what you buy but how you buy it.
One program has a bugle call; the other has flashing lights.


ERNA'S FOOD AND A VIEW IN THE SIERRAS
LEAD: ONE of the most elegant and stylish restaurants in the nation is a little-known place nestled in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada some 3,000 feet above sea level, about 40 miles northeast of Fresno, Calif.
I first learned of its existence during a recent visit to San Francisco.


KIDDE STUDIES SALE OR RESTRUCTURING
LEAD: Kidde Inc., maker of Farberware cooking utensils, Jacuzzi whirlpool baths and many other consumer, security and industrial products, said yesterday that it might restructure or sell all or part of the company.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Birthday Presence


JAZZ PHOTO PORTRAITIST
LEAD: Robert Parent, a photographer who specialized in portraits of jazz musicians, died Sunday at Sloane-Kettering Memorial Hospital following an operation for a brain tumor.
He was 63 years old and lived in New York.


LIFE VS. LIVELIHOOD AT CHRYSLER PLANT
LEAD: The Federal Government's finding that some workers were exposed to lead, arsenic and dangerous chemicals has aroused deep anxiety at the Chrysler Corporation plant here, forcing employees to weigh hopes for security against worries over health.


'Dreamgirls' Invites Comparison
LEAD: When Lillias White learned she would be starring on Broadway in ''Dreamgirls,'' her excitement was tempered by considerable apprehension.


Extension on Shelf Life of Milk Looks Political
LEAD: To the Editor:


Highlights of the Testimony
LEAD:  President's role: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North said he never had a discussion with President Reagan about the use of profits from the sales of American weapons to Iran for the purpose of assisting the Nicaraguan rebels.
But he assumed the President had ''authorized'' such use of the profits.


M.A. HANNA SEEKS DAY INTERNATIONAL
LEAD: The M.A.
Hanna Company, a diversified metals and mineral products company in Cleveland, offered $45 a share, or about $315 million, to acquire the Day International Corporation.
On the news, shares of Day jumped to $50 a share, before closing at $49.25, up $14.375, on the New York Stock Exchange today.


F.A.A. NOMINEE URGED TO ADDRESS AIR DELAYS
LEAD: Several senators today urged President Reagan's nominee to head the Federal Aviation Administration to deal immediately with the growing problem of airline flight delays, saying that otherwise, Congress would act on its own.


RETREAT MAY BE CLUB'S LAST WITHOUT WOMEN
LEAD: Members of the Bohemian Club, whose roster includes President Reagan and Vice President Bush, will gather at a sylvan 2,700-acre redwood grove 75 miles north of here on Friday for their 109th annual two-week retreat.
It may be the last retreat without women as members or employees.


A Gathering of Academicians, Sort Of
LEAD: Phoebe Stanton, retired professor of architecture at Johns Hopkins University, reading on a bench outside Hartley Hall at Columbia University as she waited for a friend.
She passed the time near a bust of John Howard Van Amringe, a former dean of Columbia and graduate of the class of 1860. (NYT)


LEAKING WATER HEATER KILLS 8
LEAD: Eight people were found dead at a Memphis apartment complex, killed by carbon monoxide leaking from a hot water heater and spread by an air-conditioner, the authorities said today.


The Witness File
LEAD:  Name: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North  Age: 43  Position: Deputy director of the political-military affairs bureau at the National Security Council from 1981 until dismissed by the President on Nov. 25, 1986.
Now he is on the staff at Marine headquarters in Washington.
Role: Colonel North has been described as the chief operator in the programs to sell American arms to Iran and subsequently to divert profits to the Nicaraguan contras.


TIME FOR MEMORIES ON ROAD TO PARIS
LEAD: Just after a heavy rain ended this morning, a good five hours before the Tour de France was due to pass through this village, a policeman checked the highway for stray dogs.
He returned every so often through the early afternoon.


EMPLOYEES CHALLENGING WORLD BANK'S CHANGES
LEAD: Employees of the World Bank, lashing back at the bank's American president, have brought a class action suit against the institution to delay dismissals of hundreds of economists and other highly skilled professionals, the demotions of hundreds more and position changes for most.


OLYMPIC PLAN DEFINED
LEAD: The International Olympic Committee would cancel rather than move next summer's Olympics if political problems make it impossible to hold them in Seoul, South Korea, The Daily Telegraph, a London-based national newspaper reported yesterday.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, JULY 8, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-10


HANDICAPPED SENIOR GOLFER TO PROTEST BAN ON CARTS
LEAD: Charles Owens, crippled for 35 years from injuries incurred in an accident in the military, says the United States Golf Association discriminates against senior athletes who are handicapped when it refuses to allow him to ride a golf cart in the Senior Open.


The Editorial Notebook; Who's Responsible for 'Safe Sex'?
LEAD: Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton, the advertising agency, recently unveiled three television commercials it made for the New York City Health Department promoting use of condoms to limit AIDS.
One shows a woman handing a package of condoms to her daughter with the words ''If you're doing anything, you use one of these.


Long Lines Make Miss Liberty a Five-Hour Outing
LEAD: A year after the spectacular reopening of the Statue of Liberty, visitors to the national monument are coping with long lines, few information signs and an elevator that has been less than reliable.


Up the Line
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North didn't walk the plank after all.
In his first day of testimony before the Congressional investigating committees, he simply moved the question of responsibility for the Iran-contra affair ''up the line,'' as he said, into the Cabinet Room and the Oval Office.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Japanese Visit Delayed
LEAD: Ever since the Reagan Administration imposed trade sanctions against Japan in April, a principal aim of Japanese foreign policy has been to get them removed.


TEXAS INSTRUMENTS, INTEL IN CHIP ACCORD
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc. and the Intel Corporation said today that they had agreed to cooperate in developing semi-customized computer chips, one of the fastest-growing segments of the semiconductor business.


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, JULY 8, 1987
LEAD: International The Senate defeated, 55 to 41, an amendment to the trade bill that would restore Presidential discretion in deciding to grant relief to domestic industries hurt by imports.
The limiting of Presidential discretion is one of the main provisions of the trade bill and one that the Administration has said could provoke a veto.


Festival Latino Is Shifting Emphasis
LEAD: The 11th Festival Latino in New York, featuring seven theatrical productions, a film festival and a free concert, will run from Aug. 1 through 23 at the Public Theater in Greenwich Village, the Delacorte Theater in Central Park and at the Metro Cinema on upper Broadway.
The festival, which will include presentations from the United States, Latin America and Spain, has been produced by Joseph Papp and the New York Shakespeare


After 50 Years, Soviet to Show Attic Full of Avant-Garde Art
LEAD: For more than half a century, since Socialist Realism became the Soviet Union's only approved form of artistic expression, many abstract creations of Russia's rowdy artistic revolutionaries have been sequestered in a quiet attic of the State Russian Museum here.


Albany Accord Reached On Increasing Pensions
LEAD: Over the objections of Mayor Koch, legislative leaders have agreed to a bill that would supplement the pensions of thousands of state and city workers who retired before 1983.


FOR A SECRET STEW RECIPE, TIME IS RUNNING OUT
LEAD: HAJJI GOLAM HOSSAIN admits he is getting a little tired of biryani, a Mogul mutton stew his family has prepared from a secret recipe for 110 years. ''But I believe in fate,'' he said, ''and my fate is to make hajji biryani in this shop, like my father and my grandfather, for as long as I live.''


Washington Talk: Briefing; Gore Offers to Debate
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr. may have some explaining to do if a debate between Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri takes place.


CORPORATE PRESSURES SLOWING GIFTS TO CHARITY
LEAD: Corporate giving to charities is leveling off or even declining as oil companies and other traditional big contributors scale back because of restructuring pressures.


Sudden Cancellation In Chambers's Hearing
LEAD: Amid controversy over the admissibility of allegations of earlier wrongdoing, the lawyer in Robert Chambers's murder trial withdrew his request for a pretrial hearing yesterday and said Mr.
Chambers would not testify at the trial.


Paris Warns of Break With Iran on Fugitive
LEAD: Prime Minister Jacques Chirac warned today that France might break diplomatic relations with Iran if a fugitive hiding in the Iranian Embassy here does not testify on a series of bombings in Paris last September.


A Cleanup Cover-Up
LEAD: Jaime Maldonado holding an umbrella as he and James Rodriguez picked up litter yesterday at Kelly Street Park in the Bronx.
They are taking part in a summer jobs program. (NYT/Jim Wilson)


DR. WERNER HENLE, VIROLOGICAL PIONEER IN CANCER RESEARCH
LEAD: Dr.
Werner Henle, a noted virologist who with his wife identified the first virus associated with cancers in humans, died of cancer Monday at the Bryn Mawr Hospital in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
He was 76 years old and lived in Philadelphia.


NEW YORK COURT LIMITS PROTECTION TO CONFIDENTIAL NEWS MATERIALS
LEAD: New York's highest court ruled yesterday that journalists' notes or other materials obtained from nonconfidential sources were not covered by a state law protecting news organizations from disclosing information gathered for a news article.


'Promise' Wins Humanitas
LEAD: ''Promise,'' a CBS television movie about a man who is forced to take care of his schizophrenic brother, and episodes of ''Family Ties'' and ''Kate and Allie'' were awarded the Humanitas Prize today for the 1986-87 television season.


Networks Will Carry Washington Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be broadcast live beginning at 9 A.M. on the ABC, CBS and NBC television networks, on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New York and Channel 49 in Connecticut.


AIR CRASH LAID TO FLAW IN CONTROL SYSTEM
LEAD: A Federal board said yesterday that inadequacies of the system for controlling air traffic, rather than human errors, were the prime cause of the collision of an Aeromexico jetliner and a small private plane that killed 82 people near Los Angeles last August.


TV Reviews; 8 Women In 'Miles To Go'
LEAD: ''MILES TO GO,'' tonight at 10:30 on Channel 13, takes eight women along a two-week wilderness trek in North Carolina and Georgia.
The women, ranging in age from 27 to 72 years old, have had little or no wilderness training.
From varying economic, social and cultural backgrounds, they learn to adapt to one another and the wilderness.


Keep the Tax Cleanup Clean
LEAD: There is a 503-page tax bill in the Congressional hopper this year, and it is just a postscript.
The bill cleans up mistakes in last year's big tax reform law.
Like every big tax revision, it had dozens of errors.
With loophole lobbyists waiting to enlarge them, the trick will be to keep the cleanup bill clean.


THE POP LIFE
LEAD:  Baez Finds Her Voice


DEATHS FROM AIDS SOAR IN NEW YORK
LEAD: The number of New York City residents who died of AIDS last year was 2,650, up by more than 59 percent from the 1985 number, according to the City Health Department, which also noted a significant increase in AIDS deaths among women.


DR. FLORENCE HOLLIS
LEAD: Dr.
Florence Hollis, a professor emeritus at the Columbia University School of Social Work, died Thursday at Crosslands, a retirement community in Kennett Square, Pa.
She was 80 years old.


EVEN AT AGE 3, ROSE MADE MARK
LEAD: Pete Rose was 3 years old when he connected solidly with a pitch served up by his father, Harry, and drove a hard rubber-coated ball to right-center field, over and out of the backyard ball field and against a glass window pane that promptly cracked in the kitchen of the Rose home on Braddock Avenue in


GENENTECH LOSES PATENT
LEAD: In its second major setback in six weeks, Genentech Inc., a leading biotechnology company, lost the British patent for what it expects to become its main product, tissue plasminogen activator.
The Chancery Division of the


OESTER CAREER IN DOUBT
LEAD: Ron Oester, the Cincinnati Reds' second baseman who was injured Sunday on a take-out slide by Mookie Wilson of the Mets, is through for the season and faces a challenge to resume his career at all because of a devastating knee injury that involves ligament and cartilage damage.
The surgery performed


Women in Court
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''I have never carried out a single act, not one, in which I did not have authority from my superiors.
I haven't in the 23 years that I have been in the uniformed services of the United States of America ever violated an order, not one.''
- Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North.  [ A1:6.


THE COLONEL STATES HIS CASE: COUNTRY AND ORDERS ABOVE ALL
LEAD: As the Iran-contra hearings resumed in Washington, the Congressional committees heard yesterday from Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.
Here are excerpts from the testimony, as recorded by The New York Times.


PAIEMENT A PENGUIN
LEAD: Looking for muscle to protect their star center, Mario Lemieux, the Pittsburgh Penguins announced the signing of the 12-year veteran Wilf Paiement, a right wing who became a free agent after scoring 20 goals and 17 assists for the Buffalo Sabres last season.
Paiement has 354 goals, 452 assists and 1,718 penalty minutes in 923 games during his career.


A CAPTIVE JOURNALIST SAYS, ON A VIDEOTAPE, HE SPIED
LEAD: A kidnapped American journalist appeared today in a videotape turned over by his captors, who said in a separate statement that he was under interrogation as an American spy.


Miss Liberty Still Packing Them In
LEAD: Visitors on their way to see the Statue of Liberty.
A year after its reopening, long lines are still the order of the day when visiting the monument.
Page B3. (The New York Times/Don Hogan Charles


'PEOPLE USED TO WALK UP TO TELL ME WHAT A GREAT JOB I DID'
LEAD: Under questioning by John W. Nields Jr., the House committee's chief counsel, Lieut Col.
Oliver L. North insisted yesterday that he believed his superiors knew about his actions.
This exchange occurred during questioning about a false chronology.


JERSEY SCHOOL STRIKERS WIN JAIL REPRIEVE
LEAD: Jail terms were temporarily delayed today for 97 teachers and other school workers who staged an illegal strike last spring in Lyndhurst, N.J.


CORPORATE TENANTS IN QUEENS
LEAD: WHEN 400 acres of vacant land surrounding the now dormant Flushing Airport in the College Point section of Queens was chosen by the city for development in the late 1960's, the idea was to bring jobs to the borough by selling manufacturers on the area's accessibility by truck to New England, Long Island and the rest of the city.


MUSIC: MOSTLY MOZART, WITH ALICIA DE LARROCHA
LEAD: BY the time Gerard Schwarz gave the downbeat last night to open the 1987 Mostly Mozart festival, one had begun to wonder if what was about to take place was a concert or an episode of the soap opera ''General Hospital.'' The flutist Jean-Pierre Rampal, scheduled to be one of three soloists on the gala opening program, canceled because of a bronchitis and flu attack.


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: I HAVE returned from the birthday party wars.
My side lost.
Balloons were broken, jelly sandwiches fell jelly-side-down on wall-to-wall carpets, the wine for the adults ran out.
Two of the same dinosaurs were received as gifts (they were stegosauruses).
There were whistles as party favors, in violation of human decency.


A YOGURT DRINK WITH CARIBBEAN ROOTS
LEAD: HERE in the stark and sparsely populated region of Vermont known as the Northeast Kingdom, the closest thing to Hispanic cuisine is a glutinous taco in the frozen food section of the local grocery store.
Still, this is the headquarters of La Vida Foods, the manufacturer of a yogurt drink called boruga that has seldom been found - until now - outside the


TENNIS
LEAD: Sundstrom Upsets Leconte: Hendrik Sundstrom of Sweden upset top-seeded Henri Leconte of France, 3-6, 6-2, 6-4, in the first round of the Swiss Open in Gstaad yesterday.
Mikael Pernfors of Sweden, seeded fifth, beat Jakob Hlasek of Switzerland, 6-2, 6-4, and Anders Jarryd, seeded sixth, also of Sweden, defeated Roland Stadler of Switzerland, 6-3, 6-4.


BORK ON HIS EVOLUTION: FAR FROM THE NEW DEAL
LEAD: Judge Robert H. Bork, whose nomination to the Supreme Court has spawned a bitter ideological battle between President Reagan and Senate liberals, said today that he was not asked his views or asked to make commitments on specific issues before Mr.
Reagan chose him last week.


FORD UNIT MARKETING NOTES AT 8.23%
LEAD: In the corporate bond market, issuers offered about $1 billion of new debt securities yesterday.
Most of them were met by strong investor demand, traders said, with interest focusing on shorter-term, rather than longer-term, maturities.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: DURING my childhood in France, it was necessary to wait for certain foods to come into season, be it asparagus, woodland strawberries or venison.
Today, of course, there is almost no food that cannot be had both in and out of season.
But I still look forward to fresh local foods that arrive without the benefit of several hours' travel by air: the first shad, for example, or the first soft-shell crabs; the first morels, or the first new peas and ears of corn.


North's Patriotic Lies
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North, in his somewhat slippery opening testimony to the combined House-Senate committees, was absolutely clear and absolutely right about one point: Lies are the ''essence'' of covert operations.


PRESIDENT FIRM ON TAX STANCE
LEAD: A Treasury official refused today to help Congressional tax writers narrow the list of options for raising $19.3 billion in taxes, citing President Reagan's opposition to new taxes.
The official, Dennis Ross, the


Footbridge, Struck by Truck, Falls on Expressway in Queens
LEAD: The twisted frame of a steel and concrete footbridge lay across the northbound lanes of the Van Wyck Expressway at Jewel Avenue in the Forest Hills section.
Police officials said the bridge was struck by a tractor-trailer.
The driver of the truck and two people in a car were slightly injured; no one was on the bridge.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Those Canadian Subs
LEAD: United States military officials -and military contractors - will be all ears today when Canada's Defense Minister, Perrin Beatty, elaborates on his country's new military strategy in a speech before the Ripon Society at the Park Hyatt Hotel.


GLOBAL EFFECTS OF REAGAN FARM PLAN RAISE FEARS
LEAD: The Reagan Administration's proposal to phase out subsidies and import barriers in agricultural trade could throw a large number of farmers out of work around the world, government officials and trade experts said today.


Judge Blocks Sale of Federal Housing Projects
LEAD: A Federal judge has temporarily blocked the Reagan Administration from selling nearly 300 federally subsidized housing projects to private investors on Wednesday.


People
LEAD: John Blauner has been promoted to senior vice president of FCB/LKP Targeted Marketing Services, the direct response and sales promotion division of FCB/Leber Katz Partners.


Illegal Load Of Asbestos Discovered
LEAD: Acting on a tip, city sanitation officials discovered more than 10 tons of asbestos late Monday and yesterday scattered over a Bronx parking lot and illegally stored in two trucks parked there.


The Star Witness
LEAD: Oliver North began his long-awaited testimony on the Iran-contra affair by scolding Congress for insufficient loyalty to the Nicaraguan rebels.
That story line ran throughout the appearance of the Marine lieutenant colonel who would be king or loyal servant, depending on whose testimony the Congressional committee will find credible.


Free at Last in the Milk Market
LEAD: Overcoming bitter resistance from the dairy lobby, New York has finally agreed to phase out its Depression-era dairy licensing system.
That's welcome news for milk consumers - mostly children, mostly poor - who stand to benefit from savings estimated at $100 million a year.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Nutrition News


Wagner Wins 2d Term at Board of Education
LEAD: Robert F. Wagner Jr. was elected to his second term as president of the New York City Board of Education yesterday.
He said one of his goals in the coming year was to obtain a commitment from businesses ''to hire any student graduating from a New York City high school.''


Bridge: In September, National Unit Will Mark 50th Anniversary
LEAD: Sept. 15 will be a notable date on the bridge calendar for three reasons, all connected with the American Contract Bridge League.


TRAILING BY 8-1, PHILLIES WIN
LEAD: Luis Aguayo broke an 8-8 tie with a 10th-inning double tonight as the Philadelphia Phillies rallied to defeat the Cincinnati Reds, 10-8.


CALIFORNIA PASTIME COMING TO THE EAST
LEAD: It may sound more like a southern California tribal ritual, or even the title of a low-budget movie, but beach volleyball is now established as a professional sport with a sizable crowd following.
It is also moving East.


NORTH INSISTS HIS SUPERIORS BACKED IRAN-CONTRA DEALS; ASSUMES REAGAN APPROVED
LEAD: After more than seven months of silence, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North finally testified in public today and insisted, often in combative tones, that the secret operations he ran out of the White House were conducted only under orders from his superiors.


Rostenkowsi Recuperating
LEAD: Dan Rostenkowski, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, was in good condition after undergoing an appendectomy Monday night in Chicago, the Illinois Democrat's office said today. ''The operation was routine with no complications,'' the statement said. ''Chairman Rostenkowski is planning to return to Washington next week.


JET LANDING IS 19 MILES OFF
LEAD: Confused by thunderstorms and look-alike runways, two Delta Air Lines pilots set their jet down in Frankfort today when they meant to land in Lexington, 19 miles away.


GEORGE'S FIRST BLACK COACH
LEAD: When John McLendon heard that George Steinbrenner had brought his name up as one of the examples that would demonstrate that there was no racism in his history, John McLendon was, he said, ''amused.''


Washington Talk: Briefing; Waiting for Greenspan
LEAD: Five weeks after the President named Alan Greenspan to succeed Paul A. Volcker as head of the Federal Reserve, the Senate Banking Committee has yet to receive the documents it needs to begin the confirmation process.
When asked yesterday when a hearing would take place, a committee aide said it might be late next week at the earliest.


BERKELEY EGGHEADS TESTED
LEAD: How does one drop a raw egg 80 feet onto hard concrete without having it, well, egg-splode?


BANKS WIN RULING ON EXPANSION
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today upheld a Federal Reserve Board decision clearing the way for banks to offer both investment advice and brokerage services to institutional or wealthy clients.


Ethics Code Approved After Postal Scandals
LEAD: The Postal Service's scandal-plagued Board of Governors unanimously adopted an ethics code today.
The action follows more than a year of investigations that have seen the vice chairman sentenced to prison and the chairman resign under a cloud.


FIVE AGENCIES IN HYATT RACE
LEAD: The five ad agencies selected to compete for the Hyatt Hotels Corporation's $8 million advertising account were announced in Chicago yesterday by Hyatt.


SIKHS SUSPECTED
LEAD: At least 34 Hindu bus passengers were killed Tuesday night by suspected Sikh terrorists in the northern state of Haryana, raising the death toll in two nights of terrorist attacks to at least 72, officials said.


MARYLAND JUDGE CASTS DOUBT ON PLAN FOR 2 NEW STADIUMS
LEAD: A Maryland judge has cast a shadow over Gov.
William Donald Schaefer's drive for a $200 million complex of two new professional sports stadiums in downtown Baltimore.


COMPANY NEWS;
LEAD: Two former executives of Refco International Futures have been awarded $30 million by a Federal District Court jury in Manhattan after they charged that the firm and its largest partner, Thomas H. Dittmer, had stolen the futures trading business that they had set up.
Mr.
Dittmer's lawyer said that he would appeal.


IS SEIZED
LEAD: A 35-year-old wanted for jumping bail on a weapons charge was arrested in East Harlem yesterday after he ran two red lights and offered $20,000 to the two police officers who arrested him, authorities said.


Corrections
LEAD: A dispatch on June 29 from Bnei Brak, Israel, about Israel's religious conflicts misstated the practice of Agudat Israel party members regarding military service.
No Agudat Israel women serve in the army, but a small number of the party's young men do.


CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER IS NAMED AT CETUS CORP.
LEAD: The Cetus Corporation, which is developing biotechnology-based pharmaceuticals, announced a change in top management yesterday.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
July 3
June 26
July 4
1987
1987
1986
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.3
7.1
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.9
2.7
Gasoline stocks
231.0
230.7
226.6
Distillate stocks
104.2
102.6
106.1
Crude imports, daily
4.5
5.3
4.5
Product imports, daily
2.0
2.2
1.7
Crude stocks
324.1
325.6
319.8
Crude production, daily
8.4
8.4
8.6
Refinery utilization (%)
87.0
86.3
83.0


ON FIRST DAY, SPOTLIGHT IS ON LAWYERS SPARRING
LEAD: The public got its first glimpse today of the lawyerly street fighting that has rumbled for months over when and how Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North would tell his story to Congress.


Travels With Baby
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Excerpts From Court Decision on the Shield Law
LEAD: Following are excerpts from opinions by the New York State Court of Appeals yesterday in the case of Knight-Ridder Broadcasting Inc. v.
Sol Greenberg, Albany County District Attorney.
Judge Fritz W. Alexander presented the court's opinion, joined by Judges Richard D. Simons, Vito J. Titone and Stewart F.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Speaking Up for Hart
LEAD: Senator Gore and five other Democratic members of the Senate Rules Committee - Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island, Daniel K. Inouye of Hawaii, Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, Brock Adams of Washington and Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut - say the Federal Election Commission was wrong in its preliminary decision last month denying Gary Hart's bid for matching


GULF BAN OPPOSED BY 12 IN CONGRESS
LEAD: In a severe blow to Congressional efforts to block the Administration's Persian Gulf strategy, 12 members of the House Armed Services Committee unanimously agreed today not to vote to block the Reagan Administration's plans to fly American flags on Kuwaiti oil tankers and to give the merchant ships naval escorts.


Let the U. N. Reflag Gulf Vessels
LEAD: The specter of a widened conflict in the Persian Gulf raised by prospective United States reflagging of Kuwaiti ships and provision of safe transit for Kuwaiti cargoes on Soviet vessels leased to Kuwait has created consternation in Congress, queasiness among our allies and concern even in the Administration.


PROTEST MARCH AT HAITI PALACE
LEAD: Several thousand Haitian protesters marched in front of the presidential palace here today as anti-Government strikes continued to paralyze the country.


A Plane From Haiti Crashes Carrying 4 American Tourists
LEAD: A small plane leaving Haiti with four American tourists and a Dominican pilot apparently lost its way and crashed at sea, but two passengers were said to have made it to shore, an American official said Tuesday.


SOTHEBY'S SOUTH AFRICA
LEAD: Sotheby's, the international auctioneering house, said today that it had sold its small South African operation to local management.
Sotheby's Sougt Africa managing director, Stephan Weiz, said the sale was arranged after Sotheby's American owners became uncomfortable about the country's political situation.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: ON the loveliest of early summer days Larry Peters decided to spend his lunch hour in Central Park.
He found the perfect grassy knoll just off the entrance at 59th Street and Seventh Avenue.
There, he stretched out, took off his shoes and settled down for a peaceful read.
After half an hour or so he dozed off into a sunny sleep.


FOR FOLIES-BERGERE, 100 NAUGHTY YEARS
LEAD: The Folies-Bergere, that legendary dream machine, is celebrating its 100th birthday with its first new show in five years: a splashy, glittering, utterly ephemeral extravaganza entitled ''Folies en Folie.''


PRECIOUS METALS DROP, REACTING TO TESTIMONY
LEAD: Prices of precious metals futures declined yesterday, reflecting relief among traders that Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North did not directly implicate President Reagan in diverting arms sales profits to Central America.


NEW YORKERS ARE FASCINATED BY THE NORTH DRAMA
LEAD: Something about the man, many New Yorkers said yesterday, compelled them to turn office time into clandestine sessions with their radios or covert missions to the display areas of appliance stores.


PACIFIC UTILITY'S $250 MILLION ISSUE
LEAD: A $250 million financing by the Pacific Gas and Electric Company was awarded yesterday to underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in competitive bidding.


LED THE MILITARY IN NEW YORK
LEAD: Maj.
Gen.
Almerin C. O'Hara, a former commander of New York State's organized militia and former State Commissioner of General Services, died of prostate cancer Sunday at the Norway Nursing Home in Norway, Me.
He was 76 years old and had lived for many years in Boynton Beach, Fla.


About New York; Group Therapy For the Victims Of Space Aliens
LEAD: Oh, sure, it's an enormous thrill and you do suddenly become the focus of attention at parties, but being abducted by aliens from outer space is not all it's cracked up to be.


HOW TO GAUGE INFLATION RATE
LEAD: SOME days, inflation seems worse than others.


Yonkers Council Approves Housing Integration Plan
LEAD: The City Council tonight approved housing integration measures demanded by a Federal judge who had threatened the city with a contempt of court citation and crippling daily fines.


Clinton to Decide Next Week
LEAD: Gov.
Bill Clinton will announce July 15 whether he intends to join the crowded field seeking the 1988 Democratic Presidential nomination, his office said today. ''I'm talking about the central decision - to run or to drop it, to go or not to go,'' said his press secretary, Mike Gauldin.
Mr.
Clinton, in his fourth term as Governor, has been deliberating for weeks about whether to join the race.


DOLLAR MOSTLY UP IN U.S. AND TOPS 150-YEN LEVEL
LEAD: The dollar was mostly higher in domestic trading yesterday, closing above the psychologically important 150-yen level for the first time in more than three months.
The market reacted positively to testimony by Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North before the Iran-Contra Congressional committee.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Integration Plan Approved


PRESIDENT BRINGS OUT CIVIC PRIDE
LEAD: At Packy's Restaurant on Broad Street, Jean Pac, one of the owners, proudly remembers the day in the mid-1970's when a visiting Cardinal from Poland, who later became Pope John Paul II, dropped in for lunch.


MCGREGOR IS OPTIONED
LEAD: Scott McGregor, struggling with a 2-7 record and 6.69 earned run average, was optioned to Rochester of the International League Monday night by the Baltimore Orioles. ''This is not exactly what I wanted to do,'' said the 33-year-old McGregor, who had to agree to the move. ''But if this is my only option, I'm all for it.


HEATED EXCHANGE: WERE FUNDS 'BEGGED FOR' OR 'OFFERED'?
LEAD: Exchanges between Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and John W. Nields Jr., the chief House counsel, often grew heated at the hearings yesterday, as Colonel North passionately defended himself and his cause.
These exchanges occurred during questioning about Colonel North's authority for his actions, and about the practice of soliciting money for the contras.


TEXAS AND MISSISSIPPI EXECUTIONS ARE CARRIED OUT AFTER PLEAS FAIL
LEAD: Two men, both convicted of committing murders in robberies, were executed early today, one in the Mississippi gas chamber, the other by lethal injection in Texas.


15 HOPEFULS BACK PARTIES' DEBATES
LEAD: All the current Republican and Democratic Presidential candidates have agreed that the two nominees will participate in the general election debates being sponsored by the parties, though they are free to appear as well in a rival series planned by the League of Women Voters.


ROADWAY SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROADWAY SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 20
1987
1986
Revenue
435,736,000
894,914,000
Net inc
9,982,000
17,569,000
Share earns
.25
.44
6mo rev
849,771,000
794,164,000
Net inc
21,120,000
33,711,000
Share earns
.53
.84


A Colonel Without Protection: North Builds a Fence Against Terror Attack
LEAD: Under questioning by John W. Nields Jr., the House committee's chief counsel, Colonel North described the reasons for the installation of a security system at his home.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I sincerely believe that I did everything within the law.
I made serious judgment errors.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Tuesday about June automobile sales included incorrect figures for light trucks.
The total number of trucks sold in the month was 454,821, an increase of 10.3 percent from June 1986.


NORTH CONTRADICTS THE TESTIMONY OF OTHERS ON CONTRA AID EFFORTS
LEAD: In the months that the nation waited for Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North to speak, many predicted that he would ''fall on his sword'' to protect his superiors, colleagues and President Reagan.


SYSTEMATICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYSTEMATICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
38,292,000
31,830,000
Net inc
2,319,000
3,019,000
Share earns
.21
.27
Yr rev
141,577,000
122,599,000
Net inc
10,162,000
11,363,000
Share earns
.93
1.03


Personal Use of Funds? 'I Never Took a Penny'
LEAD: In response to questions that have been raised about his use of money from the covert operation in support of the Nicaraguan rebels, Colonel North offered his account of the transactions.


CAVENDISH EVENT DEPARTS FROM AMERICAN TRADITION
LEAD: Players in Europe are accustomed to the idea of representing a club, a city, a county, a province or a country.
The American tradition is individualist: players represent themselves and their friends at every level short of the world championship.


U.S. Reported to Thwart a Marcos Coup Plot
LEAD: The United States Government has uncovered information that Ferdinand E. Marcos was planning to instigate an armed insurrection in the Philippines this Friday in hopes of returning to power, officials said today.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: ALTHOUGH hot-melt glue guns have been available for almost 10 years, they were slow to catch on.
In the past few years, new models that are far superior to the original versions have been introduced.
So have adhesives and caulking materials that are much stronger and more versatile.


No Headline
LEAD: New York City will start offering confidential AIDS testing this summer to any city jail inmate who requests it, Mayor Koch announced last night.


TRADE BILL: SENATE TEST ON LAYOFFS
LEAD: The Senate tentatively adopted a proposal this evening to require employers to give 60 days' notice of plant closings or mass layoffs.
But opponents will move Thursday to strike the language.
The outcome is uncertain.


POP: SLEEPY LA BEEF
LEAD: SLEEPY LA BEEF, who made one of his infrequent New York appearances at Tramps on Tuesday, is one of the living masters of the American honky-tonk vernacular.
Like Jerry Lee Lewis, he is primarily an interpretive singer who transforms country, blues, rockabilly, gospel, soul and pop sources into expressions of his own larger-than-life personality.


Town Torn By Penalty For Teachers
LEAD: The last few days have been rough for Lou Bilis, a police officer here, and his wife, Joy, a first-grade teacher at Columbus School.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.55
6.72
6.80
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.59
5.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.56
5.90
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.14
8.09
7.23
30-YR.


The U.N. Today: July 9, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


Tiny WPP's Dramatic Coup
LEAD: THE successful $566 million bid late last month by the WPP Group P.L.C., a tiny British marketing company, for the world's fourth-largest advertising concern, the JWT Group, was a dramatic minnow-swallows-whale corporate tale.
The deal was the most remarkable that Madison Avenue has ever seen, a daring and audacious move by WPP and its 42-year-old chief executive, Martin S.


CBS NET FELL BY 14.1% IN 2D QUARTER
LEAD: CBS Inc. reported lowered second-quarter earnings yesterday, citing the continued lackluster performance of its Broadcast Group.
But analysts said the drastic cost-cutting program mandated by CBS's chief executive, Laurence A. Tisch, was beginning to pay off.


Armstrong Plans To Shut Tire Plant
LEAD: The Armstrong Tire Company plant here will be closed in six months and 1,050 jobs will be eliminated because of unsuccessful attempts to cut costs, the company said.
However, a union official said he still hoped to reach an agreement to avoid the shutdown.


ILLEGAL ALIENS FREED IN TEXAS FROM LOCKED RAILROAD TRAILER
LEAD: Border Patrol agents freed 19 illegal aliens locked in a sweltering railroad trailer today, preventing a tragedy like the one that left 18 aliens dead in West Texas last week, officials said.


WEDTEC ACCUSES EX-MEESE ADVISER OF FRAUD
LEAD: The Wedtech Corporation accused the former financial adviser to Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d and an associate yesterday of submitting more than $315,000 in fraudulent bills to the company, including charges for personal trips to Las Vegas and Australia.


Horror Film Defames Traditional African Belief
LEAD: To the Editor:


FEDERAL PAPER BOARD CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL PAPER BOARD CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 20
1987
1986
Sales
240,990,000
211,581,000
Net inc
b8,574,000
7,527,000
Share earns
.37
.42
6mo sales
470,794,000
419,304,000
Net inc
b19,508,000
9,940,000
Share earns
.93
.50
Shares outst
17,539,000
12,304,000


ALL NEW YORK AUDITIONS AS A SET FOR TV'S 'EQUALIZER'
LEAD: RICHARD BIANCHI stepped onto the roof of the abandoned warehouse.
He looked at the blistered tar at his feet, the decaying wood of the water tower and the rusted walls of the building next door. ''It's beautiful,'' he said. ''Just beautiful.''


Missile Launching Lights Up Night Sky
LEAD: An unarmed Minuteman 2 ballistic missile being launched Tuesday night from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., on a 4,200-mile test flight across the Pacific.
Atmospheric conditions permitted the launching to be seen from San Diego to Sacramento, prompting many calls from alarmed witnesses. ''Everybody thought it was a U.F.O.,'' said Mary Dumey, a police dispatcher in Redding.


Cherokee Have History Of Women Leaders
LEAD: To the Editor:


FLEET FINANCIAL GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLEET FINANCIAL GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b19,234,000
32,827,000
Per share
.35
.62
6mo net inc
b57,762,000
64,507,000
Per share
1.08
1.22
b-Includes a charge related to an increase in loan loss reserves of $40 million for Fleet National Bank.


IN NO TIME AT ALL, BOTH PROPONENTS AND OPPONENTS ARE READY FOR BATTLE  Foes on the Left Strive for Unity
LEAD: By the time President Reagan went before the television cameras last week to announce his choice for the Supreme Court, the campaign to persuade the Senate not to confirm Robert H. Bork was already well under way.


British Airways Shifts Agencies
LEAD: British Airways is assigning the United States portion of its advertising account to Backer &amp; Spielvogel.
The budget should be between $16 million and $18 million.
The agency is a subsidiary of


AVANTEK INC reports earnings for 12wks to June 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AVANTEK INC (OTC)
12wks to June 20
1987
1986
Sales
52,183,000
49,092,000
Net inc
4,072,000
b3,631,000
Share earns
.21
.19
24wk sales
103,041,000
92,566,000
Net inc
8,342,000
b7,255,000
Share earns
.43
.38


AN AMERICAN IN LONDON PLANS A RESTORED GLOBE THEATER
LEAD: Odessa, Tex., has one.
So, too, do San Diego and Cedar City, Utah.
London has, however, managed to survive for over 300 years without one.


For True Security, 'True Zero,' Not 'Near Zero'
LEAD: The Soviet Union has been talking publicly about concluding an agreement on intermediate-range nuclear forces in time for a possible summit meeting this fall.
If the Soviets are serious about this schedule, they can do one thing in particular to help make it happen: move with us to global elimination of Soviet SS-20 and SS-4 missiles and American Pershing 2 and ground-launched cruise missiles.


OFFBEAT ART SPENDING SUMMER ON EAST RIVER
LEAD: A temporary new sculpture garden is emerging amid the weeds and warehouses on the Long Island City waterfront.


LUCKY 7 AND 13
LEAD: Considering that the game was played on the seventh day of the seventh month, some of the things that happened in the seventh inning of the Yankees-Twins game on Tuesday night at Yankee Stadium make a certain sort of numerological sense.
Tommy John of the Yankees, who had won seven games, was hit hard by the Twins and left the game in the seventh when the Twins established a 7-0 lead.


Precious Metals Climb; Pork Bellies Also Up
LEAD: Precious metals futures were higher yesterday, with silver futures advancing strongly on the Commodity Exchange in New York and gold rising slightly.


SPORTS PEOPLE
LEAD: Don Aase, the Baltimore Orioles' reliever who saved a club-record 34 games last season, will have surgery on his right shoulder and will miss the remainder of the season.
The 32-year-old right-hander has appeared in only seven games this season.


YANK HITTERS ROCK TWINS FOR 2ND GAME IN A ROW
LEAD: Underneath the first-base stands in Yankee Stadium, the inhabitant of the manager's office is running out of metaphors.
Lou Piniella's team scored 25 runs within 19 hours against the Minnesota Twins.


Income Up, Ministry Says
LEAD: Contributions to the Oral Roberts ministry lagged in April and May after the evangelist's widely publicized campaign to raise $8 million, his son said Tuesday, but income rebounded last month. ''Contributions are on the rise again, thank God,'' said Richard Roberts, the 38-year-old president of the Oral Roberts Evangelistic Association.


STATES MAY LOSE BILLIONS IF U.S. EXCISE TAXES RISE
LEAD: Analysts predict that the states will lose billions of dollars in revenue if Congress increases Federal gasoline, cigarette and liquor taxes to reduce the budget deficit.


Foreign Currency Deals By 2 U.S. Companies
LEAD: Financings yesterday by General Mills Inc. and Pepsico Inc. were among the first foreign currency denominated deals ever to be priced above par in the United States debt market.
The deals were priced at a higher than current coupon level to accommodate major institutional customers that trade these securities on a current yield basis as opposed to a yield to maturity basis.


PADDLING IN SCHOOL: CUSTOM UNDER FIRE ANEW
LEAD: When emergency room physicians at the south Georgia hospital saw the welts and deep purple bruises covering the thighs and buttocks of 12-year-old Brian Miller, they notified county officials about a possible case of child abuse.


NEW YORK AIDS COST FOR 1991 IS PUT AT $2 BILLION
LEAD: New York City is underestimating by half the projected cost of the spreading AIDS epidemic and is fiscally unprepared for its ''terrible consequences,'' State Comptroller Edward V. Regan said yesterday.


Marriott's Net Rises by 22.6%
LEAD: The Marriott Corporation said today that its second-quarter earnings rose 22.6 percent, to $63.9 million, or 47 cents a share, from $52.1 million, or 38 cents a share, a year ago.


Chronology II
LEAD: As Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North converts thousands of daytime television watchers into Iran-contra devotees, the National Security Archive has come up with a second edition of its guidebook to the intricacies of the scandal. ''The Chronology,'' in 920 pages, offers detailed background as well as testimony before the Congressional committee until Colonel


G.M.A.C. WON'T CALL ANTILLES BONDS
LEAD: The General Motors Acceptance Corporation, a large issuer of Eurobonds, announced yesterday that it did not intend to call any bonds issued out of its Netherlands Antilles subsidiary.
It was the first company to say publicly that it would not recall its Netherlands Antilles bonds.


STUDY SUGGESTS AGE OF UNIVERSE IS OVERESTIMATED
LEAD: The universe may be ''only'' 11 billion years old, according to a study that suggests scientists may have overestimated the age of the oldest known stars in the Milky Way galaxy.


LaROUCHE LINKS INDICTMENT TO HIS STAND ON THE CONTRAS
LEAD: Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. said today that his indictment last week, on a charge of conspiracy to obstruct justice, was a result of a Government operation that included support for the Nicaraguan rebels and, he declared, efforts to destabilize the Governments of Mexico, South Korea and Panama.


NEW CALL FOR DRUG PROGRAM
LEAD: The Dwight Gooden cocaine case, the most celebrated since the Pittsburgh cocaine trial of 1985, has prompted Frank Cashen to call for a joint drug program between the players and the clubs.
Funny he should mention that.
The players and the clubs had a joint drug agreement until the owners unilaterally killed it in


Snooker Debut Won by U.S.
LEAD: A British vs.
American match aimed at promoting the English game of snooker in the United States has ended in much the same fashion as a war between the same two nations two centuries ago.
A leading American pool player, Steve Mizerak, has beaten Britain's top snooker player, Steve Davis, in a hard-fought three-day contest in St.


WALL ST. EYES ARE ON TELEDYNE
LEAD: A lot of people are speculating these days that Henry E. Singleton, the savvy head of Teledyne Inc., is revamping his company's investment portfolio.
Yet some analysts say they think the speculators are dead wrong.


REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: A COLONEL'S SELF-ASSURANCE
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's description of his secret meetings in bathrooms, his purchase of leotards for his daughters, the poison pill he took along with him to Teheran provided another day of drama in the Senate chamber today.


OFFICER CLEARED OF TAKING GRAFT IN 77TH PRECINCT
LEAD: A 25-year-old police officer from the 77th Precinct in Brooklyn was found not guilty yesterday of taking money and crack from a drug dealer and then sharing in the proceeds from the sale of the drug.


GLASS, ART POTTERY, BASKETRY
LEAD:  Crystal Blue Persuasion, Glass Workshop, 142 Mulberry Street (Grand Street); 212-966-1808.


Most Bylines Withheld From Washington Post
LEAD: In what was described tonight as a protest by reporters over the lack of a union contract, most articles published in Thursday's issue of The Washington Post appeared without bylines.


OSLO WIDENS INQUIRY ON SHIPMENTS TO SOVIET
LEAD: The Norwegian authorities investigating a state-owned company for its illegal sale of sensitive technology to the Soviet Union are now examining more than 150 other shipments to the Russians by the same company, the prosecutor in the case said today.


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
LEAD: THE BASKETBALL DIARIES.
By Jim Carroll. 210 pages.
Viking Penguin.
Paper, $6.95.
FORCED ENTRIES.
The Downtown Diaries: 1971-1973.
By Jim Carroll. 184 pages.
Viking Penguin.
Paper, $6.95.
JIM CARROLL is a poet and rock musician in his mid-30's who grew up in several poor sections of Manhattan, the son and grandson of Irish Catholic bartenders.


Double Setback For Bilzerian
LEAD: Paul A. Bilzerian, the financier, was barred late yesterday by a Federal district judge in Seattle from purchasing 4.1 million common shares of Pay 'N Pak Stores Inc. that would have given him control of the company.
Shortly before Judge John C. Coughenour issued a temporary restraining order, Mr.


Profits at Allegis Nearly Quadruple
LEAD: The Allegis Corporation reported yesterday that its earnings in the second quarter had nearly quadrupled, to $73.4 million, or $1.29 a share, compared with a profit of $18.5 million, or 41 cents a share, in the second quarter last year.


Help Lessens For 3d World
LEAD: Developing countries received 15 percent less money from the rest of the world in 1986 as a result of a sharp cut in private bank lending and a drop in net export credits, according to the O.E.C.D.


GENERAL ELECTRIC INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL ELECTRIC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,560,000,000
7,790,000,000
Net inc
720,000,000
621,000,000
Share earns
.79
.68
6mo sales
17,880,000,000
13,670,000,000
Net inc
1,344,000,000
1,158,000,000
Share earns
1.47
1.27


Six Rail Workers Dismissed Over Failure to Fight Blaze
LEAD: Six employees of the Southern Pacific Railroad who discovered a fire that eventually destroyed a railway tunnel in May have been dismissed because they did not stop and try to put it out, a railroad spokesman says.


Wheat Forecast Shrinks
LEAD: World wheat production this year is now forecast at 518 million metric tons, 6 million less than was forecast last month and down 18 million from last year's harvest, the International Wheat Council said today.
Estimates were lowered for Australia, Pakistan and the Soviet Union.


The Editorial Notebook: The Boarder Babies and the Priest; Father Fagan Struck A Better Deal For 'Little Guys'
LEAD: On any given day in New York City, about 170 babies languish in public and private hospitals for lack of foster homes.
This boarder baby crisis developed as city officials first failed to anticipate an explosive increase in the number of abandoned and drug-abused babies and then were slow to mount an aggressive recruiting campaign for foster parents.


G.E. EARNINGS ROSE 15.9% IN 2D QUARTER
LEAD: The General Electric Company announced yesterday that earnings in the second quarter rose 15.9 percent on a 22.7 percent rise in revenues.


Kemp's Finances
LEAD: Gary Hart's widely publicized financial troubles have made the current Presidential contenders sensitive about their money management.
Which helps explain why Representative Jack F. Kemp of upstate New York called a news conference in New Hampshire yesterday to announce that his Republican campaign was no longer in the red.


It's Far-Fetched to Call Powell a Moderate
LEAD: To the Editor:


FEDERAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Revenue
394,757,000
317,739,000
Net inc
12,357,000
9,509,000
Share earns
.72
.58
Yr rev
1,419,635,000
1,230,572,000
Net inc
71,689,000
36,657,000
Share earns
4.31
2.24


STUDY CITES INCIDENCE OF CANCER NEAR POWER LINES
LEAD: A study issued today by the New York State Health Department says that children with leukemia or brain cancer are more likely than healthy children to be living in homes where the exposure to the magnetic fields generated by electric power lines is high.


Thatcher's Second Revolution
LEAD: In this city full of bookshops, perhaps the quaintest is the basement floor of a modern-looking store on Charing Cross Road.
On the first floor there is the usual collection of novels, biographies, travel guides.
But take the stairs down and suddenly - here is the world of radical kitsch.


BIDEN VOWS TO LEAD FORCES AGAINST BORK'S CONFIRMATION
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., chairman of the Judiciary Committee and a Democratic Presidential contender, assured opponents of the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork today that he would lead the fight against his confirmation to the United States Supreme Court.


British Price Airport Stock
LEAD: The Government priced Heathrow and six other British airports today at more than $:1.23 billion, or about $1.98 billion at current exchange rates, in its latest sell-off of nationalized industries.


Bond Offering By Philadelphia
LEAD: On the negotiated side of the tax-exempt market, Philadelphia is tentatively offering $185 million of general obligation bonds through two separate financings: one to raise new cash, the other to refund previously issued debt when interest rates were higher.


IRAN-CONTRA HEARING AS TELEVISION DRAMA
LEAD: ''WASHINGTON theater,'' Dan Rather said yesterday. ''It may not get much better than that.''


Administration Starts Contra Aid Push in Congress
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has begun an intensive campaign to persuade Congress to renew aid to the Nicaraguan rebels this fall, even though officials concede that the contras still suffer from serious organizational problems, uncertain discipline and isolation in Nicaragua's sparsely populated north and east.


A CLASSIC EXAMPLE OF DIETING GONE AWRY
LEAD: Kitty Dukakis was addicted to amphetamines for a quarter of a century, but experts say the doses she has described probably caused no significant permanent damage.


RESURFACING AT SARATOGA
LEAD: Saratoga race track, home to a history of upsets on sloppy tracks,will be resurfaced with a faster-drying, sandy cushion for the 24-day meeting that begins Aug. 5.
The resurfacing, which was announced yesterday by officials of the New York Racing Association at a news conference, is being undertaken because of the track's poor drainage.


WHERE TO PUT IT ALL: UP-TO-DATE STORAGE
LEAD: WEATHERPROOF most garden furniture might be; winterproof it's not.
Fine finishes dull, plastic scratches and cushions fade with exposure to the elements.


Software Units Plan to Merge
LEAD: Two personal computer software companies said today that they had agreed to merge.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q.I want to install insulation and a vapor barrier in the crawl space under the first floor of our house.
How can I do this when nails from the hardwood flooring stick down through the subflooring and the cross-bracing between the floor joists prevents installation of foil-faced batts of insulation between the joists?


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about restructuring plans for Kidde Inc. incorrectly described the takeover bid by Clarendon Group Ltd. for Argonaut Group Inc.
Clarendon and Argonaut called the proposal friendly.


POLICE KILL ROBBERY SUSPECT AT L.I. GAS STATION
LEAD: A man suspected of robbing more than 20 Long Island service stations was shot and killed last night by police officers who chased him on foot after he attempted to hold up a station in Elmont, L.I., the Nassau County police said.


WALGREEN CO reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WALGREEN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,070,834,000
913,900,000
Net inc
25,297,000
24,064,000
Share earns
.42
.39
9mo sales
3,206,488,000
2,733,941,000
Net inc
77,315,000
76,936,000
Share earns
1.26
1.25


IN NO TIME AT ALL, BOTH PROPONENTS AND OPPONENTS ARE READY FOR BATTLE  White House Tries to Combat Idea of Bork Tipping the Court's Balance
LEAD: Howard H. Baker Jr., the White House chief of staff, returned today to the Capitol Hill office he once occupied as Republican leader of the Senate.
There, behind closed doors, he pleaded with Republican members of the Judiciary Committee to mount a full-throated effort in favor of Judge Robert H. Bork, President Reagan's nominee for the Supreme


MINISCRIBE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MINISCRIBE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
80,500,000
43,700,000
Net inc
7,600,000
5,600,000
Share earns
.20
.15
6mo rev
141,900,000
84,100,000
Net inc
13,700,000
10,300,000
Share earns
.36
.29


LANDFILL IN QUEENS TO CLOSE BY 1991 UNDER AGREEMENT
LEAD: Ending a dispute with the state that has lasted more than a decade, New York City officials have tentatively agreed to close one of the city's two remaining landfills by 1991.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article yesterday about a documentary film showing ways to prevent AIDS gave an incorrect address for the film's producer, a nonprofit corporation called AIDSFilms.
It is at 50 West 34th Street.


JERSEY HIGH COURT LIFTS BAN ON REMOVING RADIUM SOIL
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court today lifted a ban on the state's plan to move 5,000 barrels of radium-tainted soil from the yards of four Montclair homes to an Ocean County wildlife preserve.


BOTTLING VINTAGE SHIPS
LEAD: GLENN BRAUN, top, has been putting ships in bottles for 15 of his 33 years. ''In the 1740's,'' he said, ''Europeans and Americans constructed miniature chairs and crucifixion scenes, but not ships, and put these into bottles.
But during the 1840's - the era of the clipper ships, which have low, narrow hulls - people started building these ships so they would fit in bottles.


UNREST IS SAID TO RISE AMONG THE YOUTH OF VIETNAM
LEAD: Hanoi's official press has begun to lend credence to recent assertions by young boat people that alienation and protest among Vietnam's youth are on the rise.


2 JETS NEARLY COLLIDE OVER THE ATLANTIC
LEAD: Two jumbo jets with almost 600 people aboard came extremely close to colliding over the Atlantic Ocean around midday yesterday, Government and airline officials said.


JACKSON SAYS RECORD SETS HIM APART FROM FIELD
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, seeking to sustain his appeal to black voters, declared yesterday that there was a clear distinction between himself and the six other Democrats seeking the party's Presidential nomination.


HERS
LEAD: FOR months now I've been consciously searching for representations of myself in the media, especially television.
I know I'd recognize this self because of certain distinctive, though not unique, features: I am a 43-year-old woman crippled by multiple sclerosis; although I can still totter a short distance with the aid of a brace and a cane, more and more of the time I ride in a wheelchair.


Clash in San Salvador Reported to Injure 21
LEAD: In the worst incident of street violence here in recent years, at least 21 people were reported seriously wounded by gunshots and clubs today when the police clashed with striking workers trying to force their way into a public building.


HALF OF ENGLAND WERE JOBS ARE AS RARE AS TORIES
LEAD: Newcastle, once a proud center of the Industrial Revolution, now lies firmly in the half of Britain where the economic promise of Thatcherism has made few inroads and her Conservative Party none.


A PATCH OF GREEN FOR HOMELESS MEN
LEAD: TO a group of men without homes or jobs, eight rectangles of soil have provided a chance to enjoy a part of American life that they rarely experience.
With the help of a nonprofit group called the Green Guerillas, these men, residents of a New York City shelter for homeless men on Wards Island, have planted flowers and vegetables next to the shelter.


Shareholders Back Caesars Dividend
LEAD: Caesars World Inc., no longer threatened by a hostile takeover bid, said its shareholders had approved its $942.4 million recapitalization plan.
The plan, under which each share of stock receives a special $26.25 dividend, was approved by 79 percent of the 22.1 million shares voted.


HOWARD M. TEICHMANN, PLAYWRIGHT, DIES AT 71
LEAD: Howard M. Teichmann, for many years a witty presence on Broadway as a playwright, biographer and raconteur, and the author with George S. Kaufman of the 1953 comedy hit ''The Solid Gold Cadillac,'' died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease) Tuesday.
He was 71 years old and lived in


NORTH SAYS CASEY AIDED HIM ON SECRET CONTRA PROGRAM; CHALLENGES KEY OFFICIALS
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North testified today that William J. Casey, as Director of Central Intelligence, helped him run the secret program to aid the Nicaraguan rebels and that many other senior members of the Government had been fully aware of what he was doing, ''although they may deny it.''


MAKE ROOM FOR LOPEZ
LEAD: Having fulfilled the entry requirements for the Ladies Professional Golf Association Hall of Fame - being a member of the women's tour for 10 years and winning at least 35 official tour events including one major - Nancy Lopez will become the 11th to be inducted, July 20 in New York.
Lopez, 30 years old, turned pro in July 1977 and has won 35 tour events, earning $1,796,933 in purses.


PLAN ON RADON VOTED BY SENATE TO HELP STATES
LEAD: A three-year, $31.5 million Federal program to help states detect and control radon contamination in homes and schools passed the Senate today.


THE FIRST HAVEN FOR MAN AND HIS AUTO
LEAD: ON Dec. 12, 1925, by a side of the Pacific Coast Highway, at the bottom of an oak-spotted hill outside San Luis Obispo, Calif., the Milestone Motel -the first roadside hotel to call itself a motel - opened its rooms and garages to man and car.


2 Ejected in Brushback
LEAD: Cory Snyder hit a home run in the second inning and a two-run double off Dan Quisenberry with one out in the ninth to give the Cleveland Indians a 9-8 victory over the Kansas City Royals tonight after a brushback pitch led to player ejections for the second consecutive game.


N.B.A. TO PROMOTE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
LEAD: The National Basketball Association and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People have agreed to work together to assure equality in employment opportunities throughout the league.


North's View Is That of a Band of Patriots Opposed by a Hostile and Unreliable World
LEAD: To the White House that Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North has pictured this week, the world was an arena of unrelenting ideological struggle.
The White House itself, mesmerized by the struggle, was a place where major questions went unasked and where much of the rest of official Washington was dismissed as thoroughly untrustworthy.


GOLDMAN BAND IN PACT WITH ITS MUSICIANS
LEAD: Two weeks after the scheduled beginning of its 70th anniversary season, the Goldman Memorial Band reached a settlement with its players and immediately started rehearsing for a concert last night at the Damrosch Park band shell.


GIAMATTI ON BEANBALLS
LEAD: The upsurge in home runs is at least partly responsible for an increase in beanballs this season, according to A. Bartlett Giamatti, the National League president.
Giamatti said yesterday that the number of players being hit by pitches ''is very worrisome because baseball degenerates when this happens.


ALLEGIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEGIS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,880,000,000
2,360,000,000
Net inc
73,400,000
18,500,000
Share earns
1.29
.41
6mo rev
5,250,000,000
4,320,000,000
Net inc
42,800,000
b84,500,000
Share earns
.79
-


INTEREST RISES IN CELEBRATING TIES TO SPAIN
LEAD: Now that the nation has marked the dissolution of colonial bonds with England, some Americans are rebuilding their tie with another colonial past.


Bond Prices Drop in Slow Day
LEAD: Bond prices slipped in light, spotty trading yesterday, pushed lower on overnight profit taking by Japanese and European investors and a selloff in the bond futures pits in Chicago.


CBS RECLAIMS 2D PLACE IN WEEK'S NEWS RATINGS
LEAD: CBS regained second place in the television news ratings last week, but its prime-time schedule dropped to third place for only the fourth time this season.


AMREP CORP reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMREP CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Revenue
25,722,000
26,362,000
Net inc
1,599,000
2,484,000
Share earns
.24
.38
Yr rev
98,830,000
99,943,000
Net inc
6,197,000
9,458,000
Share earns
.94
1.44


Cooling Off in New Jersey Is a Team Effort
LEAD: Off-duty lifeguards jumping into the pool at the Towns Swim Center in Secaucus.
Today is expected to be in the mid-90's, the kind of day when even a whiff of pool chemicals can be refreshing. (NYT/Edward Hausner)


Putting Reins on Wall St.
LEAD: The insider trading scandals, involving such prominent Wall Street figures as Ivan F. Boesky, Martin A. Siegel and Boyd L. Jefferies and investment firms such as Kidder Peabody and Goldman Sachs, have receded from front-page news.


12 Catholic Dioceses in West Join in Self-Insurance Plan
LEAD: Twelve Roman Catholic dioceses representing 1,000 churches in California, Nevada and Arizona have formed their own liability insurance company.


Wirthlin's Winners
LEAD: Who won the celebrated square-off last week among the seven Democratic Presidential contenders?
Richard Wirthlin, polltaker for President Reagan and the Republican National Committee, said he regarded two participants as potentially formidable 1988 nominees: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts and Senator Joseph R.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, JULY 9, 1987
LEAD:  International


JMB Adjusts Cadillac Deal
LEAD: The JMB Realty Corporation signed a definitive agreement for the previously announced acquisition of the Cadillac Fairview Corporation for $1.96 billion, or $60 million less than originally announced.
In a jointly issued statement, the companies said that JMB would pay $34 a share (Canadian), or $25.70 (United States), in cash.


Networks Will Carry Washington Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be broadcast live beginning at 9 A.M. on the ABC, CBS and NBC television networks, on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New York.


1,000 NEW OFFICERS GRADUATE TO THE STREETS
LEAD: At last, graduation day came.


GOT A HELMET? MAKE A LAMP
LEAD: IT'S surprising what people want to make into lamps.


RANDOM HOUSE TO BUY SCHOCKEN BOOKS
LEAD: Random House agreed yesterday to purchase Schocken Books, the family-owned publishing house that was founded by refugees from Nazi Germany and that had Hannah Arendt as its first editor.
When the agreement takes effect, Schocken -which owns worldwide rights to the works of Franz Kafka - will become an imprint of Pantheon Books, a division of Random House that was also founded in the 1940's by refugees from Nazi


Motion Denied In Insider Case
LEAD: Federal District Judge Shirley Wohl Kram yesterday denied a defense motion that accused prosecutors of improperly leaking grand jury information in an insider trading case.
The judge said defense lawyers had failed to prove a violation of a Federal rule forbiding disclosure of grand jury matters.


ERRORS IN AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL REPORTED UP BY 50% IN JUNE
LEAD: Errors by air traffic controllers increased 50 percent in June from the previous year, the chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board told a Senate subcommittee today.


TEXAS AND MISSISSIPPI EXECUTIONS BRING TOTAL TO 83 SINCE '76 RULING
LEAD: A man who murdered a 70-year-old woman was executed by injection in Texas early yesterday, and the killer of a convenience store clerk died in the gas chamber in Mississippi.


Upbeat View On '87 Stocks
LEAD: INVESTORS were cheered yesterday as the Dow Jones industrial average, the most closely watched barometer of the stock market, rose 14.19 points, to 2,463.97, setting a record.
Its previous closing high was 2,451.05 on June 25.


TWO SUSPECTS ARE SHOT IN BRONX COCAINE RAID
LEAD: Two suspected drug wholesalers who promised to sell four kilograms of cocaine to plainclothes law-enforcement agents were shot last night in an aborted drug raid in the Bronx, the police said.


ALBANY REACHES ACCORD ON NEW PRISON MEASURE
LEAD: The Republican-controlled State Senate voted 41 to 14 today to approve a bill intended to relieve overcrowding in state prisons, ending a deadlock that had threatened to delay the close of this year's legislative session.


FISHING LURE SETS RECORD AT AUCTION
LEAD: Some fishing lures just catch fish.
A Haskell minnow lure did more than that at an auction here: it caught the fancy of a buyer who spent a record $9,240 for the privilege of owning one.


AFTER KARAJAN, A CLOUDY CRYSTAL BALL
LEAD: After leading the Berlin Philharmonic for more than 32 years, Herbert von Karajan is showing signs of slowing down and speculation about a possible successor is growing.


A Difference of Opinion
LEAD: Senator Daniel K. Inouye, chairman of the Senate panel, during an exchange with Brendan V. Sullivan Jr., lawyer for Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, at the end of yesterday's session.
Mr.
Sullivan had charged that John W. Nields Jr., the House panel's chief counsel, was not allowing Colonel North to answer questions; Mr.


Sun Introduces Work Stations
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. introduced a line of computer work stations yesterday that offers performance comparable to a minicomputer for one-tenth the price.


CHERRY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHERRY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
48,313,000
38,427,000
Net inc
1,619,000
802,000
Share earns
.36
.18


Net Deposits Rose in May
LEAD: Deposits at savings institutions exceeded withdrawals by $914 million in May, the first increase in net deposits since August, the Government said today.


Laxalt Says Chances Depend On Avoiding a 'Kill' by Bush
LEAD: Former Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada says that if he can avoid a ''quick kill'' by Vice President Bush in the early primaries next year, he will have a good chance of winning the Republican Presidential nomination.


CELTICS ARE BEING UNFAIR TO RODGERS
LEAD: As soon as Al Bianchi was finally knighted as general manager, Dick Evans, the Knicks' new president, predicted that a coach will be named in ''another two weeks.'' According to Evans, ''three or four candidates'' are under consideration.
But he proclaimed firmly that his list no longer included Jimmy Rodgers, the Boston Celtics' assistant coach and director of player personnel.


Day 2: The President's Knowledge and the Ayatollah's Money
LEAD: At the Iran-Contra hearings in Washington, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North was questioned for a second day yesterday, beginning with the issue of President Reagan's knowledge of his activities.
Here are excerpts from the testimony, as recorded by The New York Times:


CBS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CBS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,205,000,000
1,166,000,000
Net inc
92,100,000
b107,200,000
Share earns
3.77
4.42
6mo rev
2,466,000,000
2,333,000,000
Net inc
140,800,000
b123,500,000
Share earns
5.70
4.98


Alvin O'Konski, 83, Former Congressman
LEAD: Alvin E. O'Konski, who represented Wisconsin in the House of Representatives for 30 years and was a co-author of the G.I.
Bill of Rights, died of a heart ailment at his summer home here today.
He was 83 years old and lived in retirement in Winter Park, Fla.


U.N. May Open Files on Nazis
LEAD: In a diplomatic victory for Israel, a majority of former members of the United Nations War Crimes Commission now favor opening the commission's files on Nazi war criminals to the public, United Nations officials announced today.


Investor Raises Texaco Stake
LEAD: Robert Holmes a Court, the Australian financier, told the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday that the investment group he heads had increased its stake in Texaco Inc. to 7.4 percent, from 6.4 percent.


STARLING TO BOX BRELAND
LEAD: A brief search for a substitute opponent for Mark Breland ended yesterday when Marlon Starling was selected to fight the World Boxing Association welterweight champion in Columbia, S.C., next month.
Breland was set to defend against the W.B.A.'s top-ranked contender, Tommy Ayers.
But Ayers lost to Rollin Williams on June 30.


HOWE ON WAY BACK
LEAD: The association governing the minor leagues has lifted its suspension of Steve Howe.
Johnny Johnson, president of the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues, said that effective Sunday, he had lifted the suspension he imposed on Howe in May of last year when Howe showed positive in a drug test whilepitching for San Jose in the Class A California


PLAYER TRIES THE OPEN AGAIN
LEAD: Except for a couple of poor 9-iron approach shots at Scioto Country Club's 15th and 16th holes in the final round last year, Gary Player might have won the United States Senior Open.
As it was, the South African finished second to Dale Douglass by a single stroke.


Gas Spurs Evacuation Order
LEAD: Twenty-one families remaining in a neighborhood north of here were ordered to evacuate Monday after officials found toxic hydrogen sulfide gas in a test well.
The 179 families in Rawhide Village were earlier given until July 31 to move out of the area, which has been plagued for months by the seepage of hydrogen sulfide and methane gases.


U.S. DOWNGRADES PRESENCE AT THIRD-WORLD FORUM
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is downgrading its representation at a major conference of the world's rich and poor nations in what appears to be a further demonstration of displeasure with the United Nations system and third-world demands.


Find an Alternative to Reflagging
LEAD: The worst way to make policy is to compound error with error because, supposedly, there's no choice.
That's exactly what the Reagan Administration proposes by going forward with reflagging and protecting Kuwaiti oil tankers.
Yet the most that members of Congress seem willing to do is call for delay.


Correction
LEAD: The Food Notes column in The Living Section yesterday misstated the size of bottles of olive oil on sale at the Fisher &amp; Levy catering shop.
They are 17 ounces.


Yields Are Mixed
LEAD: Yields for certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were mixed for the week ended yesterday.
But interest rates are expected to continue moving slowly downward, said Robert K. Heady, editor of The Bank Rate Monitor.


TRIAL DELAYS STATE REPORT ON CRIME
LEAD: A state report on organized-crime influence in New York City's construction industry, scheduled to be released today, was delayed by Governor Cuomo yesterday after defense lawyers in a Federal rackteering trial in Manhattan said the report could taint the trial.


DIGITAL COMMUNICATIONS ASOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGITAL COMMUNICATIONS ASOCIATES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
45,334,000
37,252,000
Net inc
6,904,000
4,006,000
Share earns
.47
.27
Yr sales
181,399,000
150,705,000
Net inc
b28,433,000
14,923,000
Share earns
1.91
1.10


AIDS Suspicion Bars Surgery
LEAD: A District of Columbia man who cut his foot badly on a rocky beach jetty was refused surgery at a Delaware hospital and taken by helicopter to a Washington hospital when he was unable to prove he did not have AIDS.


Taking Some of the Guesswork Out of New York State's Budget
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: The Q&amp;A column in Science Times on June 30 misstated the potential harmful effects of ultraviolet radiation in sunlight.
Ultraviolet radiation at shorter wavelengths is more harmful than that at longer wavelengths.


4 YANKS TO BE ALL-STAR STARTERS
LEAD: Dave Winfield, Don Mattingly, Willie Randolph and Rickey Henderson were elected to the American League All-Star Team yesterday, giving the Yankees half of the starting spots selected by fan balloting.


GRI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRI CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
24,627,000
22,012,000
Net inc
476,000
55,000
Share earns
.21
.02
6mo rev
41,032,000
35,583,000
Net inc
514,000
b1,006,000
Share earns
.23
-
b-Net loss and includes a loss of $500,000 on disposal of discontinued operations.


Taiwan Steel Reversal
LEAD: The International Trade Commission reversed itself today and voted, 3 to 2, that Taiwan was not dumping welded carbon steel pipe and tubing in America below the cost of production.
It had tentatively ruled against Taiwan last November; today's reversal was based on new evidence.


Youmans's 1-Hitter Defeats Astros, 1-0
LEAD: Floyd Youmans held the Houston Astros hitless until Kevin Bass's leadoff single in the eighth inning and finished with his second career one-hitter tonight as the Montreal Expos won, 1-0.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


MARRIOTT CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 19
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARRIOTT CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 19
1987
1986
Sales
1,495,500,000
1,089,500,000
Net inc
b63,900,000
52,100,000
Share earns
.47
.38
6mo sales
2,907,100,000
2,121,000,000
Net inc
104,600,000
86,300,000
Share earns
.77
.63


CALIFORNIAN SEES RISE IN ASIAN GANGS
LEAD: The Attorney General of California said today that the state needed Federal assistance to combat what he said was a growing law-enforcement problem posed by gangs of Asian immigrants.


Advertising; Behind CBS Move On Nielsen
LEAD: CBS'S cancellation of its contract with A. C. Nielsen is generally viewed among agency media executives as a negotiating ploy by the television network.


New York City Agrees to Close a Landfill
LEAD: Trash being dumped yesterday at the Edgemere Landfill on the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens.
The city has agreed to close the landfill, one of two in the city, by 1991, ending a decade-long dispute with the state.
Page B3. (NYT/Sara Krulwich)


ANTI-SIKH VIOLENCE IN NORTHERN INDIA
LEAD: The Indian Army was called out today to halt Hindu reprisals against Sikhs in the northern state of Haryana after Sikh terrorists killed at least 72 people in attacks on Hindu bus passengers, Indian officials said.


BIAGGI'S LAWYER MAY BE REMOVED BY JUDGE
LEAD: A Federal judge in Brooklyn told a defense attorney in the upcoming bribery trial of Representative Mario Biaggi that he might be removed from the case and called as a witness because of a public statement the lawyer made about Mr.
Biaggi.


Chrysler Spending
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation plans to increase its capital spending by at least $1 billion through 1990 to cover new investment after the No. 3 auto maker takes over the American Motors Corporation, the company's vice chairman said.
The Detroit News reported that Robert Miller, who heads the company's financial subsidiary, said the $1 billion was not as much as American Motors would have needed in that time if it had stayed independent.


MUSIC: MARION WILLIAMS SINGS GOSPEL
LEAD: AS she has since her days with the Ward Singers in the 1940's and 1950's, Marion Williams brought gospel music to secular turf on Tuesday at Sounds of Brazil, and once again revealed one of the most magnificent voices in American music.
Singing Ward Singers material as well as songs from her new album, ''I've Come So Far,'' Ms.


WARNING BY KNIGHT
LEAD: Bobby Knight, the Indiana basketball coach, delivered a harsh warning about drug abuse at the Five-Star basketball camp, which annually attracts some of the nation's top high school players to Robert Morris College, in Coraopolis, Pa.


REAGAN DENIES 'PLOY' ON IRAN HEARING
LEAD: President Reagan, responding indirectly to the Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair, said today that he was not seeking to divert attention from the inquiry by focusing on other issues.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Beneficial Corp., Wilmington, Del., a consumer financial services holding company, has elected David J. Farris to the new position of chief operating officer.


SEAMAN FURNITURE CO reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEAMAN FURNITURE CO (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Sales
57,742,000
45,609,000
Net inc
4,512,000
3,516,000
Share earns
.33
.27
Yr sales
224,785,000
168,696,000
Net inc
15,180,000
11,261,000
Share earns
1.12
.86


BRONX WOMAN SHOOTS AT JUDGE
LEAD: A Bronx woman, in a frenzy to recover less than $200 tied up in an estate, entered a Bronx judge's offices yesterday, told him, ''We're going to settle this here and now,'' and fired two shots at him.


POLICE AND DEMONSTRATORS BATTLE IN SEOUL
LEAD: A vast anti-Government demonstration, perhaps the largest in South Korea's history, degenerated into open street battles with police today in the center of the capital.


The Right to a Choice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Penney Buys Stake In Women's Chain
LEAD: The J.C.
Penney Company has made an investment in the Stinu Corporation of Los Angeles, which operates the Units chain of women's specialty stores.
Penney would become the largest shareholder in the company.
The investment, for an undisclosed sum, is Penney's second in the specialty store field.
The first was a 20 percent interest several years ago in Alcott &amp;


Kaiser Will Sell Chemicals Unit
LEAD: The Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation has put up for sale parts or all of its industrial and specialty chemicals business.
Kaiser was recently acquired by the British investor Alan Clore and has sold off several businesses in an effort to focus on its aluminum operations.


SONOCO PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SONOCO PRODUCTS CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
342,718,000
246,998,000
Net inc
18,434,000
15,381,000
Share earns
.42
.35
6mo sales
590,872,000
473,062,000
Net inc
33,723,000
26,994,000
Share earns
.77
.62


DOW JUMPS 14.19, TO RECORD 2,463.97
LEAD: The stock market surged ahead to another record close yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average gaining 14.19 points to close at 2,463.97.
The previous high was 2,451.05 on June 25.


SHOT-PUTTER SUSPENDED
LEAD: The Norwegian Sports Federation has suspended Lars Nilsen, the Southern Methodist University shot-put star, from international competition after finding he tested positive for anabolic steroids, The Dallas Morning News reported yesterday.


Dinkins and Ferrer to Endorse Judge in Bronx Surrogate Race
LEAD: Borough Presidents David N. Dinkins of Manhattan and Fernando Ferrer of the Bronx are to endorse today Judge Hansel McGee of Civil Court for Bronx surrogate.


WATTS RECITAL POSTPONED
LEAD: A recital by Andre Watts scheduled Sunday at Avery Fisher Hall as part of the Mostly Mozart festival has been postponed a week because of the pianist's bursitis.


Maxtor Names Chief Executive
LEAD: George M. Scalise, a prominent executive in the semiconductor industry trade battles, will leave that industry to become the president and chief executive of Maxtor Corporation, a maker of disk drives.


NEW YORK'S PLAN TO SPEED UP TRIALS IS MISSING ITS GOAL
LEAD: An ambitious plan by court administrators to reduce the backlog of cases in New York City courts by postponing judges' summer vacations has shown progress but is falling short of its goal, according to judges, prosecutors and private lawyers.


BANK OF NEW HAMPSHIRE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF NEW HAMPSHIRE CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,533,000
1,673,000
Per share
.59
.72
6mo net inc
3,166,000
3,133,000
Per share
1.21
1.35
Shares outst
2,607,000
2,317,000


MICHAEL J. EAGEN
LEAD: Michael J. Eagen, a former Chief Justice of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, died Tuesday.
He was 80 years old.


Sentenced to Death
LEAD: Steven Livaditis at court yesterday in Santa Monica, Calif., as he was sentenced to die in the gas chamber.
Mr.
Livaditis was convicted in the deaths of three people in an attempted robbery at the Van Cleef &amp; Arpels jewelry store in Beverly Hills. (AP)


AIDS TESTS URGED FOR TRANSPLANTS
LEAD: Transplant specialists are recommending that people in need of donor organs be tested for the AIDS virus before they are placed on waiting lists, a leading transplant surgeon said Tuesday.


SCHOOLGIRLS BOOT WEMBLEY BARRIER
LEAD: A group of soccer-playing schoolgirls from Cincinnati will fly to England on Saturday, headed for Wembley Stadium to break down some sports barriers that have stood for 64 years.


CHEROKEE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEROKEE GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Sales
33,746,000
25,300,000
Net inc
2,604,000
1,691,000
Share earns
.22
.15
6mo sales
70,719,000
52,645,000
Net inc
5,063,000
3,421,000
Share earns
.44
.30


ROBERT PILPEL
LEAD: Robert Pilpel, who was active in Jewish and nonsectarian humanitarian organizations for many years, died of arteriosclerosis Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 82 years old.


WIFE OF DUKAKIS DISCLOSES ABUSE OF PILLS
LEAD: When her husband found a bottle of her diet pills and confronted her in 1975, Kitty Dukakis told him she would stop using drugs.
She tried but she could not.
She just found better hiding places for her pills.


'DRAGNET' IN FIRST PLACE IN HOLIDAY TICKET SALES
LEAD: A slow July 4 weekend at the box office cut into movie earnings, but ''Dragnet,'' the rowdy comedy starring Dan Aykroyd and Tom Hanks, still earned $7 million in tickets sold to remain in the No. 1 position after two weeks of release.


LOVE STORY BY THE POPE BEING MADE INTO A FILM
LEAD: A love story written by Pope John Paul II 27 years ago is to have its film debut in Italy this year, starring Burt Lancaster, Ben Cross and Olivia Hussey, the Italian national broadcasting network RAI announced today.


BLACKOUT STARTS BUSHWICK'S RISE FROM THE ASHES
LEAD: When the lights went out at 9:34 P.M., Kathy Casuso was still at the Marine Midland Bank in Manhattan where she worked nights as a proof clerk.
She hitched a ride across the Brooklyn Bridge, hailed a gypsy cab and arrived home in Bushwick just in time to witness a scene that she did not immediately fathom but would never forget.


LARGE LOSS AT MORGAN IN QUARTER
LEAD: J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, the parent of the nation's fourth-largest commercial bank, yesterday turned in what appeared to be its first disappointing earnings report in some time, announcing a $586.4 million second-quarter loss.


Kitty Dukakis Tells of Former Addiction
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, a Democratic Presidential candidate, stood by his wife, Kitty, as she disclosed yesterday that she had once been addicted to amphetamines.
Page A14. (AP)


CHANNEL 2 DECIDES NOT TO MOVE CBS NEWS
LEAD: A plan considered by WCBS, Channel 2, to move the ''CBS Evening News'' out of its customary 7 P.M. time period in New York, which was vigorously protested by Dan Rather and his ''Evening News'' producer, has been abandoned, network officials said yesterday.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Huge Rally in Seoul


HOUSE APPROVES DELAY IN GULF DUTY
LEAD: In a symbolic move, the House today approved a measure to delay the Reagan Administration's plan to fly American flags on Kuwaiti oil tankers and to provide the ships with a naval escort.


AT N.Y.U., PIONEERING BRAIN SURGERY
LEAD: For the first time in New York, tissue was transplanted into a patient's brain yesterday.


IN MALE-DOMINATED KOREA, AN ISLAND OF SEXUAL EQUALITY
LEAD: ON certain mornings when the winds are right, the work songs of the haenyo, the diving women, waft upward from the rocky shores to the cliffs of Cheju Do, an island 60 miles south of the South Korean mainland.


A CORNER WITH NEW COLOR
LEAD: IT'S not a mirage: the southwest corner of 14th Street and Union Square is really enveloped in pastel-hued perennials and pink roses.
This sunny oasis lights up the edge of one of Manhattan's busiest thoroughfares, and one of its newly restored parks.


Genetics Institute's New Heart Drug
LEAD: Genetics Institute Inc. said it had developed a new form of tissue plasminogen activator, a drug intended to dissolve blood clots in heart attack victims.
The Cambridge, Mass., company said the T.P.A. variant can remain in the bloodstream longer than the original product and can be given in a single, more effective dosage.


LONG ISLAND YOUTH ORCHESTRA PLANS TRIP TO CUBA
LEAD: After 10 years of writing letters to Fidel Castro without a reply, Martin Dreiwitz will lead his Long Island Youth Orchestra in a series of concerts in Cuba this month.


CONSUMERS CUT DEBTS BY $560 MILLION IN MAY
LEAD: Americans paid off $560 million more in debt than they borrowed during May, the first reduction in consumer credit in nearly five years, the Federal Reserve reported today.


NOW HEAD CRITICIZES DEMOCRATS AS BEING ALOOF ON WOMEN'S ISSUES
LEAD: Eleanor C. Smeal, the departing president of the National Organization for Women, today assailed what she described as ''conventional wisdom'' that Democrats should be cautious, keep ''women's issues'' at arms length, and move toward the right for the 1988 Presidential election.


IMMIGRATION RULES ARE EASED FOR NICARAGUAN EXILES IN U.S.
LEAD: The Reagan Administration announced today that it was easing immigration standards for the 200,000 Nicaraguan exiles in the United States, including those whose requests for asylum were turned down and who face deportation.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JULY 9, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-12


SUNTRUST BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNTRUST BANKS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
70,800,000
66,100,000
Per share
.54
.50
6mo net inc
141,000,000
130,100,000
Per share
1.08
.99
The company said that during the latest quarter it sold $28 million of its Latin American loans, reducing its Latin American loans outstanding to $130.7 million.


Death Toll Is Reduced In German Explosion
LEAD: After sorting through the rubble of an ice-cream parlor leveled by a runaway oil truck and checking their lists of missing, officials said tonight that the toll was four dead, not the 30 or more originally feared.


KNICKS FINALLY SIGN BIANCHI
LEAD: It took an exhausting 80 days, involved a cavalcade of candidates and clandestine meetings throughout the country, before the Knicks made their first definitive move toward erasing their recent past.


Dutch Artists Hunting Alternatives to the Dole
LEAD: With the demise a week ago of the Pictorial Arts Scheme, about 2,000 Dutch painters, sculptors and other artists will have to sell their work themselves or find other jobs.


House Panel Votes Subpoena Of 3 in Contra Drug Inquiry
LEAD: A House subcommittee voted today to subpoena three Miami-based federal prosecutors in a largely secret investigation into whether Reagan Administration officials supported illegal drug and gun smuggling to benefit the Nicaraguan guerrillas.


Olivetti's Computers
LEAD: Olivetti, the Italian electronics, computer and office equipment company, said today that it would establish a new subsidiary, Prodest International S.p.A., for the home computer sector.
The company plans to introduce its PC1 model in Italy this month.


'TRUMPET KINGS,' ON 13
LEAD: A PROFESSORIAL Wynton Marsalis guides viewers through jazz history as told by trumpet solos in ''The Trumpet Kings,'' part of the ''Jazz Tonight'' series, to be broadcast tonight at 11 P.M. on Channel 13.
Unlike most jazz surveys, the program -written, directed and produced by Burrill Crohn - takes a hands-on, musician's perspective.


Clarendon Offer
LEAD: Clarendon Group Ltd. of Bermuda, owner of an insurance company that is trying to buy Argonaut Group Inc., another insurer, said that if it succeeded it would control the 10 percent of Kidde Inc. stock that Argonaut owns.
But Clarendon said its interest in Argonaut has ''nothing to do with Argonaut's holding in Kidde.


SCOTT'S HOSPITALITY reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCOTT'S HOSPITALITY
Year to April 30
1987
1986
Sales
873,547,000
769,415,000
Net inc
b41,943,000
b43,701,000
Share earns
.72
.81
Shares outst
57,908,000
54,168,000
b-Includes special gains of $2,814,000 and $8,031,000 for the latest and previous year, respectively.


CITY OPERA: 'STUDENT PRINCE'
LEAD: AS a drama, ''The Student Prince'' is insufferable: It pushes a few buttons about the headiness of college days, the pain of wanting what you can't have and so forth, concerns itself not a whit with such things as the exploration of character or the meaning of experience, and then sits back as Pavlov sat back, to watch the response.


TEACHING OLD PARENTS NEW WAYS
LEAD: For grandparents who do not understand natural childbirth, a hospital here is offering a class to explain the method and teach them how to listen more and lecture less.


DANCE: THREE NEW WORKS AT NORTH CAROLINA FESTIVAL
LEAD: The American Dance Festival's annual program by young choreographers and composers can usually be counted on to be one of the pleasant surprises of the summer dance season.
Each year the festival permits three choreographers to collaborate with three composers on new works.
One never knows what to expect of these ventures.


KAUFMAN &amp; BROAD INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAUFMAN &amp; BROAD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
348,326,000
250,983,000
Net inc
17,119,000
11,633,000
Share earns
.83
.58
Shares outst
20,489,000
16,813,000
6mo rev
650,177,000
447,430,000
Net inc
25,943,000
16,722,000
Share earns
1.27
.74
Shares outst
19,087,000
16,722,000


COLT INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLT INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
423,211,000
419,023,000
Net inc
b15,118,000
29,807,000
Share earns
.44
.18
Shares outst
36,734,000
164,763,000
6mo sales
833,268,000
812,565,000
Net inc
b24,505,000
55,424,000
Share earns
.72
.34
Shares outst
36,085,000
164,746,000


BankAmerica Offers Shares
LEAD: The BankAmerica Corporation, the nation's second-largest banking company, said yesterday that it was offering to sell up to 10 million common shares to its current stockholders at a 5 percent discount in an effort to raise equity capital.


THROWING ERROR IS COSTLY FOR METS
LEAD: If the game turned on one play, if it could be reduced to its simplest terms, then perhaps it was this: Gary Carter, the Mets' All-Star catcher, did not offer enough help to a teammate in the seventh inning tonight.


ISRAELIS BAR REDEFINING OF A JEW, POSING THREAT TO RULE BY SHAMIR
LEAD: Parliament narrowly rejected three bills today that were aimed at redefining the official Israeli position on who is a Jew.
The bills would have effectively denied the legitimacy of Reform and Conservative Judaism.


DARLING ADJUSTS AND WINS
LEAD: Ron Darling did not need to be told that the hurdle he passed Tuesday night was vitally important.
He had gone 76 days and nights without winning, a span of 15 pitching assignments, 6 losses, 8 games without a decision and untold misery for himself and the Mets.
Then, finally, a victory. ''The team needs me,'' Darling said in a clubhouse that was nearly empty of players and celebration following a doubleheader sweep of the Atlanta Braves.


A NEW BREED
LEAD: When the original American Kennel Club stud book was issued in 1878, 10 breeds were listed and the first dog recorded was Adonis, an English Setter bred by George E. Delano, a student at Harvard.


STAR ENTREPRENEUR'S FALL FROM GRACE
LEAD: At the age of 21, Barry J. Minkow has experienced degrees of fame, fortune and notoriety that few people achieve in a lifetime.
Having made millions of dollars from a carpet-cleaning company he started in his parents' garage six years ago, he became an entrepreneurial hero to many in Southern California.


CURRENCY MARKETS
LEAD: DOLLAR TOPS 150 YEN FOR 2D DAY


North vs. Others: A Sample of the Conflicts
LEAD:  ISSUE: ARMS SHIPMENT - One of the most important questions facing the committee is the nature of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3rd's weekend fact-finding mission last November.
Mr.
Meese was present when Colonel North proposed that William J. Casey, the late Director of Central Intelligence, make the false statement to Congress that no one in the Government knew about the Iran arms shipment of November 1985.


BROKERAGE TO MOVE 600 JOBS FROM NEW YORK TO JERSEY CITY
LEAD: The brokerage firm of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette plans to move about 600 jobs from Manhattan to Jersey City in 1989, an official of the firm said today.


Kennedy Cut in Car Crash
LEAD: Senator Edward M. Kennedy suffered minor cuts tonight when a large tree fell on the road in front of his car, an aide said.
The Massachusetts Democrat had left a Senate session and was being driven to his residence in McLean, Va., when the accident occurred about 9 P.M. on the George Washington Memorial Parkway.


Lightning Launch
LEAD: To the Editor:


Savings Bonds by Mail
LEAD: Citing efficiency, the Treasury Department said today that it would begin experimenting this fall with mailing United States savings bonds to investors rather than delivering the bonds immediately upon purchase.
The centralized distribution plan would begin as a pilot program in Ohio this October, the department said, and would affect only over-the-counter purchasers.


Contel Is Planning To Buy Equatorial
LEAD: The Contel Corporation said it would buy the Equatorial Communications Company, a satellite concern, two days after scrapping a proposed $2.5 billion merger with the Communications Satellite Corporation.


The Trade-In Value of That Fourth Shuttle
LEAD: To the Editor:


MEAD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEAD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 28
1987
1986
Sales
1,078,300,000
768,300,000
Net inc
51,900,000
b36,900,000
Share earns
.82
.59
6mo sales
2,035,300,000
1,451,100,000
Net inc
86,100,000
b57,200,000
Share earns
1.37
.91


Latin America's Untouchables
LEAD: Panama and Haiti have abruptly become the most visible battlegrounds in a hemisphere-wide struggle between civilian democrats and military leaders who defy accountability.
The ''untouchable'' in Panama is Gen.
Manuel Noriega, who rules through civilian figureheads.
In Haiti, the junta leader is Lieut.


U.S. Missiles Slide Off Road
LEAD: A United States Army truck carrying four Patriot air-defense missiles slid into a ditch beside a small road today, but there were no injuries or damages, a spokesman said.
The missiles are nonnuclear.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tour de France  Van Poppel Wins Sprint: Jean-Paul Van Poppel of the Netherlands won the pack sprint in the eighth stage of the Tour de France at Epinay-Sous-Senart yesterday, but Erich Maechler of Switzerland retained the overall lead.
Michel Vermotte of Belgium finished second in the 127-mile stage from Troyes with Johan Capiot, another Belgian, third.(AP)


In Re the Nofziger Predicament
LEAD: In the spring of 1983, when Lyn Nofziger, a White House aide turned lobbyist, was asked for advice about making such a career move, he could hardly have been more upbeat.


Trump's Stake In Golden Nugget
LEAD: Donald J. Trump, the New York real estate developer, has a 4.9 percent interest in Golden Nugget Inc., the casino operator in Las Vegas.
A secretary to Mr.
Trump said he authorized her statement after The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday that he owned the stock and might seek control.


ABC TO START DRUG TESTS
LEAD: Capital Cities/ABC issued a memorandum to its employees yesterday informing them that beginning next month, candidates for full-time employment will be screened for drug use before being hired.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption with the television listings on Saturday misidentified the actors shown in a scene from the film ''Air Force.'' They were Gig Young and John Ridgely.


Hard Work, Big Rewards
LEAD: Phil McConkey of the Giants just couldn't get away from 9-year-old Jose Diaz's one-on-one coverage yesterday during the opening clinic of the Mobil Big Apple Games, a citywide summer recreation program now in its sixth year.


Terms from the Testimony
LEAD: During the Iran-Contra hearings, legislators, lawyers and witnesses have used a number of code names (such as ''Country 1'') and phrases that have confused members, the audience and television viewers.
Among them are:  ''Take the Hit'': As the Iran-contra affair began to unravel, North said White House aides discussed who would take responsibility or ''the hit'' for conducting it, while protecting their superiors.


'I AM NOT LYING TO PROTECT ANYBODY, COUNSEL'
LEAD: When the Iran-contra hearings resumed yesterday morning, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North was questioned by the House committee's deputy minority counsel, George Van Cleve, on various matters, including his dealings with an Iranian intermediary and false statements he has made.
The Ghorbanifar Issue


Advertising; B.&amp;S. Buys Rath Firm
LEAD: Backer &amp; Spielvogel, the agency for Wendy's International since mid-June, has acquired Rath Advertising, a supplier of merchandising, sales promotion and local advertising for the fast-food chain.


BOMBAY STREET CHILDREN SCAMPER TO FIND FUTURE
LEAD: The beggar families rise up in the night from their sidewalk pallet as formidable nuclear units who badger and cling miserably to the legs of a passing potential benefactor.


Israel Guards Its Rights in Iran Arms Case
LEAD: To the Editor:


SUMMERFARE GIVES DANCE ITS DAY, DON JUAN HIS DUE
LEAD: THE Pepsico Summerfare festival, which opens tonight at the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase, has always been a place to see a wide range of dance.
And dancegoers with a taste for the new and innovative could easily spend the entire weekend at the festival, which is devoted in its opening days to dance and to theater in which movement plays an important part.


AMSOUTH BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMSOUTH BANCORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
18,514,000
16,860,000
Per share
.81
.75
6mo net inc
36,871,000
33,292,000
Per share
1.62
1.47


Advertising; A Family Production For Revlon Shampoo
LEAD: Joan Lunden, the co-host of ABC-TV's ''Good Morning America'' who is about to take her third maternity leave, has contracted to make a commercial after the baby comes for a new Revlon product called Care For Kids Mousse Baby Shampoo.


MUSIC: THE GOLDMAN BAND
LEAD: THE Goldman Memorial Band, back in place on short notice after a labor dispute was settled Wednesday afternoon, played its 70th-anniversary gala concert the same evening to an understandably sparse but warmly responsive audience at the Damrosch Park Band Shell.


Senate Action on Angola
LEAD: The Senate today rejected a trade embargo on Angola, proposed as an amendment to the trade bill by Senator Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona.
The 68-to-31 vote to table his amendment followed a sharp debate about the Administration's policy on Angola.
Washington is sending millions of dollars in covert aid to rebels who are trying to overthrow the Marxist administration in Luanda.


New York City Keeps Trying to Evict Its Drug-Dealer Tenants
LEAD: To the Editor:


ART: GAUGUIN IN BRITTANY IN QUEST OF PRIMITIVISM
LEAD: GAUGUIN, the first major artist to pursue primitivism, went to the greatest extremes in the pursuing.
As a result, his popularity has depended as much on the story of his pilgrimage to the ''real thing'' in the South Seas as on his work.
Historians have undercut the myth by showing, for instance, that the master spent much of his time in Tahiti politicking.


At Washington Post, Byline Strike Goes On
LEAD: For the second day, most articles published in Friday's issue of The Washington Post appeared without bylines because of a protest by reporters over the slow pace of negotiations toward a union contract.


POSTER ADS: CHEAP, FAST PUBLICITY
LEAD: Long after midnight, when portions of New York City become the working domain of 24-hour deli clerks, the police, sanitation crews and prostitutes, James Rogers Jr. of Paramus, N.J., loads his blue El Camino with hundreds of advertising posters and heads to New York City.


World Bank Assailed
LEAD: A Reagan Administration official today criticized the sweeping reorganization of the World Bank as not tough enough.
The official, who asked not to be identified, said that although a top-to-bottom reorganization of the 6,000-employee lending agency has caused widespread dissension and disruption in the bank, the 390 layoffs expected by the end of the year were ''peanuts.


STAGE: 'RICHARD II' IN THE PARK
LEAD: NOTHING becomes Shakespeare's King Richard II more than his dethronement.
The same could be said of Peter MacNicol's performance in the role, now on view in Joseph Papp's production at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park.


2 JERSEY JUDGES VOID JAIL TERMS IN SCHOOL STRIKE
LEAD: A state appeals court ruled today that 110 Lyndhurst teachers and school workers did not have to go to jail for taking part in an illegal six-day strike last spring.


SYSTEMATICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYSTEMATICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
38,292,000
31,830,000
Net inc
2,319,000
3,019,000
Share earns
.21
.27
Yr rev
141,577,000
122,599,000
Net inc
10,162,000
11,363,000
Share earns
.93
1.03


SLOTNICK HURT IN ATTACK LEAVING HIS OFFICE
LEAD: Barry I. Slotnick, the well-known defense lawyer whose clients have included Bernhard H. Goetz, was attacked yesterday outside his office in lower Manhattan by an unidentified man who fled on a motor scooter, the police said.


New Magazine
LEAD: David Smick and Richard Medley, former Capitol Hill staff members who have made a dent in town running conferences on currency and debt and publishing a newsletter, say they are starting a magazine in the capital called The International Economy.
They decline to disclose the provenance of the customarily substantial start-up funds that such ventures consume, but their staffing commitment appears serious.


NORTH SAYS HIS SHREDDING CONTINUED DESPITE PRESENCE OF JUSTICE DEPARTMENT AIDES: SHADOW ON CASEY
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North testified today that he continued to shred documents in his office one morning last November while Justice Department officials conducting a preliminary investigation for President Reagan worked 10 feet away reviewing other files.


Dollar, Steady vs. Yen, Falls in Other Trading
LEAD: The dollar closed lower against most major foreign currencies yesterday after trading in a narrow range, but it continued to stand its ground against the Japanese yen.


A JURY TRIES A BACHELOR, BUT CONVICTS A HUSBAND
LEAD: Allison Hamblat said ''I do'' yesterday.
The jury said, ''Not guilty,'' ''Not guilty,'' and ''Guilty.'' All in the same courtroom, before the same judge.


West Germans Charge A Brother of Hamadei
LEAD: The brother of Mohammed Ali Hamadei, the Lebanese hijack suspect, has been charged with kidnapping two West Germans held in Lebanon and with possessing explosives, a Government official said today.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A picture caption with the television listings yesterday included a misidentification, supplied by NBC, for the actor shown with Blair Brown in an episode of ''The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd.'' He was Peter MacNicol.


No Comeback For a Change
LEAD: Just when the Yankees thought they had the White Sox right where they wanted them last night, an unusual development occurred.
The Yankees didn't erupt with a late-inning come-from-behind rally and win the game.


Denny's Says No to Marriott
LEAD: Denny's Inc. has spurned an $855 million buyout bid from the Marriott Corporation, but industry analysts said they were not convinced that the talks were over.


FIRST PEOPLES BANK OF NJ reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST PEOPLES BANK OF NJ
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,678,000
c1,702,164
Per share
.83
.50
6mo net inc
b5,289,000
c3,515,933
Per share
1.64
1.21
b-Includes tax credits of $1,050,000 for the quarter and $1,960,000 for the 6 months.


DORAN HOMER IN 9th SHUTS DOWN METS
LEAD: Each night, the Mets seems to find a new way to lose, a new way to fall deeper into their unending misery.
They have lost 40 games this season, and each one has been more improbable - and painful - than the last.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.56
6.59
6.78
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.62
5.56
5.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.50
5.42
5.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.99
8.14
7.22
30-YR.


FLOW OF ALIENS INTO U.S. RISES DESPITE NEW LAW
LEAD: A rash of incidents involving illegal aliens, the worst the deaths of 18 aliens in a torrid boxcar in Sierra Blanca, Tex., has focused attention on an unexpected resurgence of illegal immigration along the nation's border with Mexico, immigration officials say.


RESIDENTS BALK AT PROPOSED CONNECTICUT EXPRESSWAY
LEAD: Every weekday morning, thousands of back country commuters from here and a half-dozen nearby towns work their way down the winding rural roads that lead to an infamous 18-mile stretch of macadam known as Route 7.
There they find gridlock in paradise. ''This is crazy,'' said Judy Moore, watching the vehicles stagger past her coffee shop hard by the Danbury-Ridgefield line on Route 7, a primary north-south road in the metropolitan area.


SAMUEL HOFFMAN
LEAD: Samuel Hoffman, a senior partner at the law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan, died Tuesday of cancer of the kidney at his home in San Jose, Calif.
He was 80 years old.
Mr.
Hoffman, who specialized in corporate law, ''had tireless energy in negotiating creative acquisitions and business combinations,'' said Franklin Feldman, a senior partner at


Net Up 16.9% At Dow Jones
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company, the publishing and information company, said yesterday that its second-quarter profit was up 16.9 percent, to $49.1 million, or 51 cents a share, from $42 million, or 43 cents a share, a year earlier.


UNITED AIR IN VENTURE IN EUROPE
LEAD: United Airlines and three European carriers plan to announce today that they will build a $120 million reservation system intended to provide fuller information to travel agents in Europe and ultimately to improve flight service both in Europe and in the United States.


A WISH FOR A MUSICAL GLASNOST
LEAD: ''There is now the possibility of true creative freedom,'' said Gennadi Rozhdestvensky about the effects of glasnost on his life and on the lives of fellow Soviet musicians.
The husky, gregarious conductor spoke in New York earlier this week on his way from Moscow to the Tanglewood Festival in Lenox, Mass., where he will lead the Boston Symphony in concerts tomorrow, next Friday and July 18.


WHERE TO FIND THE BOATS
LEAD: Here is a sampling of the boat trips available in the metropolitan region.
New York City  CIRCLE LINE: Daily departures from Pier 83, near West 43d Street and 12th Avenue, between 9:30 A.M. and 4:15 P.M., and Sundays, Wednesdays and Thursdays at 7 P.M.
The fare is $12 for adults and $6 for children.


THE TRAMA OF BEING A KUBRICK MARINE
LEAD: BEFORE being cast in Stanley Kubrick's new movie, ''Full Metal Jacket,'' Vincent D'Onofrio was a trim, good-looking athlete, a rugged 6 feet 3 inches tall and - with his full head of curly dark hair - the kind of man who makes women's heads turn.


AUSTRALIA'S LIBERALS SLIP AS ELECTION DRAWS NEAR
LEAD: SYDNEY, Australia, July 9 -


Misha Dichter Recital
LEAD: Misha Dichter, the pianist, will play Beethoven's ''Eroica'' Variations (Op. 35), Schumann's Sonata No. 1 in F sharp minor (Op.11), Four Mazurkas and the F sharp minor Polonaise by Chopin, and three Hungarian Rhapsodies by Liszt, Sunday at 5:30 P.M. in the Venetian Theater at the Caramoor Festival in Katonah, N.Y.


ATLANTANS STRIVE TO PRESERVE A HOME FAR, FAR FROM TARA
LEAD: Even then, some 60 years ago, Margaret Mitchell called the place ''the dump.'' These days the description is especially appropriate: The apartment building where she lived when she wrote ''Gone With the Wind'' is abandoned, its roof torn and sagging, its windows covered with plywood.


McMahon Hits Stride
LEAD: Jim McMahon, the Chicago Bears quarterback who had reconstructive surgery on his right shoulder surgery Dec. 12, has received the green light from Bob Gajda, who is supervising his rehabilitation.


BOYS MARKETS reports earnings for 12wks to June 14
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOYS MARKETS
12wks to June 14
1987
1986
Sales
120,059,000
110,141,000
Net inc
2,324,000
1,966,000
Share earns
.24
.21
Shares outst
9,605,000
9,200,000
24wk sales
233,710,000
-
Net inc
4,446,000
-
Share earns
.46
-
Shares outst
9,403,000
-


SEOUL PROTESTERS STAGE HUGE RALLY
LEAD: Opponents of the Government showed their strength today with perhaps the largest demonstration in South Korea's history, followed by violent assaults on the Seoul city hall and clashes with police on barricaded streets.


CITY TENNIS: IT TAKES EITHER MONEY OR TIME
LEAD: New York is not a perfect place.
Henry Miller knew this even before the alarm went off at 5:15 the other morning, and he groped for his tennis racquet.
After only five days in the city, he had already waited in a movie line for one hour, searched for a parking spot for half an hour and, late one night, been forced to listen to a drill being driven into the pavement, or as Mr.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tour de France  Van der Poel Wins a Slow Stage: Adri Van der Poel of the Netherlands yesterday won the Tour de France's 161-mile ninth stage, from Orleans to Renaze.
Erich Maechler of Switzerland retained the overall lead.
Many riders fell along the narrow roads of the Mayenne region of western France, and high temperatures made the stage the slowest yet.


Ueberroth's Hiring Goal
LEAD: Commissioner Peter Ueberroth pledged yesterday that baseball would surpass the other major sports in hiring blacks and other minority group members for high-level off-the-field jobs.


STOCKWELL IN DEMAND
LEAD: ''Now I think I'm succeeding in starting a third career here,'' said Dean Stockwell.


90-1 Return for Investor
LEAD: Reginald F. Lewis's first leveraged buyout was for a relatively small company, but it was a huge success.
He cashed out with a 90-to-1 return.
Mr.
Lewis and his investors put up $1 million in equity and received $90 million on that investment in three years.


TOURS OF ULSTER HOMES ALL DAY TOMORROW
LEAD: Tours of stone houses dating back to the 1700's are to be held tomorrow between 10 A.M. and 5 P.M. in the town of Hurley in Ulster County.


NATION'S RETAILERS REPORT RISE IN SALES FOR JUNE
LEAD: The nation's largest general retailers reported mostly favorable June sales results yesterday, and analysts surveying the figures said they expect consumer spending will continue at a cautious rate.


A Few Surprises in All-Star Reserves
LEAD: Sid Fernandez made it, but not his Met teammate Terry Leach.
Dave Righetti made it, but not his Yankee teammate Rick Rhoden.
And Rick Sutcliffe and Bret Saberhagen made it as expected when the pitchers and reserves were named yesterday for the All-Star Game Tuesday night in Oakland, Calif.


Gephardt v. Kemp
LEAD: Two contenders for different Presidential nominations have agreed to a debate on the issue of trade.
Representatives Jack F. Kemp, Republican of upstate New York, and Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, will square off July 20 at the Drake University Law School in Des Moines.


2 Doctors Among 24 Seized In a Medicaid Fraud Inquiry
LEAD: A nine-month undercover investigation culminated yesterday with the arrests of two physicians and 22 pharmacists and drugstore owners in New York City on Medicaid fraud charges including widespread drug violations and illegal medical practices.


JUDGE REFUSES TO DELAY ORDER TO REVIEW ARRESTS
LEAD: A Federal judge refused yesterday to give New York City 30 days to set up a system for the city's courts to review the probable cause of all arrests within 24 hours of the arrests.


Two Legal Minds at the Hearings
LEAD:  Brendan V. Sullivan Jr.  Attorney for Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North


Bianchi Gets Down to Work
LEAD: Al Bianchi held his first meeting as the Knicks' general manager yesterday with Dick Evans, the president of Madison Square Garden Corporation and the Knicks, and Jack Diller, Evans's chief aide.
The topic?
Finding a head coach.


TYCO LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TYCO LABORATORIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
278,666,000
269,943,000
Net loss
b4,090,000
c10,415,000
Share earns
-
.59
Yr sales
1,061,788,000
741,171,000
Net inc
b26,802,000
c37,500,000
Share earns
1.54
2.17


JUDGE WHO WAS THURMOND AIDE CALLED A KEY CANDIDATE FOR F.B.I.
LEAD: A Federal judge who once served as an aide to Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina, has emerged as a leading candidate to become Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, according to people knowledgeable about the search.


Amoco Weighing A Dome Pullout
LEAD: The Amoco Canada Petroleum Company said that it might ask to be released from its $3.87 billion agreement to buy Dome Petroleum Ltd. if a Canadian court orders Dome to consider other suitors.
A spokesman for Amoco Canada, the Calgary, Alberta, subsidiary of the Amoco Corporation, said the company had made no decision yet, pending the outcome of the case.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JULY 10, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


Kraft Offers Foreign Issue
LEAD: A $175 million (New Zealand) financing by Kraft Inc. yesterday became the third foreign currency-denominated debt issue priced over par to be offered in the United States since Wednesday.


New York City Plans Competitive Note Sale
LEAD: The City of New York plans a competitive sale of up to $1 billion of short-term notes between July 16 and Aug. 7, Mayor Koch announced yesterday.


WEST GERMAN CHIEF AND WALDHEIM PLAN TRADITIONAL MEETING
LEAD: After his visit to Pope John Paul II in the Vatican last month, President Kurt Waldheim of Austria has obtained an invitation to meet with President Richard von Weizsacker of West Germany.


EQUITY APPROVES BRITON FOR 'ROAD TO MECCA'
LEAD: The Actors' Equity Association agreed yesterday to allow the British actress Yvonne Bryceland to re-create her leading role in ''The Road to Mecca'' next season on Broadway.


G.O.P. FILIBUSTER IN SENATE BLOCKS VOTE ON GULF DELAY
LEAD: A Republican filibuster blocked Senate consideration today of a resolution seeking a delay in the Administration's plan to fly American flags on Kuwaiti tankers.


Still Time to Act on Bias-Related Violence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drop in Jews Leaving Soviet
LEAD: A State Department spokesman expressed concern today that the recent level of Jewish emigration from the Soviet Union had declined to 796 in June, from 871 in May.
Charles E. Redman, the Department spokesman, said Jewish emmigration had increased in each previous month this year.


Trailways Took a Direct Hit in Air-Fare Wars
LEAD: To the Editor:


A BROOKLYN TALENT SCOUT
LEAD: THERE are only a few people in the art world who regularly spot new talent and then actually do something about it.
Charlotta Kotik is one of them.


HOWARD V. FUNK
LEAD: Howard V. Funk, who was superintendent of schools in Bronxville, N.Y., for 10 years, died of heart failure Tuesday at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville.
He was 91 years old and lived in Tuckahoe, N.Y.


Ringside Seats
LEAD: After the Cleveland Indians rallied late in each game against the Kansas City Royals to sweep a three-game series, one that had been marked by knockdown pitches and brawls, George Brett of the losing Royals, sounding as if he had enjoyed the experience, decided that the previously downtrodden Cleveland fans finally got their money's worth.


GRUNTAL FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRUNTAL FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to May 29
1987
1986
Revenue
57,866,000
53,866,000
Net inc
2,725,000
2,608,000
Share earns
.24
.23
9mo rev
159,858,000
149,527,000
Net inc
7,436,000
7,487,000
Share earns
.67
.69


IN 1988, IT'S TRENDY TO TELL ALL
LEAD: It was not surprising that Kitty Dukakis, the wife of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, a Democratic Presidential contender, decided to discuss her onetime addiction to diet pills in public.
And that, politicians, political consultants and academics said today, may be the most remarkable fact about the way the 1988


STAGE: 'DRAGONS' TRILOGY,' A CANADIAN PANORAMA
LEAD: THE excitement of ''The Dragons' Trilogy,'' by Le Theatre Repere of Quebec, is so intense that only on reflection do its structural flaws bother one.
The play, being presented at the International Theater Festival at the State University of New York in Stony Brook, L.I., spins through 70 years of Canadian life in a vivid whirlwind of spectacle, movement and music.


Advertising; Fewer New Products
LEAD: There was an unusual dip in the number of product introductions in June compared with June 1986, according to the DFS Dorland New Product News.
The number usually increases from year to year.
The figure was 684 this year, compared with 692 last year.


The Question of Liabiliyty
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North testified yesterday that a turning point for him in the Iran-contra affair was the press conference Nov. 25. at which Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d discussed, among other things, the questions of who knew about the diversions.
Here is an exchange from that press conference.


Tiffany in Munich
LEAD: Tiffany &amp; Company, the 150-year-old jewelry retailer, said that it would open its second European shop later this year in Munich, West Germany.
Tiffany, with eight stores in the United States, opened a shop in London in September 1986 and plans more stores in major European cities.


Devils Sign Sauve
LEAD: Letting their fingers do the walking through the free-agent lists, the Devils picked up some experienced goaltending yesterday and that enabled them to let one of their younger goalies get some experience in international play.


DOW JONES &amp; CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOW JONES &amp; CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
313,053,000
285,318,000
Net inc
49,115,000
41,993,000
Share earns
.51
.43
6mo rev
598,608,000
544,986,000
Net inc
b115,834,000
c103,766,000
Share earns
1.20
1.07


Last Call for Albany Housing Action
LEAD: Despite its drive to go home, the New York Legislature has time today to move bills that would directly and indirectly alleviate the state's critical housing shortage.


DI INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DI INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,655,969
10,394,481
Net inc
b1,863,204
c6,757,202
Share earns
.34
-
b-After a gain of $15,163,591 on the exchange of securities.
c-Net loss


Jerry Livingston Dies; Wrote 'Mairzy Doats'
LEAD: Jerry Livingston, the composer of ''Mairzy Doats,'' ''The 12th of Never,'' ''Talk of the Town'' and many other songs, died of a heart condition July 1 at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 78 years old.


Taiwan Shift On Exporters
LEAD: The Cabinet decided today to lift Taiwan's 38-year-old foreign exchange controls, removing a barrier that has kept the nation's massive foreign reserves from flowing to other countries.


1,750 HOMELESS OFFERED CHANCE FOR NEW HOMES
LEAD: Sixteen nonprofit groups have been selected to develop and operate housing for about 1,750 homeless people, the Koch administration said yesterday.


19 ARE INJURED AS 2 FERRIES COLLIDE IN HEAVY FOG ON L.I. SOUND
LEAD: Nineteen people were hurt this morning when two ferryboats collided in heavy fog as they crossed Long Island Sound.


Correa Suffers Fracture
LEAD: ''That means I've been pitching with a broken arm,'' Edwin Correa, a Texas Rangers right-hander, said yesterday after X-rays revealed that he had been throwing with a stress fracture in his shoulder for about eight weeks.
He was placed on the 21-day disabled list.


L.I. RESORT BUILT IN THE 20'S IS RESCUED
LEAD: For more than half a century Montauk Manor, a 250-room fantasy castle with turrets and spires, has sat atop Fort Hill, one of easterly Long Island's highest points, as a monument of sorts to the giddy and opulent way of life of high society in the twenties.


DINING OUT GUIDE: WITH MUSIC
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
CHEZ JOSEPHINE, 414 West 42d Street (594-1925) - *(Oct. 31, 1986) Finding a spot to enjoy good music and good food in the same setting can be a problem in New York City, but the options are widening.


AFTER A DEATH, WORKERS TESTED FOR A SICKNESS
LEAD: Hundreds of workers at a Federal office building in lower Manhattan are being screened for Legionnaires' disease after one of their co-workers died from the disease and another was hospitalized.


An Opinion on Seoul


DATA TRANSLATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA TRANSLATION INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,383,000
5,622,000
Net inc
847,000
509,000
Share earns
.27
.17
Shares outst
3,193,000
3,049,000
6mo sales
15,007,000
10,158,000
Net inc
1,422,000
889,000
Share earns
.45
.29
Shares outst
3,177,000
3,027,000


RUSSIANS FAULTED IN AFRICAN CRASH
LEAD: A Soviet flight crew that ignored an alarm and descended in darkness caused the crash that killed President Samora M. Machel of Mozambique and 34 others, an international board of inquiry said today.


SHORT BOAT TRIPS FOR LOCAL SALTS
LEAD: THE appetizers are served, the wine is poured and the band begins to play ''Anchors Aweigh.'' Suddenly the restaurant moves and, from across the water, the skyline of Manhattan starts to unfold.


U S SPRINT PRESIDENT QUITS POST
LEAD: The president of the U S Sprint Communications Company resigned yesterday as the unprofitable long-distance telephone carrier announced that it would take a $350 million pre-tax charge against earnings in the second quarter.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: IT is billed as Brooklyn's first wine bar, this cheerful and casual spot in the Park Slope section called De'Vine.
Opened a year and a half ago by a former actress, Susan Garrett, it serves about 45 well-chosen wines by the glass, mostly in the $3-to-$5 range.
California and France are best represented, along with a smattering of German, Italian and Australian labels.


'WEREWOLF,' ON CHANNEL 5
LEAD: WOULD you believe a fishing-boat captain werewolf?
Would you believe a college-boy werewolf who wants to track him down?
Apparently, he'll be doing it right through the fall season. ''Werewolf,'' on Channel 5 at 8 o'clock tomorrow night, is a two-hour pilot film for an upcoming half-hour series.
Think of it as ''The Fugitive'' meeting ''The Incredible Hulk.


WILLIAM O. SWEENEY
LEAD: William O. Sweeney, a communications specialist known for his work in population control and family planning, died of cancer of the pancreas Saturday at the Devon Manor convalescent home in Devon, Pa.
He was 55 years old and lived in Manhattan.


AIDES SAY REAGAN IS VIEWING NORTH
LEAD: President Reagan is ''fully aware'' of the testimony Lieut Col.
Oliver L. North has given on Capitol Hill this week, but he will make no comment about it until the Congressional hearings are completed, probably next month, the President's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said today.


A.M.C. Merger Data Sought
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said that the Federal Trade Commission was seeking more information from Chrysler and the American Motors Corporation on their proposed merger.


FLORIDA NATIONAL BANKS OF FLORIDA INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA NATIONAL BANKS OF FLORIDA INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
9,478,000
14,300,000
Per share
.36
.53
6mo net inc
18,781,000
27,866,000
Per share
.71
1.04
Year-earlier second quarter and 6-month results are restated to reflect a change in pension accounting.


RICHARD LANGENDORF
LEAD: Dr.
Richard Langendorf, a cardiologist credited with helping to perfect interpretations of the electrocardiogram, died Wednesday.
He was 79 years old.


BONDS DRIFT IN LIGHT TRADING
LEAD: Bond prices drifted further yesterday in thin trading as traders shifted their gaze from the dollar and toward some growing hints of inflation.


'HAD MANY WORST DAYS'
LEAD: As the afternoon session began, Arthur L. Liman asked Col.
Oliver L. North about the day when he offered to resign from the National Security Council.


RUBBERMAID INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RUBBERMAID INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
244,840,000
194,681,000
Net inc
21,125,000
b18,870,000
Share earns
.29
.26
6mo sales
482,812,000
383,476,000
Net inc
41,715,000
b34,965,000
Share earns
.57
.48


An F.B.I. Agent Is Shot In a Jersey Hotel Room
LEAD: An agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation was shot yesterday while interviewing a man in a South Plainfield, N.J., hotel room, authorities said.


Chrysler Financial Offers 8 3/8% Notes
LEAD: The Chrysler Financial Corporation is offering $200 million of 8 3/8 percent notes that are due in 1990 at a price of 99.93, to yield 8.40 percent, through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Johnson Says He's Sorry
LEAD: Dave Johnson apologized to reporters today, saying that this season is ''the most frustrating I've ever spent in baseball,'' and admitting that he had lost control of his emotions and his players.


F.B.I. REFUSED TO AID NORTH IN APRIL '86
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation rejected a protection request by Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North in April 1986 because it is barred by statute from providing such services for anyone except the President, the Attorney General and its own director.


Part of New Delhi Put On Curfew After Riots
LEAD: The Indian authorities ordered a curfew in part of the nation's capital after anti-Sikh violence spread today to neighborhoods in the city's west, where mobs sought to set fire to Sikh temples, homes and businesses.


Borg-Warner Fees Total $48 Million
LEAD: The Borg-Warner Corporation said it would pay $31.5 million in investment banking fees to Merrill Lynch Capital Partners regarding its $4.4 billion buyout led by Merrill.
The Chicago-based automotive and industrial parts company also said it would pay an additional $16.5 million to its financial advisers.


Citicorp Plan On Antilles
LEAD: Citicorp, a large issuer of Eurobonds, said yesterday that it would not call debt issued before 1984 by its Netherlands Antilles subsidiary.
The announcement followed a statement by the General Motors Acceptance Corporation that it would not call its bonds.
The United States Treasury


Saving Whales From 'Science'
LEAD: In the last year, South Korea and Iceland have killed hundreds of whales for profit but in the name of science.
Both countries have brazenly exploited a loophole in the international whaling treaty that allowed virtually unregulated killing of whales for ''scientific research.'' That loophole has now been closed by the International Whaling


Pinned to, and on, Colonel North
LEAD: Oliver North is unwilling to call himself a hero.
The six rows of decorations pinned to his uniform, he said yesterday, represent the heroism of marines who served under him.
At the same time, he's also unwilling to have something much heavier pinned on him: the blame.


FILM: CAINE AND GEILGUD IN 'THE WHISTLE BLOWER'
LEAD: A NUMBER of killings occur during ''The Whistle Blower,'' Simon Langton's film about a British spy ring.
But there is only one gun to be seen here, glimpsed briefly in one of the film's last scenes, and for the most part it stays inside a drawer. ''The Whistle Blower'' eschews the usual equipment to be found in spy stories, and the usual attitudes too.


Aqueduct Parlay Plan: Profits Can Ride
LEAD: Parlay betting, which the New York Racing Association proposes to implement this fall at Aqueduct, would be a strange addition to the parimutuel menu.


TRANSACTIONS
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 386 money market mutual funds increased $1.46 billion, to $237.61 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 96 institutional funds were up $516.8 million, to $65.06 billion.
Assets of the 200 general-purpose funds were down $459.7 million, to $67.65 billion.


INQUIRY SOUGHT IN RANGERS' ROLE IN LIBERTY GIFTS
LEAD: Senator Bill Bradley asked the Interior Department yesterday to investigate reports that park rangers at the Statue of Liberty have been pressed to solicit donations from visitors.


A SANCTUARY AND INDIAN SURPRISES
LEAD: TIME stands still at the Cafe Pierre, that sanctuary of privilege in the Pierre Hotel where the ladies appear to have emerged from Town and Country magazine, the men wear year-round tans and European suits and the city's rough edges are upholstered with plush gray felt.
For years the cafe was known as a glorified tea room, a polite and familiar place to take Aunt Sofie for dinner when she visited from Boston.


NEWS OFFERS BUYOUTS TO PRINTER
LEAD: In a new phase in crucial labor negotiations, The Daily News has offered to buy out the lifetime contracts of up to 125 typographers for an annuity and insurance package that, the union said, is worth $110,000 a person.


DIGITAL MICROWAVE reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGITAL MICROWAVE
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,207,066
2,764,384
Net inc
1,336,926
b343,965
Share earns
.12
.03
Shares outst
11,230,680
10,035,456
b-Includes a tax credit of $144,570.


To New Heights
LEAD: Since 1866 when J. Wheeler of Britain used a pole to soar 10 feet off the ground, the world record in the pole vault has inched up over the last 121 years to nearly twice that height.
Sergei Bubka of the Soviet Union came within 3 inches of 20 feet June 23 in Prague with a vault of 19 feet 9 1/4 inches.


WEIS MARKETS reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEIS MARKETS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
281,884,000
269,215,000
Net inc
18,612,000
16,041,000
Share earns
.41
.35
6mo sales
560,444,000
541,406,000
Net inc
36,649,000
31,655,000
Share earns
.80
.69


Jones and Thomson in Tie for Open Lead
LEAD: Gordon Jones underwent arthroscopic surgery on his left knee on June 16.
Thirteen days later, the 57-year-old professional golfer qualified for the 10th annual United States Senior Open using a golf cart to get around the Zanesville, Ohio, Country Club course.


Giamatti Issues Warning
LEAD: A. Bartlett Giamatti, the president of the National League, warned all teams in the league yesterday that he would take severe measures, including suspensions, against players involved in ''acts clearly intended to maim or injure another player.''


REBELS TO REVIVALISTS: WHO'S WHO AT SEMINAR
LEAD: The new-music festival, which begins today, will run through Wednesday at various clubs around the city.
Information on showtimes and ticket prices is available at each club.
Here is a schedule of performances:  TODAY  Bitter End, 149 Bleecker Street (673-7030).
Equator; Boom Boom Crash; the Crows; Igloos.


ALBANY IN ACCORD ON COURT PROGRAM AND BUSINESS TAX
LEAD: Moving toward the close of the main 1987 legislative session, Governor Cuomo and lawmakers reached agreement today on an array of key issues from restructuring corporate taxes to a $1.25 billion plan to rebuild the state's courts.


1,591 Pages Fat
LEAD: The Federal Government has not grown much under President Reagan, but the Congressional Directory for 1987-88, just published by the Government Printing Office, is the fattest ever.
It contains 1,591 pages, 395 more than the last issue, printed in 1985.


ROWAN COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROWAN COMPANIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
29,665,000
40,948,000
Net loss
18,641,000
9,897,000
6mo rev
53,533,000
94,823,000
Net loss
38,276,000
15,752,000


POP AND JAZZ GUIDE
LEAD: Henry Threadgill Sextet, Central Park Band Shell, midpark at 72d Street (860-1335).
Three horns, cello, bass and two drummers make this the only sextet with seven members, but that's beside the point.
Henry Threadgill's tunes offer wry ironies, blues feeling and structural clarity, warmth and scuttling swing.


Economic Scene; Latin Market Ebbs for U.S.
LEAD: THE United States is slowly increasing its exports, whittling away at the nation's huge trade deficit.
If that deficit is to be dissolved, however, buyers must still be found for tens of billions of dollars of new sales abroad.
In the past, whenever American exports expanded, Latin America always stepped forward to purchase a big share of the additional goods.


NETWORKS TO GET MORE FOR ADS
LEAD: Despite people meters and increased competition from cable and syndicated television, the three major television networks are expected to get healthy price increases for advertising spots now being sold for this fall's prime-time season.


2 MORE JETS IN NEAR-MISS OVER ATLANTIC
LEAD: Two jets carrying about 180 passengers nearly collided over the Atlantic yesterday, less than 24 hours after a near-collision over the ocean threatened the lives of nearly 600 people on two other jetliners.


GOLD MEDAL VIOLINIST
LEAD: Ilya Grubert, winner of the gold medal at the 1978 Tchaikovsky Competition, will be the soloist in a performance of Shostakovich's First Violin Concerto, tomorrow night at 8:30 at New Jersey's Waterloo Village.
Yoav Talmi will conduct the Waterloo Festival Orchestra.
The program includes works by Glinka and Dvorak.


IMPORT DISCRETION
LEAD: Despite the threat of a veto and the loss of business backing, the Senate today approved an amendment to the trade bill that would require 60 days' advance notice to employees and local communities of plant closings and mass layoffs.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Travel System for Europe


ADMINISTRATION ASSAILS BIDEN OVER DELAY ON BORK
LEAD: The White House today accused Joseph R. Biden, the Senate Judiciary Committee chairman, of politicizing confirmation hearings on the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court.
The comments came after a committee spokesman said the Delaware Democrat would lead the opposition to the conservative appeals court judge.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''When I heard the words criminal investigation, my mindset changed considerably.''  - Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.  [ A1:4. ]


COMMUNTIY BANK SYSTEM reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMUNTIY BANK SYSTEM
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,102,930
836,080
Per share
.46
.49
Shares outst
2,412,714
1,658,706
6mo net inc
2,204,480
1,667,478
Per share
.91
.98
Shares outst
2,414,768
1,654,850


S.E.C. Said to Expand Search for Bond Fraud
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has widened its investigation of the possibly fraudulent sale of municipal bonds to include about 60 issues, many of them marketed by major Wall Street underwriters, according to published reports.
As much as $12 billion of securities may be involved.


NEW SUMMER STAPLE
LEAD: Move over, margarita.
The Bellini has arrived.
In trend-setting restaurants around the city this summer - from Harry Cipriani and its recently opened spinoff, Bellini, to Ciao Bella, Il Palazzo, Island and Alo Alo - the insouciant, aggressively bronzed set is sipping this Italian aperitif, which combines peach juice and sparkling wine.


CHAMBER MUSIC
LEAD: The Waterloo Festival presents an evening of chamber music performed by members of its faculty tonight at 8:30 in Richardson Hall on the campus of Princeton University.
The program includes works by Bach, Rossini, Brahms, Beethoven and Bartok.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (800) 682-8080.


A FALL GUY YES, A PATSY NO, A PRESIDENT'S SERVANT SAYS
LEAD: He was willing to take the hit.
He was ready to be dropped like a hot rock.
He would play the ''fall guy,'' as he put it in tough-guy lingo, allowing his superiors to finger him on a scheme that was going down the tubes.


Value Shrinking Daily
LEAD: To the Editor:


Remains of Pvt. Eddie Slovik Lost in Transit From France
LEAD: The remains of Pvt.
Eddie Slovik, the only American soldier executed for desertion in World War II, were reported missing by airline officials tonight as they were being returned from France for reburial in his native Detroit.


ARCHITECT OF SOVIET CHANGE
LEAD: Abel G. Aganbegyan, a key architect of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's audacious new economic program, likes to travel. ''It's my passion,'' he said, reporting that he covers 150,000 miles a year crisscrossing the Soviet Union on economic missions.


Boland Amendments: What They Provided
LEAD: During the period being examined in the Iran-contra hearings, United States Government aid to the Nicraguan rebels was governed by a series of legislative restrictions together known as the Boland amendments.


Gorbachev or Not, Reform Will Stay
LEAD: The Kremlin's newly approved package of economic reforms is, by Soviet standards, so radical that many strong voices in the West have predicted its failure even before Mikhail S. Gorbachev can begin implementing them.


TOWER PANELISTS WATCHING FOR ANSWERS ON NORTH'S ROLE
LEAD: Edmund S. Muskie, a member of the Presidential commission that investigated the Iran-contra affair, acknowledged today that Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's testimony had contradicted the panel's finding that he had operated virtually independently, but he added that he was not sure whether to believe him.


Bank Aide Convicted In Girl's Hit-Run Death
LEAD: A 26-year-old bank mortgage advisor was convicted yesterday of negligent homicide in the hit-and-run death of an Upper East Side high school student last fall.


Concern About Takeover Bill
LEAD: Three of New York's most prominent securities lawyers told a panel of the House of Representatives today that proposed tender offer legislation would have small effect on hostile takeover activity.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Our Towns; Stamping Out Sprinkler Abuse In Old Westbury
LEAD: Suburbanites love to use water and there are no greater water users than the people of Long Island.
While the average American uses 110 gallons of water a day, the average Nassau County resident runs 135 gallons.
And this is just average.
There are people on the Island, if they don't use 200 gallons, it's a bad day for them.


Let's Get All the Lead Out of the Gasoline
LEAD: To the Editor:


BIG ADVANCE FOR 'INTO THE WOODS'
LEAD: One of the happiest bits of news to hit Broadway - not to mention the producers involved - for a while is an advance ticket sale said to be more than $2 million for the new Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine musical ''Into the Woods.'' The advance came after the powers that be of the theater-party world heard some of the songs a few weeks ago.


Pythagoras to the Rescue
LEAD: Team Turmoil, listed in the National League standing as the ''Mets,'' or ''New York'' - Town Turmoil - were, as expected, in a high state of tension in the clubhouse.


Advertising; Merrill Promotion Hails Constitution
LEAD: AS a way of supporting its many offices nationwide and giving them additional visibility, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company will underwrite ''ratification parties'' in every state as part of the celebration of the Constitution's bicentennial.


CLASSICAL SCULPTURE
LEAD: BRITISH 18th-century taste in classical sculpture - both the type of works collected and the degree of restoration on most of them - will be tested in an auction of Greek and Roman art today at Christie's in London.
The 14 ancient busts, statues and architectural elements, part of a collection of 45 pieces acquired about 1766 by James Smith Barry, are described by


Stocks Weaken; Dow Gives Up 12.76
LEAD: Stocks weakened yesterday, and the Dow Jones industrial average retreated from the record high it set in Wednesday's session.


BAKER ASKS N.A.A.C.P. FOR FAIRNESS ON BORK
LEAD: Howard H. Baker Jr., the White House chief of staff, appealed to members of the N.A.A.C.P. yesterday not to judge Robert H. Bork, President Reagan's nominee for the Supreme Court, on a ''fragmented record, reflected in news clippings.''


HOME SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
673,175
654,593
Share earns
.41
-
9mo net inc
2,262,159
1,727,756
Share earns
1.37
-
The company said year-ago share earnings are not available.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE INVERTED JENNY: Mystery, Money, Mania.
By George Amick.
Illustrated. 250 pages.
Scott Publishing Company/Amos Press Inc., 911 Vandemark Road, Sidney, Ohio 45365. $19.95.


Ansa Is Acquired
LEAD: Borland International Inc., a personal computer software company, acquired the Ansa Corporation, which makes the Paradox personal computer data-base program, for stock valued at $29 million.
Ansa, a private company in Belmont, Calif., had revenues of $8 million last year from Paradox.
Borland, founded in 1983, sells low-priced computer-language programs.


SUMMERFARE: HOW TO GO AND WHEN
LEAD: The Pepsico Summerfare begins tonight at the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase.
Performances will be in Theaters A to E and the Choral and Recital Halls.
To reach the center from Manhattan, take the West Side Highway to the Henry Hudson Parkway.
Then take the Cross County Parkway to the Hutchinson River Parkway and continue to Exit 28 (Purchase); turn left and take Lincoln Avenue to Anderson Road; the campus is on Anderson


EX-UNIROYAL HEAD
LEAD: George R. Vila, a former chairman and president of Uniroyal, died of cardiac arrest Wednesday in his Manhattan apartment.
He was 78 years old and also lived in Sharon, Conn.


Huge Protests in South Korea
LEAD: Anti-Government protesters in Kwangju, before funeral procession for student who died after being hit by a tear-gas grenade last month.
In Seoul, violent clashes followed what was perhaps the largest protest in the country's history.
It began as a memorial for the student.
Page A2. (AP)


LONG ISLAND TOURNAMENT WILL BE PLAYED ELSEWHERE
LEAD: By ALAN TRUSCOTT


Kurdish Rebels Kill 20 In 2 Villages in Turkey
LEAD: Kurdish insurgents killed 20 people, 11 of them children, in two villages in southeast Turkey Wednesday night, hours after Prime Minister Turgut Ozal urged the autonomy-seeking rebels to give up their struggle.


Advertising; The Image Group Gets All of Cosmopolitan
LEAD: The Image Group at Wells, Rich, Greene will do all of the advertising for Hearst's Cosmopolitan magazine, with billings in the neighborhood of $1 million.


INVASION OF TRASH FROM SEA OVERWHELMING COASTAL STATES
LEAD: This morning's tide swept a bountiful harvest from the sea over Bolivar's beach: faded plastic bags, tangled ropes, rubber gloves, egg cartons, thousands of six-packs and soda cans, a plastic container of ''Milde Shampoo'' from Euro Drogist in the Netherlands and a rusty refrigerator.


NORTH AND THE CHAIN OF COMMAND: WHEN TO BE A SCAPEGOAT AND WHEN NOT
LEAD: In the third day of the Iran-contra hearings yesterday, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North was questioned about the day - last Nov. 25 - when he learned from a news conference that he had been dismissed.
Here are excerpts from the testimony, as recorded by The New York Times.
SUBJECT OF INQUIRY


Ready to Run
LEAD: Because many American track and field fans knew Eamonn Coghlan had been experiencing tendinitis in his knees throughout the month of June, they feared that the Irish running star's immediate racing future, including the world championships in Rome from Aug. 29 to Sept. 6, might be in jeopardy.
While Coghlan was on a trip to his native land, reports from Ireland said he had canceled a running appearance at the Cork City Games and undergone knee surgery in


ROLAND MAYCOCK
LEAD: Roland Maycock, a retired senior vice president and general counsel of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, died Sunday at his home in North Tarrytown, N.Y., after a long illness.
He was 74 years old.
Born in New York City, Mr.
Maycock attended DeWitt Clinton High School in the Bronx, Harvard College and Harvard Law


PONCE FEDERAL BANK, FSB reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PONCE FEDERAL BANK, FSB (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,329,073
3,010,506
Per share
.61
.65
Shares outst
5,446,061
4,631,548
6mo net inc
6,754,289
6,381,188
Per share
1.24
1.53
Shares outst
5,433,764
4,157,223


SAFETY-KLEEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAFETY-KLEEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 20
1987
1986
Revenue
75,560,000
58,336,000
Net inc
8,576,000
6,479,000
Share earns
.26
.20
6mo rev
142,875,000
112,693,000
Net inc
15,982,000
12,119,000
Share earns
.49
.37


FIRST BANK SYSTEM reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST BANK SYSTEM (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
104,600,000
b49,500,000
Per share
-
.84
6mo net loss
47,200,000
b96,100,000
Per share
-
1.64
b-Net income  The company said the latest second quarter loss resulted from the June decision to add $160 million to its loan loss reserves because of recent developments affecting its credit exposure to less developed countries.


DRUG LINKED TO INFANT DEATHS RESULTS IN FEDERAL INDICTMENT
LEAD: A Federal grand jury in St.
Louis today accused a drug manufacturer, a distributor and three people of misrepresenting the safety and the effectiveness of a drug that was used in treating premature infants.


STUDENT LOAN MARKETING ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STUDENT LOAN MARKETING ASSN (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
44,600,000
36,100,000
Per share
1.01
.75
Yr net inc
87,100,000
70,500,000
Per share
1.96
1.45


BURLINGTON NORTHERN INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURLINGTON NORTHERN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,566,728,000
1,678,420,000
Net inc
74,275,000
b785,427,000
Share earns
.99
-
6mo rev
3,224,774,000
3,642,485,000
Net inc
143,710,000
b1,037,142,000
Share earns
1.92
-


HILL SAMUEL INVITES TAKEOVER BY SWISS
LEAD: The Hill Samuel Group, the British merchant bank, said today that it was negotiating with the Union Bank of Switzerland about being acquired by Union Bank.
Hill Samuel also said that its chief executive, Christopher Castleman, had resigned in protest over the talks.


In Poll, Most Believe North
LEAD: An ABC News poll conducted Tuesday, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's first day of public testimony, found that 58 percent of the 510 adults people questioned said they thought he was telling the truth.
The poll, which was made public Wednesday, found that 35 percent said the colonel was lying and the rest had no opinion.


DIRECTORS GUILD IN PACT WITH 'RAMBO' PRODUCER
LEAD: The Directors Guild of America signed a contract today with Carolco Productions, an independent company that has made the ''Rambo'' movies, according to a spokesman for the directors union.


YORK INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*YORK INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
255,371,000
185,668,000
Net inc
10,810,000
5,302,000
Share earns
1.11
.57
6mo sales
455,922,000
332,610,000
Net inc
14,730,000
3,004,000
Share earns
1.52
.32


Dainippon Pact With Reichhold
LEAD: Dainippon Ink and Chemicals Inc. said it would delay its $473 million hostile bid for Reichhold Chemicals Inc. by one month while Reichhold provides more nonpublic information.
Dainippon also said it had extended its $52.50-a-share tender offer for the White Plains-based specialty chemical company through midnight Aug.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  CLASSICS, LIGHTENED  Classical music - with a twist or two - comes to the Prospect Park Band Shell for the second weekend of the Celebrate Brooklyn performing-arts series.
Paquito D'Rivera, a jazz saxophonist, will join the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra, under the direction of David Amram, for a program called ''From Mozart to Monk'' tonight at 8.


AUSTRALIAN TO DIRECT WADSWORTH ATHENEUM
LEAD: The Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford has named Patrick McCaughey, an Australian, as its new director.
Mr.
McCaughey, now director of the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne, replaces Tracy Atkinson, who has retired.


TWO PORTIONS OF NEW YORK RENT STABILIZATION LAW ARE VOIDED
LEAD: A judge in Queens has voided two sections of New York State's two-month-old rent stabilization code on the technical ground that they were not included in a draft proposal that was presented at public hearings last year.


BANPONCE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANPONCE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
4,315,000
b6,024,000
Per share
-
1.05
6mo net inc
1,901,000
11,781,000
Per share
.33
2.04
b-Net income  The company said earnings for the latest second quarter and 6 months reflect the addition of $10 million to Banco de Ponce's reserve for LDC loans.


POP AND JAZZ GUIDE
LEAD: Freddie Jackson, with Ray, Goodman and Brown, Pier 84, 44th Street and 12th Avenue (249-8870).
New York's most popular love balladeer, Freddie Jackson implores, cajoles and sweet-talks in a rough-and-ready style that may not be as refined as that of his fellow New Yorker Luther Vandross, but is nevertheless convincing.


Indictment for Tax Evasion
LEAD: A Federal grand jury today indicted a reputed organized crime figure for evading taxes on income from business he did with MCA Records Inc.


Goldome Gets $92 Million
LEAD: Goldome, the eighth-largest thrift institution in the country, said yesterday that it had received more than $92 million in orders for its stock from depositors and other residents of its service region.
The offering ended last Thursday.


PROSECUTOR TELLS COURT DEAVER LIED TO SAFEGUARD SALE OF HIS BUSINESS
LEAD: Michael K. Deaver lied to Congress about his lobbying business to protect his ability to make ''millions of dollars of income for relatively little work,'' the special prosecutor in the case said today.


Wiser Heads in New Jersey
LEAD: Common sense has finally prevailed in a dispute between striking teachers in New Jersey and a stubborn judge in need of a lesson in temper.
A higher court has overturned jail sentences imposed by State Superior Court Judge Paul Huot on more than 100 teachers and other school employees who engaged in an illegal strike in March.


GREAT ATLANTIC &amp; PACIFIC TEA CO OF AMERICA reports earnings for 16wks to June 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT ATLANTIC &amp; PACIFIC TEA CO OF AMERICA (NYSE)
16wks to June 20
1987
1986
Sales
2,901,380,000
2,101,909,000
Net inc
30,368,000
b28,686,000
Share earns
.80
.76
Shares outst
38,078,100
37,975,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $9,700,000, or 26 cents share.


Rhoden Angry at Snub
LEAD: Rick Rhoden, one of three American League pitchers with 11 or more victories, failed to make the league's All-Star team yesterday and blamed his absence on the scuffed ball controversy that surrounded him recently.
A league official denied that the controversy had anything to do with it.


U.S.F.L. Official To Weintraub Post
LEAD: Harry L. Usher, cheif operating officer of the 1984 Olympics and commissioner of the United States Football League, is taking a position with a new division of the Weintraub Entertainment Group.


Bid for Pay 'N Pak Is Placed on Hold
LEAD: A hostile bid for Pay 'N Pak Stores Inc. was put on hold yesterday, and the West Coast home-improvement retailer appeared to have gained the upper hand in support of a management-led leveraged buyout.


THE COLONEL PRESENTS HIS CASE: HIS BELIEFS, HIS WORK AND HIS GRIEVANCES
LEAD: The committee allowed Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North to present an opening statement, after a two-day delay, and he set forth his views on his White House service and the Congressional inquiries.


MGM-UA COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MGM-UA COMMUNICATIONS (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
72,386,000
64,431,000
Net loss
27,506,000
b3,840,000
9mo rev
309,619,000
243,967,000
Net loss
41,944,000
b15,485,000
b-Net income and includes for the 9 months a tax credit of $1,185,000.


Meeting on a Middle East Peace Initiative
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, left, talking yesterday in Geneva with Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel.
They were meeting to discuss a possible international peace conference to settle the Middle East conflict.
An Israeli official said an agreement was reached that the Egyptian Foreign Minister, Esmat Abdel-Meguid, would visit Israel in about two weeks for further talks on the proposal.


FILM: 'THE SQUEEZE,' A COMEDY-ACTION DRAMA
LEAD: THERE'S nothing about Michael Keaton that says movie star.
But Mr.
Keaton, with his ordinary looks, permanent scowl and diffident manner, has in the past been able to carry entire films (most notably ''Mr. Mom'') with his quick wit and casual, smart-alecky delivery.
He would certainly do the same for ''The Squeeze,'' which opens today at the Gemini and other theaters, if there were anything to carry.


Baum, in a Playoff, Wins State Open
LEAD: Mel Baum, who qualified after another player defaulted, captured the Michelob New York State Open golf tournament today with a birdie on the second hole of a playoff against Brad Worthington.


MOZART AT CARAMOOR
LEAD: The St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble is to present an all-Mozart program tonight, as part of the Caramoor Music Festival in Katonah, N.Y.
The concert, in the Spanish Courtyard at Caramoor, starts at 9 P.M.
Tickets are $20.


Soybeans Move Higher; Oil and Cattle Advance
LEAD: Soybean futures advanced yesterday for the fourth day this week, reflecting firm cash prices and tightening supplies.
Wheat was higher but corn was mixed on the Chicago Board of Trade.


Cardinals Win 8th in a Row; Lead by 9 1/2
LEAD: Jose Oquendo's run-scoring single capped a four-run rally in the 10th inning tonight as the St.
Louis Cardinals extended their winning streak to eight games with a 7-6 victory over the San Francisco Giants.


WHERE A PANAMANIAN HERO'S DEATH INTERRUPTED THE DREAM
LEAD: In this bustling farm town on Panama's fertile Azuero Peninsula, anti-Government sentiment is nothing new.
It erupted dramatically in September 1985 after the killing of one of the town's leading citizens, Dr.
Hugo Spadafora, an outspoken critic of the military.


New Apple Unit
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. said that its new software subsidiary would be named the Claris Corporation, reflecting ''clarity and distinctiveness.'' Apple said in April that it planned to spin off its software sales effort into an independent company in which it would retain a minority stake.


ART: 7 OF WARHOL'S FINAL PAINTINGS
LEAD: AMONG Andy Warhol's last paintings are the seven, all from 1986, on view at the Leo Castelli Gallery.
They constitute neither a great show nor a merely average one, but they reveal Warhol proceeding with a reasonable facsimile of his early appropriational energy, plagiarizing himself in the process.


Where No News Is Good News
LEAD: For a time, Lawrence E. Walsh, the special prosecutor investigating the Iran-contra affair, had to call home to Oklahoma City and ask his wife's permission to watch television.


Networks Will Carry Washington Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be broadcast live beginning at 9 A.M. on the ABC, CBS and NBC television networks, on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New York and Channel 49 in Connecticut.


WASHINGTON FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (DC)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (DC)(O)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
12,107,000
9,588,000
Per share
1.02
.81
9mo net inc
34,901,000
26,416,000
Per share
2.94
2.24


EA ENGINEERING SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EA ENGINEERING SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,287,400
2,927,700
Net inc
73,200
176,300
Share earns
.03
.11
Shares outst
2,568,400
1,608,400
9mo rev
9,408,100
8,172,300
Net inc
304,800
554,700
Share earns
.13
.33
Shares outst
2,335,200
1,679,900


COMPUTER DESIGNED SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER DESIGNED SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
998,758
844,795
Net inc
b345,339
68,359
Share earns
.11
.02
9mo rev
2,438,581
2,770,681
Net inc
376,144
307,455
Share earns
.12
.10


KOHLBERG IS RAISING $5 BILLION
LEAD: Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the leader in arranging leveraged buyouts, is creating what would be by far the largest fund to finance buyouts.


Pulling Life From a Soviet Attic
LEAD: Going up to attics one sometimes finds family roots, and secrets.
In attics a child discovers that great-grandmother was a quilter, father a boy clarinetist.
Oh, what the Russians stand to rediscover as glasnost makes it possible for the first time in decades to explore the attics of the state museums.


Note of Braggadocio Resounds at Hearing
LEAD: Is there really something different about New York lawyers?
Arthur L. Liman, the chief Senate counsel, apparently thinks so.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JULY 10, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-9


BOXCAR VICTIMS BURIED, AS MIGRATION GOES ON
LEAD: As six young men were buried here, a week after they and a dozen other illegal immigrants from Mexico suffocated in the 120-degree heat of a sealed boxcar, seven men and women boarded the daily train to Ciudad Juarez, on the border with El Paso.


SENATORS SEEK BUDGET CHANGE
LEAD: Democratic and Republican leaders in the Senate have agreed to try next week to give the budget-balancing law a mechanism to make spending cuts automatic.
The Supreme Court struck down the original automatic mechanism.


The Long Seventh Day
LEAD: Anniversaries and ceremonials don't intrigue me as much as new things happening.
So I didn't stop to think what the 20th anniversary of the six-day Arab-Israeli war meant until I read the article ''My Neighbor, My Enemy,'' by Thomas Friedman, in last Sunday's New York Times Magazine.


NEW YORK HELD NOT LIABLE FOR PAROLEE
LEAD: New York State's highest court ruled yesterday that the state may not be held liable for paroling, and admitting to a state college, a prisoner who later murdered two students.
The prisoner had previously been diagnosed as homicidal.


HYCOR BIOMEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HYCOR BIOMEDICAL (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,980,000
1,616,000
Net inc
b153,000
c59,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
3,656,000
3,291,000
Net inc
b190,000
c94,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Includes extraordinary tax benefits of $48,000 and $57,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


LAWMAKERS AGREE ON INCOME TAX CUT
LEAD: Lawmakers in the State Senate and Assembly reached a tentative agreement today on a plan to reduce New York City's personal income taxes by $75 million, and to return to taxpayers another $230 million in excess revenues that the city would otherwise collect because of changes in the Federal tax code.


ROAD TO GOOD WATER STREWN WITH FAILED PROJECTS
LEAD: At daylight's first blush, the women of this tropical district for generations have begun the long walk to faraway rivers and streams to collect water for their families.


MEESE TELLS PANEL HE DIDN'T VIOLATE U.S. LAW ON ETHICS
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, testifying for the first time about his involvement with the Wedtech Corporation, told a Senate subcommittee today that he never violated Federal ethics laws.
He said a partnership he set up with an investment manager then employed by Wedtech ''involved no conflict of interest.


TURKEY TRIES TO STAY ALOOF ON WAR
LEAD: Despite hostile gestures from both sides in the Persian Gulf war, Turkey is clinging to a delicate neutrality between Iran and Iraq, seeking to remain aloof from a conflict close to its borders and fearing that it might spread.


A NEW-MUSIC FESTIVAL ROCKS WITH BANDS OF OUTSIDERS
LEAD: DURING the next six days, more than 200 rock bands will be playing at clubs, concert halls, discotheques, even a record store, in and around New York City.


Gaining on Paris
LEAD: To the Editor:


HORNE AND UPSHAW
LEAD: The Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra, conducted by Gerard Schwarz, with Marilyn Horne and Dawn Upshaw as soloists, performs works by Mozart, Vivaldi and Gluck tonight and tomorrow at 8 o'clock in Avery Fisher Hall.
Tickets are $8 to $16.
Information: 874-2424.


OFFER FOR PHILLIPS-VAN HEUSEN
LEAD: Caroline Hunt Schoellkopf, by some accounts the country's richest woman, wants to own a shirt company.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JULY 11, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


Reagan Bruises His Eyelid
LEAD: President Reagan bruised his lower left eyelid while removing a contact lens, his physician announced today.
Photographers noticed the tiny red bump when the President appeared at a meeting at the Old Executive Office Building.
To answer queries, the White House released a written statement by its physician, Army Col.


Dollar Is Mostly Higher Gold Dips in New York
LEAD: The dollar closed mostly higher in thin summer trading yesterday, with markets showing little reaction to reports pointing to weak inflation in the United States.


TV: Perception of North the Key
LEAD: It's perception that counts; who knows that better than elected officials?
On television, the question in the Iran-contra hearing yesterday was not so much what the hearing was about; it was, what did it seem to be about?
How was it playing on television?
Senator David Boren dropped a hint on CBS the night before.


HANDFUL OF BILLS IN ALBANY TOUCH EVERYDAY SITUATIONS
LEAD: Of the 900 or so bills signed into state law each year, the vast majority go unnoticed by most New Yorkers - they are technical amendments or laws affecting only small groups or in some cases, only one person.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tour de France  Mottet Captures Yellow Jersey: Charles Mottet of France took the lead yesterday after finishing second in the 10th leg of the Tour de France cycling race behind Stephen Roche of Ireland.
Roche captured the 54-mile leg, an individual time trial from Saumur to Futuroscope, France, in a time of 1 hour 58 minutes 11 seconds, riding at an average speed of 27.5 miles per hour.


AIDS Fear Spawns Ethics Debate As Some Doctors Withhold Care
LEAD: Dr.
Terence M. Schmahl, a heart surgeon at a Milwaukee hospital, and his wife, Karen, an anesthesiologist at another hospital in the city, were both concerned about contracting AIDS from the people they see every day.


Telling the Truth?
LEAD:  NORTH


Rodriguez Seizes Senior Lead
LEAD: ''If you wanted to do a script for this, you couldn't do much better for the final two rounds,'' Arnold Palmer said today after the second round of the United States Senior Open.
He was two shots behind the leader, Chi Chi Rodriguez, and a shot behind Gary Player.


MIDLANTIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDLANTIC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b28,750,000
40,081,000
Share earns
.77
1.06
Net inc
b73,763,000
79,329,000
Share earns
1.95
2.10
b-Includes a special $30 million provision for loan losses in response to developments related to the debt situation of developing nations.


MOUNTING DELAYS HINDER ARREST SYSTEM
LEAD: Every day, 24 hours a day, New York City shuffles people who are arrested but not yet formally charged with crimes from one criminal justice center to another like so many checkers.


Directors Seek Talks To Bar Weekend Strike
LEAD: Television and film producers and directors called for further talks today after a 16-hour, all-night negotiating session to try to avert a directors' strike this weekend.


Economy Lags but Race Is On in New Zealand
LEAD: New Zealanders will vote Aug. 15 in a national election that, more than anything else, will be a referendum on the Labor Government's economic policies, dubbed ''Rogernomics,'' after the Finance Minister, Roger Douglas.


RSI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RSI CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
22,035,000
13,126,000
Net inc
b2,539,000
c364,000
Share earns
.37
.05
9mo rev
65,120,000
45,781,000
Net inc
b6,607,000
c1,983,000
Share earns
.97
.29


WESTERN STEER-MOM 'N' POP'S reports earnings for Qtr to May 22
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN STEER-MOM 'N' POP'S (OTC)
Qtr to May 22
1987
1986
Revenue
18,805,000
12,690,000
Net inc
450,000
424,000
Share earns
.19
.21
Shares outst
2,517,518
2,093,153


Music: Wind Instruments At Festival
LEAD: Two summers ago, the Mostly Mozart Festival presented a ''Wind Spectacular'' that culminated in a grandiose performance of Handel's ''Royal Fireworks'' Music in one of its original orchestrations, with 24 oboes and a proportional number of other instruments.
Thursday night, before an appreciative, sold-out Avery Fisher Hall, the festival repeated the idea with a wind program that again wound up with this sweetly elephantine statement of


SOUTHEAST BANKING CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHEAST BANKING CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b43,730,000
c21,195,000
Per share
-
.74
6mo net loss
19,138,000
c40,831,000
Per share
-
1.45
b-Includes a special provision of $85 million for possible credit losses in developing countries, which brings the total reserve for credit losses to $193.6 million, or 2.53 percent of total loans outstanding June 30.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.50
6.62
6.47
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.60
5.62
5.75
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.48
5.50
5.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.65
8.19
7.22
30-YR.


SAUDI HOLDS STAKE IN TRANSAMERICA
LEAD: A company controlled by Suliman S. Olayan, a Saudi Arabian businessman, disclosed today that it owns 5.29 percent of the Transamerica Corporation, but disavowed any desire for a takeover.


British Inflation at 4.2%
LEAD: Britain's annual inflation rate, as measured by retail prices, rose to 4.2 percent in June, one-tenth of a percentage point higher than the previous month.


Pvt. Eddie Slovik's Remains Are Found in San Francisco
LEAD: The remains of Pvt.
Eddie Slovik, which were lost on their way from France and then found in San Francisco, headed home to Detroit today, more than four decades after his execution for desertion in World War II.


UNITED VIRGINIA BANKSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED VIRGINIA BANKSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b9,000,000
21,300,000
Per share
.29
.75
6mo net inc
b29,800,000
41,700,000
Per share
1.01
1.46
b-Includes an $18 million special provision for loan losses, taken primarily for Latin American loans.


Lots and Lots of Rumors
LEAD: It took 25 minutes instead of the usual five to negotiate the two furlongs from the parking lot to the press box at Belmont Park yesterday.
There was little traffic, this being a twilight racing card with the first post still hours away.
But the early birds were out and around, and every one of them wanted to stop and talk, to offer and to extract some helpful advice.


NORTH SAYS CASEY PROPOSED USING ARMS PROFIT FOR FUND KEPT SECRET FROM PRESIDENT PRIVATE SPY AGENCY
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North testified today that William J. Casey, as Director of Central Intelligence, had wanted to use profits from the arms sales to Iran to establish an ''off-the-shelf, self-sustaining, stand-alone'' fund that could pay for intelligence operations outside normal Government control.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Jack Singer, general manager of the Class AAA Phoenix Firebirds, said yesterday that the San Francisco Giants had reached an agreement with Dave Kingman for him to play in Phoenix.
The 38-year-old slugger was expected to sign a contract today.
If he displays his former power, Kingman, who has 442 major league career home runs, may play later this season with the Giants.


NORTH OUTDRAWS THE TOP SHOW ON DAYTIME TV
LEAD: If the testimony of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North were a regularly scheduled soap opera, it would be the biggest hit on television.
His appearances are attracting five times as many viewers as the most popular daytime show, ''General Hospital.''


OLIVE E. ANDREWS
LEAD: Olive E. Andrews, a former director of women's activities for the United Hospital Fund of New York, died Tuesday at the Bethel Nursing Home in Ossining, N.Y.
She was 90 years old.


PRODUCTION OF MISSLE APPROVED
LEAD: The Pentagon announced today that it had approved initial production of the Air Force's newest air-to-air missile.
It said tests had shown that the missile works and that its costs have stopped rising.


Bridge; At 19, Woman From Queens Holds Potential for Stardom
LEAD: If, as some predict, a young woman from Queens becomes a star in the game she is doomed to be last in any expert listing that is done alphabetically.


Casey Planned to Write Memoirs
LEAD: Shortly before William J. Casey was hospitalized last December, his literary agent circulated a proposal for a book of memoirs.


McEnroe on U.S. Team
LEAD: John McEnroe, who missed Wimbledon with a bad back, will play with the United States Davis Cup team for the first time since 1984 in its crucial match with West Germany next month, the United States Tennis Association announced yesterday.


GROSSMAN'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROSSMAN'S INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
310,639,000
294,781,000
Net inc
b9,350,000
d1,937,000
Share earns
.46
.10
6mo sales
502,671,000
469,771,000
Net inc
b2,854,000
cd22,099,000
Share earns
.14
-


U.N. Group Meets Amid Anxiety
LEAD: The seventh ministerial meeting of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development began deliberations today in an uncertain mood.


DEKALB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEKALB CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
97,900,000
98,900,000
Net inc
b4,600,000
c51,200,000
Share earns
.38
-
9mo rev
301,500,000
359,200,000
Net inc
b13,200,000
c41,200,000
Share earns
1.10
-


U.S. SAYS SOVIET IS STALLING ON ARMS AND SUMMIT ISSUES
LEAD: The Reagan Administration criticized the Soviet Union today for what it said was a slowdown of arms-control negotiations and preparations for a summit meeting.


CONSOLIDATED PAPERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED PAPERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
177,448,000
165,187,000
Net inc
19,128,000
24,910,000
Share earns
.88
1.14
6mo sales
352,383,000
326,929,000
Net inc
41,110,000
48,344,000
Share earns
1.89
2.22


BUSH AGREES TO 4 DEBATES
LEAD: Vice President Bush announced today that he would participate in four debates for Republican Presidential candidates later this year and in 1988.


Landlord Told to Begin Sentence: 30 Days in His Squalid Apartment
LEAD: A Beverly Hills neurosurgeon has been ordered to begin a sentence of 30 days' confinement in a vermin-infested apartment building for failing to improve conditions in four buildings he owned.


Livestock and Meat F&gt;all While Cotton Advances
LEAD: Livestock and meat futures declined today, with pork off sharply on the expectation that more hogs would be coming to market next week.


Once Was a Time: Sharing the 60's
LEAD: To everything there is a season.


Democrats and Women: Party Shifts Approach
LEAD: Three years into the post-Ferraro era of Democratic politics, the party's Presidential candidates are campaigning for women's votes in a manner that has aroused debate and complaints from some women that feminism is being neglected.


Your Money; A Tax Strategy For Investors
LEAD: THE top tax rate for individuals will drop next year, and this is all the more reason to try to defer investment income into 1988.


Divestment Plan Is Approved
LEAD: The United Methodist Board of Pensions has approved a plan to sell holdings in companies that do business in South Africa.


War Games
LEAD: To the Editor:


Memo Details How a Frustrated Reagan Pondered Ways to Get Aid to the Contras
LEAD: President Reagan told his national security adviser in May 1986 that he was so frustrated by Congressional refusal to approve contra aid that he wanted ''to figure out a way to take action unilaterally to provide assistance.''


Abortion Aid Cutoff Is Blocked
LEAD: The state Court of Appeals issued an order today that blocked, at least temporarily, a new law cutting off Medicaid payments for abortions.


On Queensboro, The Cottonwood Grows Very Tall
LEAD: The City of New York naturalist, insisting that he was not a contradiction in terms, consulted his field guide, which mentioned all manner of habitats for the eastern cottonwood tree, from streams in Quebec to sandbars in Florida, but nothing pertaining to this.


Rolls-Royce, G.E. Get Qantas Orders
LEAD: Rolls-Royce P.L.C. and the General Electric Company received orders to supply engines to the Australian airline Qantas for its new long-range Boeing 747 aircraft.
The British jet-engine maker said the airline had ordered four of the American-built Boeing 747-400's with Rolls-Royce RB211-524D4D engines and has options on a further 15.


Japan Car Cutback Seen
LEAD: Japan's car industry will shrink by 2 percent over the next three years because cheaper vehicles made in the United States will take some of its export market, a spokesman for the Industrial Bank of Japan predicted today.
The decline would cost Japan's economy about 30,000 jobs over the next three years, he said.


Judge Rules in Lawsuit On Building of Tower
LEAD: A Federal judge ruled yesterday that the landmarks preservation law in New York was constitutional, but that he must review a refusal to permit construction of an office tower on the grounds of St.
Bartholomew's Church.


VALLEY INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VALLEY INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,926,000
18,578,000
Net inc
34,000
b2,483,000
6mo rev
34,140,000
35,746,000
Net loss
1,583,000
3,985,000
b-Net loss


Opera: 'Cavalleria' in Park
LEAD: Watching the New York Grand Opera struggle through ''Cavalleria Rusticana'' and ''Pagliacci'' at the Central Park Bandshell on Thursday night made one wonder why opera doesn't stay indoors where it's safe.
Granted the weather forecast (hot and steamy) fit the subject matter at hand, but there was simply too much to fight against.


VLSI TECHNOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VLSI TECHNOLOGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
42,006,000
26,035,000
Net inc
1,856,000
159,000
Share earns
.08
.01
6mo rev
80,202,000
46,570,000
Net inc
3,468,000
b2,034,000
b-Net loss


TOO MUCH OF A BAD THING
LEAD: Sports, having already established itself as the opiate of the masses, now seeks to become their constant companion.


SOLITRON DEVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOLITRON DEVICES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
13,256,000
13,029,000
Net inc
1,002,000
1,037,000
Share earns
.23
.20
Shares outst
4,365,576
5,185,764


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''Are you criticizing how well I did my shredding?'' - Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.


Chip Orders Dropped in June
LEAD: Orders for semiconductors weakened in June from May levels, and the book-to-bill ratio, a key index of the health of the industry, suffered its first substantial decline since last summer.


The Dance: A Salute To the Hula
LEAD: The American Dance Festival brought four Hawaiian dance companies to Page Auditorium of Duke University on Thursday night.
Watching ''Dance Hawaii: A Salute to Classical Hawaiian Dance'' was like making a voyage of discovery.


RAYTHEON CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAYTHEON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,917,000,000
1,828,000,000
Net inc
110,800,000
99,800,000
Share earns
1.50
1.28
Shares outst
73,800,000
77,900,000
6mo sales
3,668,000,000
3,553,000,000
Net inc
212,600,000
192,100,000
Share earns
2.87
2.47
Shares outst
74,000,000
77,800,000


NATIONAL BANCORP OF ALASKA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL BANCORP OF ALASKA
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,923,000
4,367,000
Per share
.79
.88
6mo net inc
7,657,000
8,887,000
Per share
1.54
1.78


FOOD SECTOR A KEY
LEAD: In a highly encouraging report on inflation, the Government said today that the Producer Price Index for Finished Goods rose only two-tenths of 1 percent in June.


It's Official, It's Cheap, It's Smuggled
LEAD: On the narrow sidewalks of Palma Street, near the brightly uniformed soldiers who guard Paraguay's Pantheon of Heroes, about 30 young men try to catch the eye of passers-by with the glitter of their bargains - Rolex, Cartier and Omega watches that are all cheap because they are fakes.


William Halstead, 84, Stereo Radio Innovator
LEAD: William S. Halstead, an inventor who was a pioneer in stereophonic broadcasting, died of pneumonia Tuesday at Canoga Park (Calif.) Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Woodland Hills, Calif., a Los Angeles suburb.


The Senate Helps Trade, but Not Enough
LEAD: The Senate has taken three steps forward and one backward on important amendments to its trade bill.
The forward steps, sponsored by Senators Bradley and Gramm, give the President essential flexibility in dealing with import competition.
The bipartisan step backward, co-sponsored by the Senate leaders, Robert Byrd and Bob Dole, waters down the House's


Trash Barge To End Trip In Brooklyn
LEAD: The 112-day odyssey of the Mobro, the world's most famous garbage barge, appeared to be over today as New York City agreed to burn its load at an incinerator in Brooklyn.


TV: HAYLEY MILLS AS TEACHER
LEAD: At 8:30 tonight, Hayley Mills plays a with-it sixth-grade teacher in ''Good Morning, Miss Bliss,'' which has all the marks of threatening to become a half-hour NBC series.
Miss Bliss's students, whom we meet at the start of the new school year, are cute as buttons - a whole classroom of Indianapolis buttons.


Operetta: New Leads In 'Prince'
LEAD: The New York City Opera shifted casts Wednesday night in its run of Sigmund Romberg's ''Student Prince.'' The two sets of singers will alternate in these performances, which continue through tomorrow.


DOW GAINS 4.78 POINTS TO 2,455.99
LEAD: Stock prices rose modestly yesterday despite the release of what many traders said was positive news on inflation.


U.S. Links 3 to Boxcar Deaths
LEAD: Federal charges were filed today against three Mexicans thought to be part of a smuggling ring linked to the deaths of 18 illegal aliens in a locked boxcar.
One of the men was being held in El Paso, but the authorities believe the other two have fled to Mexico.


Day Accepts New Hanna Bid
LEAD: The M. A. Hanna Company said today that the board of the Day International Corporation had accepted a sweetened takeover offer for about $336 million.


And the Telegrams Pour In
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North has reported receiving thousands of telegrams, most of them supportive, since his testimony began this week.
Here are some of them.


Panama Policemen Prevent Anti-Government Gathering
LEAD: Riot policemen sealed off a section of Panama's capital today to prevent anti-Government demonstrators from gathering for a protest rally.


PHOTO SATELLITES RESTRICTED BY U.S.
LEAD: The Commerce Department today issued final regulations that give the State and Defense Departments the right to veto license applications for private ownership of satellites capable of producing high-resolution photographs.


North's Methods: Calling Up the Memory of Teddy Roosevelt
LEAD: As Lieut Col Oliver L. North testified for the fourth day yesterday, Arthur L. Liman the chief counsel for the Senate committee, questioned him about the circumstances and goals of the Iran negotiations, and about the actions of his superiors.
Here are excerpts from the testimony, as recorded by The New York Times.


Mesclun: Latest in Salads
LEAD: After you have discarded iceberg lettuce and even grown tired of bibb, Kentucky limestone, arugula and mache, what is left?


Satirist Paints Soviet Future
LEAD: Vladimir Voinovich says he fixed on the name for his latest novel, ''Moscow 2042,'' by sitting back and trying to predict how long the Soviet state could be expected to survive.


A Podiatrist Pleads Guilty To Overbilling of Medicaid
LEAD: A Brooklyn podiatrist pleaded guilty yesterday to overbilling the state Medicaid program by $70,000 and agreed to pay the money back.


Stieb's 4-Hitter Blanks Royals
LEAD: Dave Stieb pitched a four-hitter, and George Bell hit his 29th homer and drove in two runs tonight as the Toronto Blue Jays shut out the Kansas City Royals, 7-0.


'We Were Not Breaking the Law'
LEAD: At one point yesterday, Representative Ed Jenkins, Democrat of Georgia, had a heated exchange with Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North about the plans for a continuing fund.
Here are parts of that exchange.


Judge Says U.S. Officials, Honoring Constitution, Violated Protesters' Rights
LEAD: A Federal district judge, declaring that the officials who control Independence Mall ''may not fully appreciate the reach of the First Amendment,'' found today that they had violated the free-speech rights of protesters at a ceremony honoring the Constitution's bicentennial.


AN EVANGELIST AND NORTH
LEAD: On Sept. 15, 1985, the day that Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North left for his secret mission to Teheran, the Marine officer confided to the Rev.
Pat Robertson that he was going to Iran to seek the release of hostages, Mr.
Robertson said today.


U.S. Issues Rise Moderately
LEAD: Prices of Government securities rose moderately yesterday in response to a smaller-than-expected increase of two-tenths of 1 percent in June's Producer Price Index.


MOSCOW AND BONN ARE INCHING CLOSER
LEAD: A six-day visit to the Soviet Union by President Richard von Weizsacker appears to have opened the way for a stepping up of high-level contacts between Moscow and Bonn, according to West German officials and Western diplomats.


CATERPILLAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CATERPILLAR INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,040,000,000
1,990,000,000
Net inc
118,000,000
139,000,000
Share earns
1.20
1.41
6mo sales
3,689,000,000
3,724,000,000
Net inc
34,000,000
250,000,000
Share earns
.35
2.54


Judge Withdraws as Candidate to Head F.B.I.
LEAD: Adding to the list of candidates who have turned down the job, a Federal appeals judge from South Carolina withdrew his name from consideration as head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Retreat From Populism in Maryland
LEAD: Gov.
William Schaefer of Maryland threatens to withhold state funds for poverty lawyers unless they promise not to sue the state.
Though clothed in humanitarian arguments, the move represents a retreat from statesmanship.


ELI LILLY &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELI LILLY &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,017,600,000
879,300,000
Net inc
150,300,000
125,700,000
Share earns
1.03
.87
6mo sales
2,076,600,000
1,867,600,000
Net inc
355,500,000
298,300,000
Share earns
2.42
2.07


Sowell Airs Letter To Todd Shipyards
LEAD: The Dallas investor James E. Sowell, who holds a 9.9 percent stake in the Todd Shipyards Corporation, has listed several alternatives that he said the Jersey City-based naval construction, repair and overhaul concern should pursue ''as soon as practical.'' The list was part of a July 7 letter to the board of the financially troubled concern.


E. GEORGE THIEM
LEAD: E. George Thiem, an investigative reporter who twice won the Pulitzer Prize at The Chicago Daily News, died Wednesday.
He was 90 years old.
The Daily News, which closed in 1978, won a public-service Pulitzer in 1949 based on reporting by Mr.
Thiem, who, along with Roy J. Harris of The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, uncovered 51 newspaper employees secretly on the payroll of Gov.


Capital Drama: Lawyers Take Note
LEAD: Did the House committee's chief counsel glower too much?
Was his Senate counterpart too soft on the colonel and too tough on the President?
Why has the defense attorney been so ill tempered?


A Longer List
LEAD: Johnny Morris, a rookie wide receiver with the Chicago Bears, made some strong statements about reported payoffs to schoolboy athletes by Southwest Conference members and about the integrity of the National Collegiate Athletic Association yesterday as camp opened for Bear rookies at the team's Lake Forest


HIBERNIA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HIBERNIA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
11,500,000
7,500,000
Per share
.61
.52
Shares outst
18,901,174
14,600,994
6mo net inc
23,200,000
15,500,000
Per share
1.23
1.07
Shares outst
18,849,556
14,484,738


L.I. JITNEYS AND NEWCOMERS' PHONE PREFIXES
LEAD: Walk down Main Street's neatly swept brick sidewalks here, under a canopy of elm trees, past an array of colorful boutiques, and the travails of the city seem light years away.


Seeking a Lost Crown
LEAD: Life began at 39 for Archie Moore when he won the world light heavyweight title in 1952.
One of Moore's proteges, George Foreman, the former world heavyweight champion, hopes life will begin anew for him at the same age when he seeks to regain his title.


Correction
LEAD: A dispatch on July 6 from Amherst, Mass., about the first national conference of the American Green movement included a misstatement of the movement's position in West Germany, attributed to Jutta Ditfurth, a spokeswoman for the party there.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Garden Pianist


Tipton to Be Sold
LEAD: Tipton Centers Inc. said it had agreed to be acquired by Dixons Group P.L.C., a British consumer electronics retailer, for $9.50 a share in cash, in a deal worth $30.4 million.
The transaction was unanimously approved by the Tipton Centers board, the companies said.
Tipton, which has undergone a major expansion, runs 18 brand-name discount stores in the Midwest.


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, JULY 11, 1987
LEAD:  International 2-8  2,,q&gt;Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North testified that William J. Casey, as Director of Central Intelligence, wanted to establish a ''stand alone'' fund that could pay for intelligence operations outside normal government control.
Page 1  Americans believe Colonel North by an overwhelming margin.


Greenspan Says He'd Sit Out Some Federal Reserve Votes
LEAD: Alan Greenspan, President Reagan's nominee for chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, will not participate in regulatory decisions that directly affect J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, one of the nation's most aggressive banking companies, according to a document he submitted to the White House and Congress.


PILOT IN NEAR COLLISION OVER OCEAN SUGGESTED INCIDENT BE KEPT SECRET
LEAD: A radio conversation among pilots after two airliners nearly collided over the Atlantic Ocean on Wednesday included repeated suggestions that the incident not be reported, officials close to an investigation of the incident said yesterday.


Cards and Calls (and Cash) Pour In for North, a Hero to Many Americans
LEAD: Expressions of support are pouring in. So are the flowers. And so is the cash.


ANTHEM ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANTHEM ELECTRONICS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 26
1987
1986
Revenue
46,888,000
27,956,000
Net inc
1,151,000
834,000
Share earns
.16
.12
6mo rev
91,329,000
56,194,000
Net inc
1,861,000
1,677,000
Share earns
.26
.23


Chinese Find Tomb Figures
LEAD: Archaeologists in northern China have found 1,700 terra-cotta warriors and horses from an imperial tomb believed to be more than 1,500 years old, the New China News Agency reported today.
It said the figures depicted singers and dancers.
China's most famous terra-cotta figures are life-size warriors and horses, believed to be more than 2,000 years old.


TREASURY EASES ANTILLES TAX MOVE
LEAD: In an effort to quell an unexpected uproar in the Eurobond markets, the Treasury Department tonight retreated from part of its decision to cancel tax treaties with the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba by acting to prevent companies from redeeming their bonds.


Dukakis Ends AIDS Test Ban As State Insurance Aide Quits
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis has approved a policy that will allow insurance companies in Massachusetts to test for the AIDS virus, reversing an earlier ban on testing imposed by his insurance commissioner.


TAX ABATEMENT TO BE RENEWED BY LEGISLATOR
LEAD: Pressing to close the 1987 session of the State Legislature, lawmakers worked through the night and into this morning, reaching agreement on a renewal of New York City's J-51 real-estate tax abatement program, state economic development initiatives and a range of other outstanding issues.


Knicks, Celtics: Talks at The Top
LEAD: The negotiations for Jimmy Rodgers to become head coach of the Knicks took an unusual turn last week, reaching the highest level of the Knicks' and the Celtics' management: the chairman and chief executive officer of Gulf and Western Inc., Martin Davis, and the principal owner of the Boston Celtics, Donald Gaston.


Thai Officials Say Laos Turns To Marijuana to Help Budget
LEAD: The Government of Laos is promoting cultivation and export of marijuana as a means to earn foreign exchange, according to Thai officials who have been monitoring narcotics in the region.


North Testimony to Be Book
LEAD: Pocket Books said yesterday that it would publish the testimony of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North within a week after he completes his appearance before the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair.
Titled ''Taking the Stand,'' the mass-market paperback book will sell for $5.50.
A minimum first printing of half a million copies has been scheduled.


U.S. Anti-Drug Effort Found Ineffective in Halting Supply
LEAD: Federal law-enforcement agents are still seizing relatively little of the cocaine, marijuana and other illegal drugs smuggled into the United States, according to a Congressional report.


The Big Show
LEAD: To the Editor:


CPC INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CPC INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,316,955,000
1,129,017,000
Net inc
b175,755,000
48,751,000
Share earns
2.14
.50
Shares outst
81,975,000
97,336,000
6mo sales
2,515,311,000
2,189,411,000
Net inc
b218,516,000
86,742,000
Share earns
2.66
.89


CONTINENTAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINENTAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
83,124,000
66,440,000
Net inc
2,883,000
2,707,000
Share earns
.23
.21
Shares outst
12,822,997
12,795,752
Share earnings and shares outstanding reflect a 10 percent stock dividend paid June 2, 1987.


Time to Talk Strategy With Moscow
LEAD: Throughout the dispute over banning medium-range nuclear missiles from Europe, the cry has been ''We in Western Europe can't cut our nuclear strength - not when the Warsaw Pact is stronger in conventional forces.'' Yet Western leaders have been unwilling to foot the high bill for more men and weapons and unable to negotiate a new balance with the Soviet


Yanks' Homers Knock Off Sox
LEAD: Unlike one day earlier this season, Scott Nielsen wore socks to the ball park last night, but the Yankees knocked them off.
Joel McKeon had his socks knocked off, too.


CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a sentence of the Food Notes column in The Living Section on Wednesday was incorrectly worded.
The sentence, referring to a new food store opened by J. Bildner &amp; Sons, should have read: ''Although Upper West Siders can find produce, cheeses, seafood and prepared salads in more variety and generally better condition in other shops nearby, and Bildner's stock of packaged groceries is limited, it is doubtful that there is a finer bakery in the area.


6 Workmen Killed In a Plunge to Deck Of Ship in San Diego
LEAD: A crane-operated basket carrying 12 civilian shipyard plunged 30 feet onto the deck of a Navy ship today, killing 6 men and injuring 6. said.


War Ain't Peace Yet
LEAD: Accepting the gift of an expensive security gate, for which he later submitted phony documentation, was ''probably the grossest misjudgment I have made in my life,'' Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North told the select Congressional committees.


Let's Have No Censorship on New York's Air
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Haiti Vacation Ends in Plane Crash at Sea for 4 Americans
LEAD: Francis Randall, a 55-year-old history professor at Sarah Lawrence College, remembers that the light plane crashed into the darkened ocean with a ''terrific jolt.''


ISRAEL PACKEL
LEAD: Israel Packel, a lawyer, educator and former state attorney general who served on Pennsylvania's Superior and Supreme Court benches, died Wednesday.
He was 79 years old.


MCA Reports Chief Is Better
LEAD: In an effort to calm speculative stock trading, MCA Inc. said yesterday that its chairman and chief executive, Lew Wasserman, was recovering satisfactorily after surgery.


Persuasive Orfeo
LEAD:  ORFEO ED EURIDICE  Opera by Gluck.
Libretto by Calzabigi.
With Janet Baker, Elizabeth Gale and Elisabeth Speiser.
London Philharmonic Orchestra and Glyndebourne Chorus conducted by Raymond Leppard.
Produced at Glyndebourne Festival by Peter Hall.
Sung in Italian with English subtitles.
Home Vision.


Arias Plan Deserves Better From Us
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Calls Are Issued For Testing Of Poultry
LEAD: IN the last 10 days several consumer groups have joined in urging the Agriculture Department to require that all fresh poultry and meat be labeled with cooking and handling instructions.
A bill will soon be introduced in the Senate calling for random testing of poultry and poultry feed.
And one consumer group has urged a boycott of poultry.


Nippon Computer Deal
LEAD: Nippon Telegraph and Telephone said today that it had signed an agreement to buy its fourth supercomputer from Cray Research Inc., the Minneapolis-based computer company.


Judge Upholds Special Prosecutor's Role on North
LEAD: A Federal judge today upheld the authority of a special prosecutor to investigate the Iran-contra affair and to enforce a grand jury subpoena against Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.
The judge, Aubrey E. Robinson Jr. of Federal District Court in Washington, ruled that the Justice Department had acted properly in granting a special backup appointment to the special prosecutor, Lawrence E.


Greyhound Deal
LEAD: The Greyhound Corporation said its previously announced acquisition of the routes and some assets of Trailways Inc. takes effect Monday with the official closing of the contracts.
Greyhound said its chairman, Fred Currey, would meet with Trailways employees at the Trailways headquarters to discuss the impact of the merger on Dallas operations.


Texaco Stake 9.5% For Holmes a Court
LEAD: The Australian financier Robert Holmes a Court said yesterday that he owns 9.5 percent of Texaco Inc. common shares, up from the 7.4 percent he reported just on Wednesday.


STUART HALL CO reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STUART HALL CO (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
19,903,769
14,396,853
Net inc
456,369
311,127
Share earns
.16
.14
Shares outst
2,855,966
2,166,001
6mo sales
32,035,020
24,605,897
Net inc
758,189
559,546
Share earns
.27
.27
Shares outst
2,855,966
2,099,941


Louvre to Seek Private Backing in U.S.
LEAD: The Louvre will seek American corporate and private financing to help complete a decade-long project to renovate the museum and upgrade its conservation and exhibition facilities, according to Emile G. Biasini, the French official in charge of the expansion project.


South Korean President Resigns Party Post
LEAD: Chun Doo Hwan waving to supporters yesterday as he left the Democratic Justice Party offices with Roh Tae Woo, right, the party's designated presidential candidate.
President Chun stepped down as head of the party, citing a wish to remain above party politics as the presidential election approaches.


NUCLEAR DATA INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUCLEAR DATA INC (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,467,000
10,538,000
Net inc
b19,000
c6,051,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $6,000.
c-Net loss and includes a charge of $3,000,000 for asset restructuring.


Memos of 1986: Pushing to Help the Contras
LEAD:  THE PRESIDENT'S FRUSTRATION


In Support of a Human Rights Appointment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Vietnam Is Said to Plan To Keep Cambodia Role
LEAD: A senior Communist diplomat in close touch with Vietnam's views strongly suggested in an interview here that Hanoi intended to keep firm military links with Cambodia even if it adheres to its announced intention to withdraw its troops in 1990.


Three Police Officers Slain In Siege at Michigan Motel
LEAD: Three police officers were found shot to death before dawn today, about 10 hours after they were taken hostage by four heavily armed people in a motel here, the authorities said.


PAXTON (FRANK) CO (O) reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAXTON (FRANK) CO (O)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
92,557,745
92,382,298
Net inc
2,704,815
3,029,509
Share earns
.90
1.01


CORRECTION
LEAD: The Personal Computer column in Science Times on June 16 referred incorrectly to languages spoken in Equatorial Guinea.
Fang is one language spoken there.
The column also incorrectly described PC-Globe software's handling of the term GDP.
It is in fact defined, in the database menu, as Gross Domestic Product.


INSIDE
LEAD: U.S. Faults Soviet on Talks
The Reagan Administration pointedly criticized the Soviet Union for what it said was a slowdown of arms control negotiations and preparations for a summit meeting.
Page 3.


JUDGE IN TEACHERS' CASE SEES DRIFT FROM RESPECT
LEAD: Judge Paul R. Huot is clearly surprised by all the fuss over his jail terms for 110 Lyndhurst teachers and other school workers who defied his order to end an illegal strike last March.


Rock: Petty's 'Caravan'
LEAD: ''Rock-and-Roll Caravan,'' a touring triple bill headlined by Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, pulled into Madison Square Garden on Wednesday.
It was a distinctly old-fashioned concert, circa mid-1970's, with casual staging and guitar-driven, noncomputerized songs that looked back to Bob Dylan and the Rolling


SENATORS BACK TRADE RETALIATION
LEAD: The Senate today overwhelmingly approved a trade bill amendment designed to require the Administration to take action against countries, such as Japan, that consistently deny access to American products.


New A.C.C. Chief?
LEAD: Gene Corrigan, who had strong ties to the Atlantic Coast Conference before becoming athletic director at Notre Dame in 1981, will be named the commissioner of the A.C.C. next week, The Atlanta Journal reported yesterday, quoting a source close to Corrigan.


Man and Woman Found Slain In an East Village Apartment
LEAD: A man and a woman, both described as Asian, were found shot to death yesterday afternoon in what appeared to be an execution-style slaying in the East Village, the police reported.


Javier A. White, Head Of Law Firm in Harlem
LEAD: Javier A. White, the managing partner of Stevens, Hinds &amp; White, one of the most influential law firms in Harlem, died of a heart attack Wednesday at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 42 years old and lived in Washington Heights.


Fed Panel Backed Slight Tightening
LEAD: Federal Reserve policy makers voted by 9 to 1 at their May 19 meeting to tighten monetary policy slightly while leaving open the possibility for an increase in a key interest rate, according to minutes of that meeting that were released today.


JURY SETS POLAROID DAMAGES
LEAD: A Federal District Court jury late today set damages in a class action suit against the Polaroid Corporation.


REPORTERS' RIGHTS: ALTERED INTERPRETATION OF NEW YORK'S LAW
LEAD: In considering the scope of a New York statute protecting journalists' sources and materials from subpoena, a sharply divided Court of Appeals offered a glimpse into how judges can make new law by interpreting statutes in ways that legislators never intended.
Assemblyman Steven


FAIRCHILD TO REORGNIZE AND SELL MORE DIVISIONS
LEAD: In a wide revamping, Fairchild Industries, the military contractor, said yesterday that it was raising funds, putting more divisions on the block, trimming its debts and planning to buy back stock.


First U.S. Diphtheria Death Since '82 Occurs in Florida
LEAD: A 16-year-old boy has died of diphtheria, the nation's first reported fatality resulting from the highly infectious disease since 1982, according to health officials.


The Tables Turned, Iran Panel Bickers As North Is Praised
LEAD: Each day, the members of the Iran-contra committee have watched the yellow stack of telegrams on Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's table grow higher and higher.


Fall in Grape Crop Seen
LEAD: The California wine grape crop will be 10 percent lower than last year, according to a State Agriculture Department forecast.
The department estimated the statewide crop at 1.9 million tons, citing reduced production in most grape-growing regions.
The 1.9 million tons estimated this year is the same tonnage California growers actually harvested in 1984.


NORTH SAYS CASEY PROPOSED USING ARMS PROFIT FOR FUND KEPT SECRET FROM PRESIDENT  MANY ARE FOUND TO BELIEVE NORTH
LEAD: By an overwhelming margin, the American people say they believe Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North is telling the truth about the Iran-contra affair, and most say that President Reagan is lying, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll has found.


Cox Breaks Foot
LEAD: The St.
Louis Cardinals, front-runners despite a number of injuries to their pitching staff, received another jolt yesterday when they learned that Danny Cox, a right-hander, suffered a broken bone in his right foot.
Brian Bartow, a team spokesman, said that X-rays revealed a fracture of a bone behind Cox's little toe.


CYCLISTS FAULT LIMITED USE OF BRIDGE
LEAD: The Port Authority thought it was good news.


Move Over, Vanna
LEAD: On Wednesday morning Lieutenant Colonel North's attorney, Brendan Sullivan, scolded the committee for its slow pace in examining his client.
Unless it was sped up, he protested, the colonel would have to come back next week.


Pension Funds Start With Lower Wages
LEAD: To the Editor:


CONSTON CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to May 38
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSTON CORPORATION (AMEX)
Qtr to May 38
1987
1986
Sales
46,894,000
44,619,000
Net inc
b3,110,000
3,279,000
Share earns
.41
.50
Shares outst
7,600,000
6,600,000
b-Includes about 5 cents a share attributed to a reduction in the Federal income tax rate under the 1986 Tax Reform Act.


White-Water Team Shoots for the Top
LEAD: The white-water rivers of our nation - the swift ones made white by their rapids - have challenged recreational canoeists and rafters for years.
The rivers, like the Youghiogheny in Pennylvania or the Penobscot in Maine, may be old, but new to them are the high-tech carbon fiber canoes and kayaks, carrying competitors in wet suits.


Letter: On Wilderness Preserves; Alaska Has Withdrawn Its Fair Share
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHARLES KING JR.
LEAD: Charles King Jr., a corporate executive and management consultant, died of cancer Wednesday in Norwalk Hospital, Norwalk, Conn.
A resident of Wilton, Conn., he was 67 years old.


Sifton Moves to Knopf
LEAD: Elisabeth Sifton, who has had her own imprint at Viking Penguin Books since 1984, has been named executive vice president of Alfred A. Knopf.
While she will acquire and edit books for Knopf, she will not have her own imprint there.
Sonny Mehta, Knopf's president, said Thursday that Ms.
Sifton will begin her new job in late August.


The Limits of Milton's Tolerance
LEAD: To the Editor:


CSC INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CSC INDUSTRIES
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
46,998,000
38,178,000
Net inc
620,000
b2,915,000
Share earns
.07
-
6mo sales
93,802,000
77,637,000
Net inc
1,181,000
b4,984,000
Share earns
.14
-
b


Film: 'Nerds in Paradise,' a Sequel
LEAD: If you've seen one nerd - a four-eyed, egg-headed individual with a plastic pencil holder in his breast pocket and a song in his heart - have you seen them all?
That is the question loosely posed by ''Revenge of the Nerds II: Nerds in Paradise,'' which opened yesterday at the Movieland and other theaters.


Spinoff Is Named By Hospital Corp.
LEAD: The Hospital Corporation of America said that the spinoff company that would buy 104 it its hospitals under the company's $1.9 billion reorganization plan would be called Healthtrust Inc.
The 104 hospitals, with a total of 13,844 beds, are being sold in 22 states to Healthtrust, which, like the Hospital


End of an Odyssey
LEAD: The Mobro garbage barge off Brooklyn.
An agreement to burn the trash signaled an end to the Mobro's 112-day voyage.
Page 33 (NYT/Angel Franco)


ABBOTT LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABBOTT LABORATORIES (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,060,000,000
938,000,000
Net inc
155,110,000
133,665,000
Share earns
.68
.57
6mo sales
2,060,000,000
1,800,000,000
Net inc
297,000,000
257,000,000
Share earns
1.30
1.09


ON WARDS I., CENTER OFFERS ADDICTS WAY TO KEEP CHILDREN
LEAD: Last year, social workers told Cheryle Davis that the child she was carrying might be taken away from her at birth.


Mets Pound Astros, 7-3
LEAD: The scores from St.
Louis do not seem to interest the Mets anymore.
The only race of importance now is one of respectability in the National League East.
First place is too far from reality for now.


An Interested Party, Nicaragua Monitors North
LEAD: Ronald Garcia, a technician, adjusting videotape equipment at the press office of President Daniel Ortega Saavedra in Managua.
Each day, Mr.
Ortega reportedly receives translations of testimony in the hearing. (AP)


BANDAG INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANDAG INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
103,350,000
93,591,000
Net inc
15,116,00
11,691,000
Share earns
.93
.69
6mo sales
193,403,000
172,608,000
Net inc
28,785,000
20,348,000
Share earns
1.74
1.19
Shares outst
16,524,796
17,146,432


Pilot Whales Still Together Off Nantucket, Trackers Say
LEAD: Three pilot whales that were returned to the sea last month after eight months of treatment are still together, say researchers who are tracking the whales through radio transmitters on two of them.


Cyprus Bomb Kills 2 in Car
LEAD: A hotel owner and his 13-year-old son were killed today when a bomb exploded as the man started his car in Limassol, the police said.
They said they did not know the motive behind the bombing, which was the second on this Mediterranean island in a month.


Officer Suspended for Letting A Sex Film Be Shown in Jail
LEAD: A correction captain who authorized the showing of a pornographic movie at the Bronx House of Detention for Men was suspended for a day without pay and may face departmental charges, the city's Department of Correction reported yesterday.


Iranian Businessman Derides North's Story
LEAD: The Iranian businessman who Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North said proposed the idea of diverting Iran arms profits to Nicaraguan insurgents during a 1986 encounter in a bathroom has called that testimony ''the best joke I have ever heard in my life.''


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 54.


MOVE TOWARD MILK PRICE RISE
LEAD: A group of farmers representing 95 percent of the Northeast's dairy producers voted today to establish a new minimum price for milk, a move expected to increase milk prices this fall by about six cents a gallon.


Zambia Death Toll Is Cut
LEAD: Officials today sharply lowered their estimate of the number of people who died Sunday when a barge sank on a river crossing from Zaire to Zambia.
The officials now estimate the total number of passengers at 250, 51 of whom were known to be dead, and about 190 of whom had swum to safety.


Piquet Fastest In Race Trials
LEAD: A tire blowout and a second-place finish behind Nelson Piquet of Brazil spoiled Nigel Mansell's homecoming today as Piquet, Mansell's teammate, posted the fastest first-session practice time for the British Grand Prix on Sunday.


Faeroe Islanders Seek Ouster Of a U.S. Warship on a Visit
LEAD: The Faeroe Islands asked Denmark today to order a United States frigate out of the islands' waters after the ship's officers refused to say whether it carried nuclear weapons, the Danish state radio reported.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD:  Questions appear on page 17.


Lack of Exercise Is Linked to Heart Disease
LEAD: The link between heart disease and physical inactivity may be as strong as the links between heart disease and smoking or high blood pressure, Federal health officials said Thursday.


John Hammond, 76, Critic and Discoverer Of Pop Talent, Dies
LEAD: John Hammond, a critic, talent scout and record producer whose musical discoveries ranged from Billie Holiday to Bob Dylan and who had an extraordinary influence upon the history of American popular music, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old.


OF BEARS, BULLS AND BODY-BUILDERS
LEAD: It was lunch time in lower Manhattan and seven Wall Street workers shed their shirts to the whistles, hoots and applause of an animated crowd yesterday.


Henry E. Hasiwar, 70, Dies; Labor Adviser and Executive
LEAD: Henry E. Hasiwar, a onetime organizer of farm workers who became an oil company official, died of cancer of the lung and liver Wednesday at Misericordia Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 70 years old and lived in Yonkers.


You Can't Keep a Good Concept Down
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alcoa Planning Big Write-Off
LEAD: The Aluminum Company of America said yesterday that it would take a $165.7 million after-tax charge against earnings for the second quarter.
As a result of the charge, the company said it would report a loss for the quarter.


After Nixon and Reagan, Young Republicans Face '88 With Uncertainty
LEAD: The hottest-selling shirt at the Young Republican national convention here depicts a smiling Richard M. Nixon. ''He's Tan, Rested and Ready,'' the shirt reads. ''Nixon in '88.'' The nearly 800 delegates who have gathered here for a three-day convention that started Thursday have hardly begun a Nixon Presidential drive.


PARK ELECTROCHEMICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARK ELECTROCHEMICAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
30,215,000
24,606,000
Net inc
1,642,000
1,379,000
Share earns
.32
.27


CORRECTION
LEAD: A Paris dispatch in The Living Section on Wednesday about the Folies-Bergere misidentified a performer and incorrectly characterized her role in a new show.
She is Bertice Reading, and she left the show on May 15.
An earlier Folies-Bergere performer was also misidentified; she was Mistinguett.
The article also misstated the name of an 1887 revue at the theater.


OLD KENT FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OLD KENT FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
14,891,000
15,747,000
Share earns
.66
.71
Net inc
29,419,000
30,758,000
Share earns
1.30
1.39
Net for 1986 is restated to reflect the acquisition, on a pooling of interests basis, of American National Holding Co.


In Australia Vote Today, Unions Are a Nonissue
LEAD: During construction of a pedestrian mall in an Australian city recently, workers went on strike to protest lunchtime strollers' heckling them for not working hard enough.
The laborers said if they were to tolerate the insults, they wanted extra pay.
They got it and returned to work.


Tiffany in Munich
LEAD: Tiffany &amp; Company, the 150-year-old jewelry retailer, said that it would open its second European shop later this year in Munich, West Germany.
Tiffany, with eight stores in the United States, opened a shop in London in September 1986 and plans more stores in major European cities.


Japan Trade Surplus Falls
LEAD: Japan's trade surplus fell 10 percent, to $6.61 billion, in June from its 1986 level, the Finance Ministry said today.
The June surplus was down from $7.36 billion in June 1986, although it was up slightly from $6.41 billion in May.


TOTAL SYSTEM SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOTAL SYSTEM SERVICES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,826,000
8,964,000
Net inc
1,544,000
1,173,000
Share earns
.09
.07
6mo rev
20,555,000
17,331,000
Net inc
2,900,000
2,214,000
Share earns
.18
.14


A WORKERS' BEER GAINS STATUS
LEAD: Almost overnight, Corona Extra has become the second-best-selling imported beer in the United States.
But in the East, where Mexico's equivalent of Budweiser remains scarce, Corona fanciers are in for a long, dry summer.


Koreans Testing Democracy's Limits
LEAD: With all the talk of democracy in the air, 17 nurses at a hospital in the city of Taegu staged an overnight sit-in last week.
They demanded that the hospital reinstate several dismissed nurses, raise everybody's wages and operate a shuttle-bus service at night.


Larger German Tax Cut
LEAD: The West German Parliament passed a bill today to increase tax cuts scheduled for next year, which the Government hopes will help reduce world trade imbalances by increasing domestic spending on both foreign and local goods.


Mellon Seeking Cut in Costs
LEAD: The Mellon Bank Corporation's chairman, Frank V. Cahouet, today announced six-month hiring and salary freezes and told the bank's 18,000 employees that layoffs would follow in the company's campaign to slash costs.


WORLD CONTAINER reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WORLD CONTAINER
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
153,249
73,730
Net loss
159,908
304,639


Books of The Times; Cheerless Affairs
LEAD:  MUM AND MR.
ARMITAGE.
By Beryl Bainbridge. 144 pages.
McGraw-Hill Book Company. $15.95.


THE SURPRISES OF A ROADHOUSE
LEAD: THE name Redding Roadhouse sounds as though it is telegraphing exactly the kind of tavern you'd find along a roadside.
But the name is a bit of a put-on, and this new restaurant-cum-pub is considerably more interesting than the straightforward name leads one to expect.


When You Write by Committee
LEAD: Early in my writing career, I was approached by a film producer to convert Hemingway's ''Hills like White Elephants'' into a television script.
Being neither a dyed-in-the-beard Hemingway fan nor an the answer toi the questu iiooonnnnthe advocate of television in its current guise as an entertainment medium,


Doing the Needful
LEAD: LOOKING FOR A wife?
The classified advertising section of The Hindustan Times in New Delhi offers a match with ''a beautiful homely girl'' from a good family.
Set a time to meet, but if you're especially eager, you can always ''prepone'' the visit.


Islamic Fundamentalism Gains in Egypt
LEAD: Islamic fundamentalists are quietly gathering strength in Egypt, a troubled nation where the very rhythm of life is still set by the five daily calls to prayer from countless minarets.


ROBERT BOOKMAN WED TO KATHLEEN A. CARNEY
LEAD: The marriage of Kathleen A. Carney, the executive director of the New York City Board of Standards and Appeals, to Robert S. Bookman, a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Goldfeder &amp; Bookman, took place yesterday at the 24 Fifth Avenue restaurant in New York.
Rabbi Terry Bookman, the brother of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony.


Garden of Peace: A Big Step Closer
LEAD: THE odds were against another monument for Washington.
But Elizabeth Ratcliff, a former English teacher and the mother of five in Berkeley, Calif., had this harmless idea: no statues, no political statements; just a garden dedicated to peace.
Who can vote against peace?


Michael Markoe Schieffelin, a Student, Is Wed to Miss Speyer in Mount Kisco
LEAD: Katherine E. Speyer, a daughter of Dr.
Joseph F. Speyer of Willington, Conn., and Anne Mattison Speyer of Middletown Springs, Vt., was married yesterday to Michael Markoe Schieffelin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Jay Schieffelin 3d of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The Rev.
Jack Silvey Miller performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church of Mount


Baltimore Mayor Opens Bid
LEAD: Mayor Clarence H. (Du) Burns officially has begun his campaign to become the city's first black elected Mayor, six months after he was appointed to the post.
Mayor Burns, a Democrat who was previously president of the City Council, was appointed in January when his predecessor, William Donald Schaefer, became Governor.


Misery on the Meatpakcing Line
LEAD: From time to time, an article receives a particularly strong response from readers.
Whenever possible, we will print a large number of the letters it elicits.


GROWING UP JEWISH
LEAD: ''IRVING'S mother would like to say something to us about happiness,'' Irving's mother confides to the audience at the beginning of Israel Horovitz's comedy ''Today I Am a Fountain Pen,'' now at the New Studio Theater.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Madison, Conn.  $270,000
91 East Wharf Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, circa 1890 Victorian; old moldings, walk to beach; taxes $1,337.
West Haven, Conn.  $141,000
108 Skyline Drive
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; fireplace in family room, 1-car garage; taxes $1,840.


FAMILIAR FESTIVAL OPENER
LEAD: IN CELEBRATION of its 25th anniversary, the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival's recent opening night was festive indeed, what with pre-performance parties - seven going on simultaneously in private homes nearby -and post-performance toasts and tributes held under an elaborately decorated tent on the Drew


IRAQ SAYS IT REGAINED GROUND
LEAD: Iraq said today that its troops staged a surprise attack on Iranian forces during the night, reoccupying areas in the southern Iraqi marshes near the Majnoon oil fields.


In Israel, a Vote On Who Is a Jew
LEAD: Two of Israel's bitterest disputes, the theological one over who is a Jew and the political one over control of Parliament, came head to head last week with results that put new strains on the coalition Government.


DEBORA L. TOFFEY BECOMES THE BRIDE OF R. C. PUCKETTE
LEAD: The wedding of Debora Lynn Toffey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.James Toffey of New Vernon, N.J., to Richard Charles Puckette, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles McDonald Puckette 4th of Scotia, N.Y., took place yesterday at Grace Episcopal Church in Madison, N.J.
The Rev.
Nelson Thayer performed the ceremony.


Getting a Seat At Paris Salons
LEAD: Each year fashion writers converge on Paris in late January and late July to view the new summer and winter haute couture collections.
After the initial showing, the 24 houses open their doors to the public.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''Company giving has to be related to the company's interests; not be a gift to the ballet because my wife likes ballet.''


'Quality Housing' Zoning Nearing a Vote
LEAD: A MAJOR component of New York City's master plan to promote housing construction has been forwarded with broad, but not unqualified, support to the Board of Estimate, where it is scheduled for a public hearing on Thursday.


A Bank Battles Poverty
LEAD: RABEA stepped out of her dirt-floored house, stamped one bare foot on the ground and snapped a smart salute.
Rabea is so poor that she cannot offer a visitor a chair or protect her children from rain leaking though her thatched roof.
But she is a proud borrower at an innovative rural bank.
Like nearly 300,000 other landless


Growing Up With Privilege and Prejudice
LEAD: Karen Russell's article was interesting.
However, I must criticize your choice of cover photograph.
The ones of Karen Russell reading the newspaper or walking through the Harvard campus would have been more appropriate.
I suppose you felt the picture of her listening to a radio was more descriptive of blacks than the pictures depicting intellectual pursuits.


THE UNFLINCHING EYE: PHOTOJOURNALIST MARY ELLEN MARK
LEAD: LAST WINTER, MARY ELLEN MARK turned her fascination with autism into an assignment.
At the Mothering Center in Greenwich, Conn., she stood among the mothers and children, photographing a therapy session.


2d Request for Proposals: 2 Acres Jamaica
LEAD: New York City today is once again putting out a request for proposals to develop a two-acre site in Jamaica, Queens, that can accommodate, within current zoning regulations, a commercial building of up to 490,000 square feet.
The property, bounded by Jamaica Avenue, 160th Street, Archer Avenue and Parsons Boulevard, is part of the 10-acre Jamaica


How High 'Up the Line' Did the Memos Go?
LEAD: WHEN Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North leaves the witness table this week, his place will be taken by Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter, the former national security adviser and the man Senator Warren Rudman of New Hampshire, a Reagan loyalist but one of the Iran-contra hearings' toughest questioners, expects to be ''by far the most single important witness.


BOATING INCREASE TESTING MARINE POLICE
LEAD: THERE will be a record number of boats on New Jersey's waterways this summer, a situation that makes industry officials smile but law-enforcement authorities scowl.


Okamoto Shoots 66 To Increase Lead
LEAD: Ayako Okamoto of Japan overcame 90-degree heat to shoot a six-under-par 66 today and take a six-stroke lead in the $400,000 du Maurier Classic.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A San Francisco dispatch on June 7 about efforts to restore native plants in California misidentified an area where the removal of eucalyptus trees has been proposed.
It is Golden Gate National Recreation Area in Marin County.


ROBIN M. KEEFE IS MARRIED TO ROBERT F. LYNCH 3D
LEAD: At St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church in Riverside, Conn., yesterday Robin Mary Keefe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Manton Keefe of Norwalk, Conn., was married to Robert Francis Lynch 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lynch Jr. of Riverside.
The Rev.
Stanley Rousseau performed the ceremony.


'Free Trip' to Las Vegas
LEAD: A company in Queens, N.Y., National Listings Network Corporation, has been operating a ''free trip to Las Vegas'' telephone offer and making unauthorized charges to credit cards, according to the Better Business Bureau.
The bureau says it has been obtaining refunds for consumers who have complained about the company, of 163-17 Depot Road, Flushing, since February 1986.


STARS IN THE PRESS BOX
LEAD:  THE 1987 MEDIAGUIDE  A Critical Review of the News Media's Recent Coverage of the World Political Economy.
Edited by Jude Wanniski. 374 pp.
New York: Perennial Library/ Harper &amp; Row.
Cloth, $19.95.
Paper, $9.95.


39 FROM COUNTY JOINING CHORISTERS IN THE ROYAL FESTIVAL HALL
LEAD: MEMBERS of the Westchester Chorale, the New Rochelle Chorale and the Pleasantville Cantata Singers will join forces with more than 200 other singers on July 19 in London's Royal Festival Hall to perform Verdi's Requiem, accompanied by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra.


Jazz: Kevin Eubanks
LEAD: KEVIN EUBANKS, a guitarist, is looking for the jazz side of jazz-rock fusion with the quartet he's leading through Sunday at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South.


Finale in Albany: Politics, Pizza and Lots of Bills
LEAD: It was labeled ''the session that wouldn't end,'' and thrashed about until almost 6 o'clock this morning, more than a week after it was supposed to fade away.
In its wake were left, among other things, hundreds of empty soda cans, coffee cups and candy wrappers.


Roundup of Ripkens
LEAD: THE Ripkens of Baltimore made baseball history last night when 22-year-old Billy joined 26-year-old Cal Jr. in the Oriole lineup managed by their father, Cal Sr.
When Billy was brought up from Rochester Friday and started at second base alongside his brother, the shortstop, in last night's game against the Minnesota


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  WINDHAM HILL CONCERT
''Mood music for the '80's'' is the phrase frequently applied to the records produced by Windham Hill Recording Artists.
William Ackerman, steel-string guitarist and founder of the California record company, and Philip Aaberg, keyboard artist and composer whose work is recorded by Windham Hill, will make their only New York appearance at the Tarrytown Music Hall at 8 P.M.


MUSIC
LEAD:  Zoot Sims: In a Sentimental Mood  Directed by Lennart Wetterholm.
Sonet Films.
Sony Video Software. 52 minutes. $29.95.
The November 1984 recording session that is the basis for this film was one of the last Zoot Sims made before his death from cancer on March 23, 1985.
But it is a testament to the tenor saxophonist's skill and professionalism that his performance is anything but infirm.


40 Hurt as Circus Tent Collapses on Audience
LEAD: A circus tent, battered by wind gusts, collapsed during a performance near here today, injuring about 40 people.


SPAIN SHOWS MODERN ART IN A VINTAGE SETTING
LEAD: IN THE DECADE OR SO SINCE FRAN-co's death Spain has undergone countless changes, but surely one of the most dramatic is in contemporary art.
During this short time, the country has assumed a prominent place on the art world's map.
Madrid has once more become the site of a bustling gallery scene and a stop on the tours of major international exhibitions.


Different Fortunes for Two Champions; METS' MOMENTUM IS A THING OF THE PAST
LEAD: SWEET bliss, 1986.
It was a season made for the movies, a summer full of cloudless days.
The Mets were feisty and arrogant and unchallenged throughout baseball.
They reveled in their curtain calls at home, they fought willingly, almost happily, on the road.
And they won.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Carlsson to Meet Wilander: Kent Carlsson of Sweden overcame a 4-3 deficit in the third set yesterday to beat the defending champion, Andres Gomez of Ecuador, and advance to the final of the United States Pro Tennis Championships.
In a rematch of last year's semifinal, the third-seeded Swede beat the second-seeded Gomez, 7-5, 4-6, 7-5.


A DEFERENTIAL FATHER AND A SON WHO WAS DIFFERENT
LEAD: MY father was a peasant.


Now It's Glitter Mouse
LEAD: ''I'VE been a Disney girl since I was a child,'' said Wendy Gell, a jewelry designer. ''I was planning on approaching Disney; before I had the chance, they came to me.''


Plotting a Global Attack Against Farm Subsidies
LEAD: PRESIDENT REAGAN has proved a master of the machinery of new ideas, some workable, some not, and the idea he proposed last week looked like one of the latter.
Mr.
Reagan asked the governments of the world, most of them popularly elected, to join him in bargaining away much of the aid they give the farmers who help keep them in power.


EUROPE MAINTAINS THE HIGH STANDARDS OF HI-FI
LEAD: A EUROPEAN VACATION turned into a busman's holiday when it afforded opportunities to tune in on the audio scene in England and the Netherlands - two countries that have long been bastions of high fidelity.


Dance Festival in Durham
LEAD:  To the Editor:


MOVIES
LEAD:  Falling in Love  Produced and directed by Steven Paul.
Screenplay by Steven Paul, Ted Allan, Susannah York.
Starring Elliott Gould and Susannah York. 1980.
Embassy Home Entertainment. 99 minutes. $24.95 ''Falling in Love'' is an obscure film that has returned like a ghost from its well-deserved grave.


Slotnick Is Injured In Street Attack
LEAD: Barry I. Slotnick, the highly visible defense lawyer whose clients include a number of Mafia figures, Bernhard H. Goetz and Representative Mario Biaggi, Democrat of the Bronx, last week was the victim of an attack that left him bleeding and bruised and with a broken left wrist.


Different Fortunes for Two Champions; GIANTS HAVE A QUIET OFF SEASON
LEAD: TWO months ago, Phil Simms and Phil McConkey of the Giants were in Los Angeles to make a National Football League instructional video.
So were such players as Eric Dickerson, Tony Dorsett and Todd Christensen.


Realignment for Bronx Democrats
LEAD: Bronx Democrats, more a coalition than an organization, are split again, this time over the party's nominee for borough surrogate.
Borough President Fernando Ferrer last week endorsed Judge Hansel McGee of Civil Court, the only black among four primary candidates, while the Bronx Democratic leader, Assemblyman George


Threat to NATO Is Seen in Armor On Soviet Tanks
LEAD: Thanks to an Israeli invention appropriated by Moscow's weapon designers three years ago, many Soviet tanks have become virtually invulnerable to the antitank weapons carried by American infantry and aircraft, United States military officials report.


Long Day for Yanks
LEAD: Bill Long was supposed to make a detour on the Chicago White Sox road trip and go to Buffalo yesterday.
If he had followed his planned itinerary, he would have missed seeing Ron Guidry strike out 14 of his teammates.
The Yankees, on the other hand, would not have missed Long because if he had gone to Buffalo, they might have capitalized on


BEST SELLERS: JULY 12, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
MISERY, by Stephen King. (Viking, $18.95.)
Injured and drugged, an author is held captive by a
psychotic fan.
2
4
3
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
(Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $18.95.) A brutal murder
creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and
lawyers.


NATURE
LEAD:  World of the Sea Otter  A Production of Marine Mammal Fund.
Fort Mason Center, Building E., San Francisco, Calif. 94123. 30 minutes. $39.95.
Frolicsome, bewhiskered and great natural aquatic performers, sea otters have charmed an untold number of nature lovers who have observed them at play in the kelp beds off California's central coast.


Sports of The Times; Baseball, Beanballs And Thon
LEAD: ANDRE DAWSON, like so many other batters who have been hit by pitches this season, got up from the Wrigley Field dirt last Tuesday and charged the mound.
But three years ago, Dickie Thon didn't get up.
He was carried off on a stretcher.
He had been struck in the face by a fastball flung by Mike Torrez, then a Mets' right-hander.


HOW SHOULD THE METS HANDLE THE RIFTS ON THEIR TEAM?
LEAD: How should Mets handle the rifts on their team?
Hire a child psychiatrist.
JAY KREISBERG
New Rochelle, N.Y.


Next Week; Who's Not In Hall of Fame Who Should Be?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


RECORDINGS
LEAD:  The Fleshtones: 'Fleshtones vs.
Reality'  Emergo Records, 225 Lafayette Street, Suite 709, New York, N. Y. 10012


CROPSEY DEBATE
LEAD: THE tempest over Jasper Francis Cropsey's tranquil ''View at Hastings-on-Hudson'' continued unabated last week as both sides in the dispute defended their positions and one - the Hastings Historical Society - began legal proceedings to prevent the sale of the painting.


Reporter's Notebook: An Invitation From 'Fat Tony'
LEAD: Anthony (Fat Tony) Salerno, a powerful Mafia chief, was being escorted from the courtroom after a session in his racketeering trial when he suddenly approached a prosecutor to make a personal comment.


Missing Dolly
LEAD:  To the Editor:


CATHERINE HAMERSLEY WEDS
LEAD: Catherine Van Kleeck Hamersley, the daughter of L.Gordon Hamersley of Southampton, L.I., and the late Elsey Van Kleeck Hamersley, was married yesterday to Mark David Helman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving J. Helman of Brookline, Mass.
Annette Bellanti, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the Endicott Estate in Dedham, Mass.


White House Rethinking Its Outlook
LEAD: White House officials say they mishandled their approach this week to the Congressional testimony of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and made themselves and the President look silly in the process.


Headliners; A Hopeful Schools Chief
LEAD: The mood was upbeat at the Brooklyn headquarters of the New York City Board of Education last week as Robert F. Wagner Jr. was elected unanimously to his second term as president.
In the coming year, he said, he intends to obtain a commitment from businesses ''to hire any student graduating from a New York City high school.


At the Courthouse, the Barber Shop and the Drugstore, They're With North   In Alabama, Pride is Undisguised
LEAD: Down at the Calhoun County courthouse, Charles F. Fuller, the chairman of the county commission, said he did not have much doubt about the way people here feel about Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.


Mayor, Councilmen Survive A Recall Drive in Galveston
LEAD: Mayor Jon Coggeshall and four City Council members today survived a recall attempt sparked by a half-finished trolley sytem.
Mr.
Coggeshall survived by a 4,779-to-3,749 vote, while the four Council members fared about as well, City Secretary Patsy Poole said.
The turnout was about 25 percent.
The $12 million system is being built with Federal, state and private money.


JANE L. COLOMBO MARRIED TO PETER JEROME MCGUIRE
LEAD: Jane Lauren Colombo and Peter Jerome McGuire were married yesterday at the Congregational Church of Manhasset, L.I., by the Rev.
Thomas Roan, who was assisted by the Rev.
John S. Hayes, a Roman Catholic priest.
The couple's parents are Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony T. Colombo of Locust Valley, L.I., and Mr.


Commercial Property: Westchester Offices; 20% Vacancy Casts a Pall in Once-Booming Suburb
LEAD: MORE than 250 employees of the Nynex Corporation, parent company of New York Telephone, will leave Manhattan this summer to work in an office complex in Westchester County.
The scheduled departure comes within weeks of announcements from several other companies that are planning similar shifts.


Anti-Americanism Grows in South Korea
LEAD: A ROAR of approval reverberated among the hundreds of thousands of protesters on Thursday as a handful of young men dashed into the Seoul Plaza Hotel and pulled down an American flag. ''Down With America,'' the crowd chanted a few minutes later as the flag was burned in the city's central square during what may have been the largest demonstration in South


TRUTH WAS THE LAST STRAW
LEAD:  CAUSE AT HEART  A Former Communist Remembers.
By Junius Irving Scales and Richard Nickson.
Foreword by Telford Taylor. 427 pp.
Athens: The University of Georgia Press. $24.95.


A RETURN TO THE LAND OF FAIRY TALES
LEAD: THE LAST DECADES HAVE SEEN a revival of interest in, and enjoyment of, theatrical, balletic and operatic performances based on old-fashioned fairy tales.
From the American Ballet Theater's recent ''Sleeping Beauty'' to the City Opera's 1986 staging of Massenet's ''Cendrillon'' to the Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine musical ''Into the Woods,'' coming to New York in October, large and sophisticated audiences typically attend such spectacles and are enthralled by them.


Quality Housing: Cons and Pros
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Making Safer Sex Safer
LEAD: Much to its credit, the Food and Drug Administration is taking condoms seriously.
The agency has embarked on a campaign of increased inspection and testing.
Since April it has intercepted 15 shipments of defective condoms from Korea and four from Malaysia, and has sent letters to U.S. manufacturers asking them to focus attention on quality control.


CIGARETTES ROLLED FROM THE BIBLE
LEAD:  TOWN SMOKES  By Pinckney Benedict. 168 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Ontario Review Press/Persea.
Paper, $9.95.


SHAPING A NEW CONSCIOUSNESS IN SCULPTURE
LEAD: ''SCULPTURE OF THE 80'S'' IS the messy title of a basically successful exhibition of work by 10 sculptors, all women, at the Queens Museum through next Sunday.
One reason why Ileen Sheppard, the museum's director of exhibitions, chose the title was to try to oblige the public to approach the work primarily as sculpture.


RECORDINGS
LEAD:  That Petrol Emotion: 'Babble'  Polydor 833 132-1 Y-1; LP and cassette


Drunken Driving And a Murder
LEAD: IT was just a year ago that Donald F. James - a distillery executive and ''an exceptionally fine person,'' in the words of a minister who knew him -left a company party in Louisville, Ky., after midnight and drove head-on into a murder indictment.


MOVIES
LEAD:  The Lightship  Starring Robert Duvall, Klaus Maria Brandauer, Michael Lyndon.
Directed by Jerzy Skolimowski. 1986.
CBS/Fox Video. 87 minutes. $79.98.
Set in 1955, ''The Lightship'' is Jerzy Skolimowski's tale of the good, the bad and the innocent.
A Coast Guard lightship picks up three men in a motorboat who turn out to be killers on the run.


New England Ski Museum
LEAD: To visit the New England Ski Museum in Franconia, N.H., is to take a quick course in the history of skiing in the United States with emphasis, of course, on the Northeast.


NANTUCKET MAY OBTAIN LAND
LEAD: Townspeople have authorized $6.2 million to buy a private water company that serves 70 percent of this island in a deal that could include 68 acres of undeveloped land.


Off-Duty Officer In Military Uniform Is Shot in the Head
LEAD: An off-duty police officer wearing a Naval Reserve uniform was shot and critically wounded yesterday morning near his home in Queens, apparently as he was being robbed, the police said.


NEED FOR STOCKPILING WASTE DISPOSAL SITES
LEAD: I applaud the initiative of Suffolk County Executive Michael A. LoGrande and the town supervisors in agreeing on the need for a countywide authority to deal with ash disposal, bypass material and recycling.


The Perfect Hamburger
LEAD: Please remember Father's Day.
The weather: no sun, rainy, high humidity.
Guests: adults and children.
The perfect solution: the perfect hamburger.
I even froze the butter.
I used the chopped fresh thyme, the parsley and basil from my own garden.
Worcestershire, the only brand I know.
Sorry, I didn't have the guts to try the anchovy fillets.


What Is to Be Done About the Bork Nomination
LEAD: To the Editor:


Appalachian Trail
LEAD: To the Editor: As one who has hiked in the White Mountain Presidential Range for years, I was pleased with ''On the Appalachian Trail'' (Travel, May 17) but surprised at the recommendations for lodgings.
The Mount Washington Hotel is elegant and beautiful, but going there to experience the ambiance of hiking the trail would be the equivalent of booking a suite at the Pierre to experience Bohemian life in Greenwich


LAUREN J. HUDSON IS WED IN BOSTON TO R.D. RAABE JR.
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Advent in Boston yesterday Lauren Jean Hudson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
F.Donald Hudson of Boston, was married to Roderick D. Raabe Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raabe of Tokyo and Chathamport, Mass.
The Rev.
John A. Cranston performed the ceremony.


BOATERS ON THE SOUND: THE MORE, THE RISKIER
LEAD: LONG ISLAND SOUND, a rich natural resource surrounded by a dense and rising population, is becoming too popular for some of its devotees' own good.


Reason for a Residence For Secretary of State
LEAD: To the Editor:


What Is to Be Done About the Bork Nomination; Political Creationism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Schaffhausen's Mesmerizing Falls
LEAD: The mightiest river cataracts in Europe, on the Rhine near Schaffhausen, Switzerland, are no match for Niagara Falls or nature's majestic waterworks in Latin America and Africa.
Yet the Rhine Falls have attracted and awed visitors for centuries, and they still do.


TOBA AND ELICIA WEINSTEIN PLAN TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Abe Weinstein of Garden City, L.I., have announced the engagements of their daughters Dr.
Toba Aliyah Weinstein, who is planning to wed Dr.
Joel Marshall Siev in November, and Elicia Robin Weinstein, who is to marry Barry Ira Krosser next March.


SHORTAGES OF DORMS CONFRONT COLLEGES
LEAD: COLLEGES throughout the state are scrambling to find ways to meet a housing shortage next fall, when students return to campus.


Dr. Thomas F. Waddell, 49, A Founder of Gay 'Olympics'
LEAD: Dr.
Thomas F. Waddell, one of the founders of the Gay Games for homosexual athletes in 1982 and a sixth-place finisher in the decathlon at the Olympic Games in 1968, died at his home in San Francisco yesterday morning.
He was 49 years old.
His wife, Sara Lewinstein, said by telephone that Dr.
Waddell had died of complications related to AI


Q. &amp; A.: CLEANING GUTTERS, CAULKING CRACKS, REMOVING PAINT
LEAD: Q. LIKE many other homeowners, I have a continual problem each fall with leaves and other debris accumulating inside the rain gutters around the outside of my house.
I deal with this in the same manner as most homeowners do - by climbing up on a ladder and scooping all the debris out of the gutters.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  THE VOYAGE OF THE LUDGATE HILL  Travels With Robert Louis Stevenson.
By Nancy Willard.
Illustrated by Alice and Martin Provensen.
Unpaged.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 8)


A Pardon for North?
LEAD: You have to give Colonel North credit - millions of it.
He not only can shred the Constitution, but stand to gain by what's left of it.
For even if the law catches up with him, he can always count on a Presidential pardon.


Sense and Criticism
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Aberdeen  $109,500
1303 Wellington Place
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 4-year-old condominium apartment; den, fireplace in living room, terrace; maintenance $77, taxes $1,500.
Brick Township  $113,000
595 New Jersey Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 10-year-old Cape Cod; patio, hardwood floors, 1-car attached garage; taxes $1,248.


No Headline
LEAD: Building sand castles may be child's play, but it's also competition for visitors to Hither Hills State Park in Montauk.
The park's annual sand castle and sand sculpture competition on Friday mornings is once again under way, using materials found on the beach.
T-shirts are given to the winners, but everybody who enters gets a certificate and a lollipop.


Lasix and Racing
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Growing Up With Privilege and Prejudice
LEAD: Karen Russell's article proves that she is aware of the problems still facing America today.
Many black students on Ivy League campuses are oblivious to institutional racism.
What about the decline in black enrollment at Ivy League law schools and in the numbers of black professors who are hired?
Many students seem unaware of the long-range implications of these setbacks for blacks.


Sunday in the Zoo With Penguins
LEAD: WHEN the San Francisco Zoo decided to put a new slant on its fund raising, it called in the penguins - and invited them to brunch.


A Hepatitis Outbreak Hits Upstate New York
LEAD: After large outbreaks in two nearby counties this spring, Onondaga County is facing its worst siege of hepatitis in at least six years.


WATERFORD FESTIVAL EXPANDS OFFERINGS
LEAD: SUMMER MUSIC at Harkness Memorial State Park in Waterford, which was launched three years ago on the proverbial wing and a prayer, has turned into one of the most well-attended festivals in the state.


Mountains And Mystique
LEAD: As a regular reader of Malcolm Browne's science acticles, I found his essay an amusing change.
However, at the risk of finding myself grouped among his ''malicious bores,'' I must point out that K-2 is not the only name borne by the new contender for highest mountain.
It also is commonly, albeit not officially, called Mount Godwin-Austen, after Col.


Lean and Mean?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ben-Gurion's Zionism
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Army Auditors Urging Unit to Sell 3 Airplanes
LEAD: Army auditors say the Corps of Engineers should sell three airplanes designated for use in emergencies because top officers of the corps had used the planes for expensive trips overseas.


Undercard of Triplets
LEAD: THE triplet brothers of Mike Weaver, a former heavyweight champion, get back into action today, forming the undercard for the Frank Tate-Troy Darrell United States Boxing Association middleweight title bout in Atlantic City.
Floyd, Lloyd and Troy, are 12 years younger than their famous brother, Mike, who won the World Boxing Association title on March 31, 1980 by knocking out John Tate in the 15th round.


The Biggest Farm Debt: $68 Million and Growing
LEAD: ALL that is left of the Tex-Cal Land Management grape and almond farm lies behind an old winery near the San Joaquin Valley town of Delano, where acres of junked tractors, pickup trucks, earth scrapers and plows gather dust under a scorching sun.


On the Volga, Winter Is Far From the Mind
LEAD: Soviet pop music poured from the open door of a parked bus and spilled over the mounds of construction sand that had become a temporary beach beside the Volga River.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An Associated Press dispatch last Sunday from Kinshasa, Zaire, about a train wreck in Zaire that killed 125 people omitted mention of a higher toll in a previous African train accident.
At least 392 people were reported killed when a train plunged from a bridge in Ethiopia on Jan. 14, 1985.


HISTORY
LEAD:  American History, 1914-1929: Warring and Roaring  MasterVision.
New York, N.Y. (212) 879-0448. 60 minutes. $64.95. ''Warring and Roaring'' is a whirlwind, high-school-level historical tour of the United States during World War I and the 1920's -the ninth of 10 videotapes in McGraw-Hill's MasterVision series on American history.


IN HOUSTON, A SYMBOL OS CONFUSED AMBITIONS
LEAD: FOR SOME YEARS THIS CITY HAS been American architecture's best weathervane - the place that shows, at least so far as commercial design is concerned, which way the wind is blowing.
Houston is hardly a city of the avant-garde, but it is surely a city that loves to build, and it has a tradition of bombastic overreaching that has given its buildings a welcome energy, if not much subtlety.


Ahnahkaq Henson, 80, Dies; A Son of Explorer With Perry
LEAD: Ahnahkaq Henson, the half-Eskimo son of the American polar explorer Matthew A. Henson, has died, relatives said today.
He was 80 years old.


NURSING HOMES: A HAVEN, NOT A HORROR
LEAD: NURSING HOMES used to be perceived as places where people were sent in order to wait to die.


Dance
LEAD: Audiences can now enjoy scenery as well as choreography, as dancers take to the great outdoors and give concerts in all sorts of urban and sylvan locations.
Holly Fairbank and Dancers will perform at the edge of the pond in Central Park between 100th and 103d Streets on Friday and Saturday at 6:30 P.M.


Powell on His Approach: Doing Justice Case by Case
LEAD: Amid furniture marked with little yellow stickers for the movers, Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. sought the other day to sum up his approach to hundreds of hard cases over more than 15 years at the strategic center of the most powerful court in the world.


RUSSIAN SAYS U.S. IGNORES ARMS BIDS
LEAD: The Soviet Prime Minister, Nikolai I. Ryzhkov, today accused the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization of failing to respond adequately to Soviet initiatives at the Geneva arms-control talks.


A PROPOSAL: SEND OUT THE CLONES
LEAD: FOR YEARS, I'VE BEEN wishing for a record that delivered quietude - one that wouldn't drown out ambient sound, but would tune out more din as I turned up the volume.
Now, as science tiptoes onward, that device has been invented.
It turns out to be not a record at all, but a computerized ''antinoise'' system that analyzes an offending racket and generates an equal but opposite racket in return, so that the two soundwaves cancel each other out.


Bookshelf
LEAD:  Additional titles of interest:


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE SEARCH FOR THE REAL NANCY REAGAN.
By Frances Spatz Leighton. (Macmillan, $19.95.) If this is the unauthorized biography of the First Lady, one shudders to think what the authorized version will be like.
Frances Spatz Leighton, a journalist and the co-author of ''My Thirty Years Backstairs at the White House'' and other books, is so sympathetic to Nancy Davis Reagan that she almost becomes one with her.


AN ELECTRONIC WATCHDOG CALLS WOLF, WOLF, WOLF
LEAD: THIS is in part a tale of one family's efforts to seek an alternative to suburban living - an apartment in the city and a house in the country, for us, the best of two worlds.
But it's really the story of how the introduction of computer technology into that environment can create an incongruous mix.


Opera Orchestra Group Announces '88 Season
LEAD: Leonie Rysanek, Aprile Millo, Gabriela Benackova, Mariella Devia and Samuel Ramey will sing with the Opera Orchestra of New York in concert versions of three operas during the organization's 1988 season.
Eve Queler is the musical director.


Public Campaign Financing: Close but No Cigar
LEAD: IT was not for lack of trying that the Legislature adjourned this session without a bill changing the way New York City campaigns are financed.


World War II Deserter Buried in Michigan
LEAD: Anna Kadlubowski placing a flower on the coffin containing the remains of her brother, Pvt.
Eddie Slovik, yesterday.
Private Slovik was executed by firing squad in 1945 for desertion and buried in France.
His remains were exhumed last week and returned to Detroit where he was buried next to his wife, Antoinette.


CONCERN TO SELL SOVIET MACHINES IN U.S.
LEAD: RUSSIA Inc.?
While it is generally acknowledged that the Soviet Union has a long way to go before it outsells the Japanese on world markets, observers say the the Soviet Union will begin producing goods for export in earnest during the next decade.
The Soviet Union has already announced its plans to enter the United States automobile market in 1991 with its new compact car, Moskvich 2141, and next month a concern in Ardsley, the Earthworm Tractor Company, will become, it says, the first American company to sell Soviet-made construction equipment in the United


Ballet: The Bolshoi's 'Raymonda'
LEAD: ''RAYMONDA,'' which the Bolshoi Ballet presented for the first time Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera House - with Lyudmila Semenyaka triumphant in the title role -was originally choreographed in 1898 by Marius Petipa for Russia's Maryinsky Ballet.


U.S. Role in Gulf Seen as a Way to Regain Arabs' Favor
LEAD: ONE morning last week, while Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North faced intricate questioning on Capitol Hill about the secret arms sales to Iran, a seminar of experts on the Middle East convened at the Brookings Institution to take up a question that Colonel North had not been asked.
It had to do with the political and strategic situation in the Persian Gulf, and it was posed crisply by one of the experts, Anthony H.


Dance of Life Wins Tidal on Late Rally
LEAD: Dance of Life, unable to catch Theatrical in his last two starts, had a chance to shine in that rival's absence yesterday and scored a three- and-a-half-length victory over Uptown Swell and Duluth in the $176,400 Tidal Handicap at Belmont Park.


A MOVING REVIVAL OF 'ALL MY SONS'
LEAD: THE Westport Country Playhouse in Connecticut is now running plays for two weeks instead of one.
Practically speaking, this means you have six more days - tomorrow through Saturday - to catch up with one of the contemporary theater's most powerful American dramas, Arthur Miller's ''All My Sons,'' in a moving, intelligent production.


BEAUTY PAGEANTS VS. DEBATES
LEAD: SIGH IF YOU MUST, BUT IT REALLY IS TIME TO worry about the Presidential debates for 1992.
We know about the 1988 debates already.
We know we are sure to have them because an incumbent President will not be running.
A President is less likely to want to debate than a challenger; a President has more to lose.


Growing Up With Privilege and Prejudice
LEAD: I would like to applaud your publication for printing Karen K. Russell's article ''Growing Up With Privilege and Prejudice'' (June 14) -not to mention making it your cover story.
As a young black woman, I found her story truthful and straightforward without sounding bitter or militant.
She closes her article by reflecting on the repercussions it may bring.


IS COLLUSION THE NAME OF THE GAME?
LEAD: ON MAY 1, RICH GEDMAN SWALLOWED his pride and signed a contract with the Boston Red Sox that will pay him $1.8 million over the next two years.
Despite what appear to be lucrative terms, Gedman, a 27-year-old all-star catcher, felt cheated.
He had become a free agent at the end of the 1986 season, but failed to receive a competitive offer from any team other than the Red Sox.


POSTINGS;
LEAD: For loft-aficionados with a talent for interior design but not necessarily carpentry, a new loft-style condominium project in Little Italy might offer the right ratio of raw to finished space.


Bork Opponents: N.A.A.C.P., N.E.A. And Biden, Too
LEAD: The nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court was gathering opposition last week.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the National Education Association announced at their conventions that they would fight it, while liberal lobbying groups organized their mailing lists.


BEAST HAS VINELAND ON ALERT
LEAD: SOMETHING in this rural Cumberland County city, a place where farmland, businesses and tree-lined streets blend into the shadowy surrounding countryside, is indiscriminately slaying household pets and livestock by night.


Olympic Champion Wins Impressively
LEAD: At the start of the seventh round of Meldrick Taylor's junior welterweight bout today against Irleis (Cubanito) Perez, Lou Duva, co-manager of Taylor, turned to a ringside spectator and said: ''Isn't he beautiful?''


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article last Sunday about expert witnesses incompletely described Dr.
David A. Crown's help in identifying the remains of Josef Mengele in 1985.


Q and A
LEAD:  Canadian Islands  Question: Are there any places that provide lodging on the Queen Charlotte Islands of British Columbia?
Do any airlines fly there? -N.
J.
L., Philadelphia  Answer: The Queen Charlotte Islands, which, at the nearest point, are about 70 miles from Prince Rupert, British Columbia, have a few motels and lodges.


CONSTANCE CULLEN BECOMES A BRIDE
LEAD: The marriage of Constance Marie Cullen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Joseph Cullen of Douglaston, Queens, to James Edward Cavanaugh 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cavanaugh Jr. of Narragansett, R.I., took place yesterday at the Fordham University Church on the Rose Hill campus in the Bronx.
The Rev.


3 FAIRS ON DEVOTEES' AGENDA
LEAD: AMONG the perennial events on this month's crafts calendar are a number of weekend fairs both in New Jersey and within easy reach in Manhattan.


Myers and Johnson Save Game for Mets
LEAD: Think of it: 30 home runs, 30 stolen bases.
It is one of baseball's most elusive and intriguing marks, a record that requires a blend of power and speed in one player.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A dispatch from Washington on June 28 about President Reagan's leadership misstated poll findings about his approval rating.
A New York Times-CBS News Poll in March found that Mr.
Reagan's approval rating had fallen 25 points, to 42 percent, since the first disclosures about the Iran-contra affair.


A NEW SMELL FOR SUCCESS
LEAD: ONCE UPON A TIME, FRAGRANCES were created around elaborate tales of love and conquest.


MISS SACHS WEDS DR. DANIEL MILLER
LEAD: Marjorie Sachs, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan M. Sachs of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., and Dr.
Daniel Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Miller of New York, were married yesterday at the High Tor Vineyards in New City, N.Y.
Judge Kenneth S. Rones of the Clarkstown Justice Court in New City performed the ceremony.


Changing Names
LEAD: To the Editor:


Perspectives: 'Luxury' Decontrol; Lifting Regulation While Aiding the Poor
LEAD: THE chapter on New York City's housing in the report of the Commission on the Year 2000 starts, ''No city can flourish without a strong, healthy housing market.''


Hartford Gets Blunt About Hiring Goals
LEAD: WHEN the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities rejected an affirmative action plan by the State Veterans Home and Hospital Commission last month, it did not merely point out problems, return the paperwork and wait for a new proposal.


JUDITH MCCLURE WEDS DR. RICHARD HESSNEY
LEAD: Judith Hiatt McClure, a teacher of business education at the Sleepy Hollow High School in North Tarrytown, N.Y., and Dr.
Richard Charles Hessney, an associate editor of Reader's Digest in Pleasantville, N.Y., were married yesterday at the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow in North Tarrytown.
The Rev.


Votes in Congress; Last Week's Tally in Key Eastern States
LEAD:  Senate  1.
Plant Closings: Vote on an amendment to the omnibus trade bill to delete a provision that would require 60 days' advance notice to employees and local communities about plant closings and mass layoffs.
Rejected 60 to 40, July 9.  2.
Gulf Duty: Vote to kill an amendment to the omnibus trade bill that calls for a 90-day delay in the Administration's plan to fly American flags on Kuwaiti oil tankers.


INTERNATIONAL MENU, ECLECTIC DECOR
LEAD: THE Ship's Galley Restaurant on Main Street in Sag Harbor might look like a summer snack spot designed to attract tourists searching for burgers and brew, but it isn't.


Keeping Southland All in the Family
LEAD: Southland's decision to sell itself to its founding family keeps it out of the hands of such possible hostile bidders as the Belzbergs or the Dart Group.
Instead, the company that operates 7-Eleven stores will be sold for about $5.1 billion to a company run by John P. Thompson, the chairman; Jere W.


A CROWDED SOUND CAUSES SAFETY FEARS
LEAD: LONG ISLAND SOUND, a rich natural resource surrounded by a dense and rising population, is becoming too popular for some of its devotees' own good.


Q AND A
LEAD:  University Tenant


COMING TO TERMS WITH THE ISLAND
LEAD: IT is difficult for me to believe, but I am coming to terms with Long Island.


How the White House Lost Its Big Bank Battle
LEAD: WHEN word began to circulate on that muggy Thursday three weeks ago that Representative Jim Leach was the swing vote on a contentious banking bill, the calls started coming into his office.


Relevant Ignorance
LEAD: WE ARE IN THE midst of another assault on dumbness.
This one was ignited by evidence of amazing ignorance among young people.
For instance, do you know about the recent survey of California college students?
Half of them couldn't locate Japan on a map.


Rogue Colonel? Rogue Government
LEAD: At one point during his week of testifying before America, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North held his left hand aloft as if to pledge ''scout's honor.'' The gesture typified the performance.
Indeed, for a time it seemed that the dazzling political theater would obscure the content of the Iran-contra scandal.


MARY ELLEN MONGILLO WED TO GEORGE SELBY
LEAD: The wedding of Mary Ellen Mongillo to George Walter Selby took place yesterday at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Roman Catholic Church in Hamden, Conn.
The Rev.
Daniel J. Johnson performed the ceremony.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Arthur Mongillo of Hamden, and Mr. and Mrs.
George Selby of Wheaton,


Pregnant, Unmarried and Much in the Public Eye
LEAD: Like a growing number of single professional women in their 30's, Liz Walker decided that, married or not, it was time to start a family.


Turkey's Westward Yearnings
LEAD: IRRITATED by pressure from its NATO allies and beset by criticism at home, Turkey's civilian leaders are seeking to emerge from the shadow of the generals who seized power in the early 1980's, a process that seems ponderous, lonely and uncertain.


PEACE IS OUR RESPONSIBILITY
LEAD: AS the helicopter lands on the yellow scorched grass, green canvas covers blow off the battered and bloodied bodies.
Soldiers dressed in green Army fatigues move swiftly and silently as they carry their dead toward the aircraft.
Once all are on board, the helicopter takes off amid a spray of bullets.


The Perfect Hamburger
LEAD: Your perfect hamburger is just the recipe our cardiac surgeons need to boost business (Food, ''The Perfect Hamburger,'' by Craig Claiborne with Pierre Franey, June 21).
The ''21 Club'' burger weighs in with 85 grams of fat - about six and a half tablespoonfuls - of which 39 percent is saturated.
Accompanied by 260 milligrams of cholesterol, this candidate will cushion many an executive artery.


Making Arms
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sonia Jones's 'Small University'
LEAD:  To the Editor:


A Dissident Returns to Seoul From U.S. With Congressman
LEAD: A dissident who has lived in the United States for more than four years returned to Seoul today with a Congressional escort.


Hands Up, S.D.S.
LEAD:  To the Editor:


A Fresh Air Visit Offers New Tastes
LEAD: Cinnamon toast topped the breakfast menu on Nancy Rosado's second day at the home of Rhu and Burrett McBee, and their 6-year-old daughter, Alice, devoured hers eagerly.


Q. &amp; A.: CLEANING GUTTERS, CAULKING CRACKS, REMOVING PAINT
LEAD: Q. LIKE many other homeowners, I have a continual problem each fall with leaves and other debris accumulating inside the rain gutters around the outside of my house.
I deal with this in the same manner as most homeowners do - by climbing up on a ladder and scooping all the debris out of the gutters.


Boxing Scoring
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Growing Up With Privilege and Prejudice
LEAD: Karen Russell writes: ''How will I deal with racism in my life?
I have no brilliant solution.'' I think Ms.
Russell has asked a pertinent question and given the appropriate answer, because each time you're confronted with a blatant or subtle act of racism, hatred or bigotry, you are not sure of how you will react.


Getting the Rhino Into the Computer
LEAD: IS the gorilla in Seattle related to the one in San Antonio?


What Is to Be Done About the Bork Nomination; Conservatives, Wake!
LEAD: To the Editor:


VICTORIA MORASH AND T. M. EVARTS WED
LEAD: The marriage of Victoria Lee Morash, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell F. Morash of Lexington and Nantucket, Mass., to Thomas Morgan Evarts took place yesterday at the Follen Community Church in Lexington.
The bridegroom is a son of Josephine Evarts of Mount Kisco, N.Y., and the late Maxwell Evarts.


Slowing Down on Santorini
LEAD: Coming to Santorini for a week had been something of a challenge.
Could two Type A New Yorkers whose vacations usually involved skiing or doing something culturally serious (and one of whom had a very short attention span for lying on beaches) find happiness spending an entire week in Santorini, one of the Cycladic islands in the southern Aegean?


Where the Mystical Meets the Bizarre
LEAD: Everyone should have a favorite California freeway.
Mine is Interstate 280, the scenic route from San Francisco to San Jose, not so much because it's well engineered or beautiful, although it is, but because to drive it is to experience repeated warps in time.


What Is to Be Done About the Bork Nomination; Under a Cloud
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q. &amp; A.: CLEANING GUTTERS, CAULKING CRACKS, REMOVING PAINT
LEAD: Q. LIKE many other homeowners, I have a continual problem each fall with leaves and other debris accumulating inside the rain gutters around the outside of my house.
I deal with this in the same manner as most homeowners do - by climbing up on a ladder and scooping all the debris out of the gutters.


HARRY'S LUCK
LEAD:  HARRY HOPKINS  Ally of the Poor and Defender of Democracy.
By George McJimsey.
Illustrated. 474 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $25.


How the Call of the Wild Pays Off
LEAD: DETROIT Zoo directors have a dream.
They want the world's best chimpanzee exhibit.
What they envision is a four-acre recreation of an African forest where a colony of 25 to 30 chimps can live in captivity as they would in the wild.


CRIMINAL IN MASSACHUSETTS HAVE NEW REASON FOR GLOVES
LEAD: One May evening a Boston woman was raped in her home.
Detectives arrived the next morning to investigate and recovered fingerprints from a glass jar of coins.


Judge Expected to Approve Plan To Integrate Housing in Yonkers
LEAD: A Federal judge has indicated that he will accept the housing integration plan that the Yonkers City Council approved last week under the threat of a contempt-of-court citation and crippling fines.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Islip to Tape Trash Trips IT will be candid camera soon for Islip's garbage.
By the end of the summer, television cameras and a complete videotaping system will be installed at the town's landfill in Hauppauge.


'Summer Touches' For Whites Only
LEAD: In the June 14 issue of The New York Times Magazine (which included Karen K. Russell's article ''Growing Up With Privilege and Prejudice''), there appeared a Beauty article, ''Summer Touches'' (by Linda Wells), which could have been titled ''Summer Touches for White Women Only.'' The third paragraph of the article divides women into two categories: those with ''a little bit of tan,'' and those with ''pale skin.


Dealings Broke No Law, Meese Says
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d said last week that he had broken no Federal ethics law in his financial dealings.
Confident, at times combative, he told a Senate hearing on Government ethics that he knew from the start that his investment partner had ''some connection'' with the Wedtech Corporation, but that he ''didn't pay much attention.


MS. SLOMKOWSKI IS WED IN BOSTON
LEAD: At the chapel of the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Holy Cross in Boston yesterday Theresa M. Slomkowski, assistant to the editor of the Boston Publishing Company, was married to Robert J. Manning, editor in chief of the company, a book publishing concern.
The ceremony was performed by Msgr.
Francis J.


Thailand
LEAD: To the Editor: I enjoyed Simon Winchester's article ''Exploring Ayutthaya by Canal Boat'' (Travel, June 7).
It brought back memories of my own trip to that idyllic spot 10 years ago.
At that time there were no river boats to ''disgorge their invading armies of package tourists''; indeed, it took me several mornings of cajoling and humble pleading before I found a single Bangkok driver who was willing to take me there.


BUDGET BUOYS TOURISM HOPES
LEAD: RECORD spending, a new theme and increased activity by the state's 19 local tourism districts are generating more interest in Connecticut as a tourist destination, but how much tourism this translates into this summer remains to be seen, officials say.


Tampering With Art Is Hollywood's Art; Of Deals and Properties
LEAD: To the Editor:


WATER, WATER ...
LEAD: WATER.
In spite of recent thunderstorms, the ground is dry.
Containers such as patio planters, wooden tubs, troughs and window boxes need attention; also check soil around young shrubs, new perennials, flower beds and vegetables.
Mulch after the ground is soaked.
Use water-soluble fertilizers for tomatoes, peppers, eggplants, annuals and perennial divisions; nutrients dissolve quickly in water and are absorbed immediately by plants.


Harold F. Cherniss, an Expert In Greek Philosophy, Is Dead
LEAD: Harold F. Cherniss, a specialist in ancient Greek philosophy and professor emeritus at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., died June 18 at the Medical Center of Princeton after a long illness.
He was 83 years old.


ANYBODY HOME?
LEAD:  SPHERE  By Michael Crichton. 385 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.


AIR, LIGHT AND CITY PLANNING
LEAD:  To the Editor:


ACOUSTICS AREN'T JUST TRIMMINGS
LEAD: TESTY READERS OCCASIONALLY WRITE TO complain about what they perceive to be critics' obsession with the acoustical properties of concert halls.
Why reiterate that Avery Fisher Hall's acoustics are glaring? they grumble.
Or that Carnegie Hall may or may not be slightly better or worse or different from what it was before its renovation?


Chatham Light Takes Pace
LEAD: Chatham Light, the favorite, posted his sixth victory in as many starts in the final of the $518,000 Lawrence B. Sheppard Pace for 2-year-old colts and geldings tonight at Yonkers Raceway.


HIS NO. 1 JOB IS TO STRENGHTHEN THE CITY OPERA'S ORCHESTER
LEAD: IT SURPRISED MORE THAN A few people when Sergiu Comissiona was named music director of the New York City Opera a year ago.


Remembering Mr. Lomax
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


DRAFT RESISTER BEGINS A 3-YEAR TERM IN PRISON
LEAD: Wearing a T-shirt bearing the words ''justice is a constant struggle,'' David Gillam Kerley, a 26-year-old law student at the University of Wisconsin, departed for Leavenworth Federal Penitentiary in Kansas on Friday to begin a three-year term for refusing to register for the military draft.


LISA Q. L. WAGNER MARRIED TO EDWARD RICE ELDREDGE
LEAD: At the Congregational Church of Christ in Norfolk, Conn., yesterday Lisa Quinn Lovis Wagner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rodney Belknap Wagner of Brooklyn and Norfolk, was married yesterday to Edward Rice Eldredge, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Stuart Eldredge of Peterborough, N.H.
The Rev.
Bruce F.


Data Update
LEAD:  NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS  (In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
$
Apr. 87
Apr. 86
Change
Starts
1,665
1,945
-14%
Completions
1,821
1,703
7%
Sales
724
883
-18%
Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce


The Changing Baseball, Through the Eras
LEAD: The offense-defense balance in baseball has gone through distinct eras.
Generally speaking, the period before 1920 is called the ''dead ball'' era, not only because the baseball itself was less resilient than later, but also because one ball, used and scuffed, was kept in play much longer during the course of a game, and because pitchers were allowed to doctor and discolor it in various ways.


Uneasy Umpire
LEAD: THE National League umpire Billy Williams, who suffered a broken leg while calling a play at home plate last week, said he felt a little out of place sitting in a chair this time of year. ''Normally, I work seven days a week,'' Williams said. ''I work seven or more games, depending on if I work doubleheaders.


ABBY COHEN IS ENGAGED
LEAD: Abby Cohen and Steven Lane Conn, rabbinical students at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York, plan to be married in August.
The future bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Cohen of Fair Lawn, N.J., who have announced her engagement to a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanford Conn of West Bloomfield, Mich.


Two Close Calls For Air Travelers
LEAD: In May, looking apprehensively to the busy season, the National Transportation Safety Board warned of an apparent ''erosion of safety'' in the air traffic control system and a growing number of near-collisions.


HEATHER MITCHELL AND P.B. MURPHY MARRY IN CHICAGO
LEAD: Heather Holden Mitchell, the daughter of Mary Ann Mitchell of Hunting Valley, Ohio, and Holden Charles Mitchell of Woodbridge, Conn., and Peter Bradford Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray Bradford Murphy of Little Silver, N.J., and Harwichport, Mass., were married yesterday at St.
Chrysostom's Episcopal Church in Chicago.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended June 27
MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $550,000
228 West 21st Street
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,552-sq.-ft. co-op in a renovated prewar brownstone; high ceilings, dining area, fireplace, library, private garden; maintenance $315, no tax-deduction (Broker: Jaffe LaSalle)


Bad Argument
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


W. F. ALLMAN, WRITER, WED TO PATRICIA DILLON
LEAD: Patricia Anne Dillon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Dillon of Newport Beach, Calif., was married at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Trinity in Spring Lake, N.J., yesterday to William Foster Allman, a son of Martha O'Leary of Bay Head, N.J., and James J. Allman of Mountain Home, Ark.


FOR THE CONSERVATION OF WATERFOWL
LEAD: THE 1987-88 migratory bird hunting and conservation stamp is available from Postal Service philatelic sales outlets and many post offices.
These stamps, known to collectors as ''duck stamps'' are issued annually by the Department of the Interior and must be carried by waterfowl hunters who are at least 16 years old.


Transsexual Presses Bias Case in New Hampshire
LEAD: The New Hampshire judicial system is considering its most unusual discrimination case thus far, a case involving a transsexual.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  THE POLITICS OF READING  &gt;One of the benefits of democracy, says the novelist Walter Abish, is our freedom to ignore our novelists' politics, to read their books, if we please, simply as stories.
He tells us how he conceives of politics in his own work in ''Alive and Writing: Interviews With American Authors of the 1980s'' (University of Illinois), edited by Larry McCaffery and Sinda Gregory.


SALES VIRTUOSO: Gene Tupper; Perfecting the Art of Selling a Steinway
LEAD: EXCEPT for a brief Army stint, Gene Tupper has been surrounded by Steinways all his life.
For 49 years his mother, Alice, gave piano lessons in Estherville, Iowa, on a series of used Steinway uprights. ''I always had a love affair with the Steinway,'' said the 61-year-old Mr.
Tupper, recalling his early days of studying and teaching piano.


A Father's Pictures
LEAD: IN ALL THE TIME I WAS GROWING up, I never heard my father speak about what it was like to have been at Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7, 1941.
He showed us photographs instead.
He had grown up in the Hawaiian Islands, traveled to New York City to study photography with Margaret Bourke-White, then returned to Hawaii as a Navy photographer.


SAN FRANCISCO
LEAD: New hotels are looming all along the San Francisco skyline.
Two major hotels are scheduled to open soon, a third opened in May, five more are under construction, and a 388-room tower is being added to the San Francisco Hilton, the city's largest hotel.


CHRISTINE CRONIN WED TO CORNELIUS GALLAGHER
LEAD: Christine Ruth Cronin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Green Cronin of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Cornelius Gallagher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent James Gallagher of West Islip, L.I.
The Rev.
William J. Winterrowd performed the ceremony at St.
James the Less Episcopal Church.


ONLY ANKLE DEEP IN ADVENTURE
LEAD: SOMETIMES EVEN FILMS ABOUT adventure, about discovery, about wondrous technological triumphs have a way of seeming small.
It's a function of the particular universe that is being explored.
If that universe is effectively no larger than, say, a suburban backyard, there isn't much to be unearthed no matter how energetic the digging.


CHUN FOE'S PLANS STIR SOUTH KOREA
LEAD: Over the years, Korean governments have kidnapped Kim Dae Jung from Japan, sentenced him to death, effectively exiled him to the United States and put him under house arrest scores of times.


Woman Pulled From River
LEAD: Two police officers and an Emergency Medical Services technician swam into the Harlem River yesterday afternoon and saved a woman who had jumped from a bridge, the police said.
The woman, who was not immediately identified, jumped off the bridge where Broadway crosses the river into the Bronx.
The officers, Phillip Fowler and John Fraser, and the technician, Mark Watin, pulled the woman to shore about 150 feet downstream from the bridge.


Proprietary Rights
LEAD:  To the Editor:


IMPROMPTU TOPPINGS MAKE PIZZA AN EASY SUMMER TREAT
LEAD: HOMEMADE pizza is one of the easiest dishes to make for weekend guests during the summer.
If you have a food processor, the dough can be prepared in seconds.
Of course, a couple of hours is needed for rising, but dough can be made beforehand, allowed to rise and frozen until it is needed.


'ALL MY SONS' IN WESTPORT
LEAD: THE Westport Country Playhouse is now running plays for two weeks instead of one.


Personal System
LEAD: To the Editor:


TEST TUTORING LEADS TO A CAREER AS AUTHOR
LEAD: JUST a few weeks ago, Samuel Brownstein handed his publisher the manuscript for the 14th edition of one of his 10 books in print.
The sixth editions of two of his other books will be released by the end of the year.
And Mr.
Brownstein, who will say only that he is ''in my 70's,'' has more deadlines stretching into 1988.


Growing Up With Privilege and Prejudice
LEAD: As a black man, what I find ironic is that Karen Russell displays a conk (straightened hair), admits to a ''white'' accent and tells us that she plans to use her talents for Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's campaign, and thus against the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's.


Fishing Lure Brings $9,240
LEAD: Some fishing lures just catch fish, but the Haskell minnow lure has hooked a buyer who spent a record $9,240 to own the 4 1/2-inch, silver-plated copper device.
The sale, at an antique fishing tackle auction here, broke the old record of $5,500 for a fishing lure.
Robert S. Lang of Windsor, Conn., who helped set up the auction, said the lure, patented in 1859, probably sold for 50 cents when new.


Cambodia Reported Ready to Repatriate Refugees
LEAD: A senior Government minister has declared that Cambodia is ready in principle to take back the bulk of the 275,000 Cambodians who have sought refuge in Thailand since the Vietnamese invasion of 1979.


173 BEDS FOR ELDERLY APPROVED
LEAD: FOR the first time in nearly a decade, state health authorities have tentatively approved a major increase in the number of nursing-home beds for the county.


Animals Trapped for Jersey Highway Project
LEAD: Before getting down to roadwork here, the New Jersey Turnpike Authority has been practicing a little wildlife management.


At The Courthouse, the Barber Shop and the Drugstore, They're With North   In Illinois, He Gets Hero's Reception and Is a Star at Soap Opera Time
LEAD: If he sat down at the lunch counter in Your Corner Drug Store here, Col.
Oliver L. North could straighten out all the commotion.


Captive Writer Appears on Tape
LEAD: In a videotaped statement that was promptly dismissed by a White House spokesman as possibly made under ''coercion or perhaps even with torture,'' Charles Glass said last week that he had come to Lebanon to ''collect information for the benefit of the C.I.A.'' Before he was kidnapped June 17, the 36-year-old former Middle East correspondent for ABC News had told friends he was back in Beirut to work on a book about


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, JULY 12, 1987
LEAD: International 3-14  2,5.5,q&gt;The Iran-contra investigation will continue to be aggressive despite the favorable public reaction to Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's testimony before the Congressional committees, members of the committees said.
Page 1  White House officials mishandled their approach to the Congressional testimony of Colonel North and, in the words of one official, made themselves and the President look silly in the process.


STYLIZATION GILDS THE BOLSHOI'S 'GOLDEN AGE'
LEAD: IT IS A VERY DIFFERENT BOLSHOI Ballet - boasting a dazzlingly talented new generation of dancers - that has arrived on our shores for a two-month national tour, the first since 1979.
Yet, it is also the Bolshoi, more than any other company, that fits the old French saying that the more things change, the more they remain the same.


INTEREST IN BALLOONING IS SOARING
LEAD: PHINEAS FOGG traveled around the world in one, and Dorothy tried to take one all the way from Oz to her home in faraway Kansas.


Golfers Withdraw
LEAD: SEVEN American golfers, including 1981 champion Bill Rogers and last year's top United States finisher, Gary Koch, have withdrawn from this week's British Open.
Hubert Green, Hale Irwin, Joey Sindelar, John Mahaffey and Doug Tewell were the others who pulled out of the tournament.
Rogers gave no reason for his decision, but Green, the 1977 United States Open and 1985 PGA champion, did, saying ''The current state of my game dictates that I must withdraw.


MORRIS MUSEUM FAILS ITS TEST
LEAD: THE State Council on the Arts has the Jersey City and Morris Museums tied up, the first with the New Jersey Arts Annual, of which it is the sponsor, and the Morris Museum with the council's 1985-1986 Visual Arts Fellowship exhibition.


HOW SHOULD THE METS HANDLE THE RIFTS ON THEIR TEAM?
LEAD: As a transplanted New Yorker and a loyal Mets fan for 20 years, it disgusts me to see the bickering and clashing of egos on a team that was once noted for its boyhood innocence and charm.


Street Parking By Credit Card?
LEAD: AS Mayor Koch saw it, the coin-operated parking meter was doomed in New York, victim of a curse of riches.
With 62,778 meters and a quarter buying as little as 10 minutes of parking in the streets, the city was hard put to keep the coin boxes from overflowing.


Series of Pit Bull Attacks Stirs a Clamor for Laws
LEAD: When Raylene Smith sees a pit bull, she sees a killer.
Her mind flashes back to the day two years ago when two pit bulls knocked her to the ground, tearing at her stomach, legs, arms and thighs.


CENTENARIANS: 81% ARE WOMEN
LEAD: ALTHOUGH an informal survey of centenarians in the state may not be definitive, it did point up one fact - the vast majority are women.


The Dordogne
LEAD: To the Editor: The article on hiking in the Dordogne (Travel, June 7) sounded very much like our own experiences along the Grande Randonnee system in France.
First introduced to it through an earlier article (''France's Appalachian Trail'' by former Representative Henry S. Reuss, Travel, May 23, 1982), we have since hiked on many segments, but mostly in the southwest and in Brittany.


A Step Back in Time With the Artisans
LEAD: Anyone who has made the glittering crossing of the Ponte Vecchio in Florence recently might well have missed the big white tears painted on the bronze bust of that secular saint of the jewelers, Benvenuto Cellini.
The consummate Renaissance man - goldsmith, swordsman, scholar and creator of the most beautiful saltcellar of all times - is in mourning, it seems.


Don't Count Out Conservatism
LEAD: In demonstrating that Reaganism has yet to run its course, Irving Kristol seems to take particular glee from the fact that Reaganomics, by running up a huge Federal debt, has foreclosed the liberal agenda for the foreseeable future.
Has it occurred to him that Mr.
Reagan's debt has also foreclosed any Government agenda?


A Sailor' Club Rigged For the Computer
LEAD: Sailors for whom the term ''user-friendly'' means access to a computer and a modem will find that the governing body of their sport, the United States Yacht Racing Union, is on line 24 hours a day to answer questions.


Generosity's Price
LEAD: 'Ten years ago the pressures on me were to see that Champion did more for the community.
But the world has changed.
Today, greed is in and we are told greed and intolerance are good for the country and for the company.
But I don't see it that way.'


The Promise of a Global Farm Fix
LEAD: While Congress backs into a policy of protecting failing industries, Reagan Administration officials are pursuing constructive fixes for America's trade woes.
The President offers a plan for restoring trade leadership for America's largest and most efficient industry: agriculture.


BE FRUITFUL AND MULTIPLY
LEAD:  THE BIRTH DEARTH  By Ben J. Wattenberg. 182 pp. New York: Pharos Books. $16.95.


EROS MAKES WAR By Isabel Allende. Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden. 274 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.    FEW literary legends can compare to that surrounding ''The House of the Spirits,'' Isabel Allende's family-chronicle-cum-history of her native Chile. Her very first novel, published when she was in her early 40's, rose to best-sellerdom. Reviewers were indulgent. Here was a beautiful, humane, talented woman who happened to be the exiled niece of the martyred Chilean President Salvador Allende. The troublesome secret was that in prose and format the book was mostly imitation Garcia Marquez.   Happily, Ms. Allende is no longer the novice in ''Of Love and Shadows,'' a suspenseful thriller. Set in the terrorized Chile of Gen. Augusto Pinochet (himself an occasional character), it tells of the love that grows between Irene Beltran - feisty, innocent, marginally upper-class and a reporter for a women's magazine - and Francisco Leal, son of impoverished Spanish Republican exiles, an unemployed psychologist and sometime political activist who casually drifts into Irene's office as a freelance photographer. Together they cover a variety of beats, but something clicks when they start investigating Evangelina, a 15-year-old peasant girl and fabled miracle worker. During a brutal army search of her family's house, Evangelina, in a trance, singlehandedly lifts up a cruel lieutenant and hurls him out the door.   Soon thereafter Evangelina ''disappears''; through journalistic tips and footwork the hero and heroine locate the girl's corpse in an abandoned mine shaft, where bodies of dozens of the regime's opponents are also decaying. Francisco takes photos; word spreads; a scandal ensues. Then someone sprays Irene with bullets from a passing car. She survives in the hospital but is obviously marked for Government liquidation. With help from friends she and Francisco assume disguises, quietly flee Santiago and cross the Andes into Argentina, ready to fight the dictatorship from exile. ''We will return,'' they say. LOVE and struggle a la ''Casablanca'' - it's all there. Ms. Allende skillfully evokes both the terrors of daily life under military rule and the subtler forms of resistance in the hidden corners and ''shadows'' of her title, particularly in the churches or in simple unsung acts of solidarity. At the same time the author ably captures the voices of the regime's apologists - the complex lies and cliches of its proud male foot soldiers and the pat false phrases of its rich lady cheerleaders. A journalist herself, Ms. Allende renders with expert detail such offbeat worlds as the professional routines of a hairdresser, the range of types in a private nursing home or the operations of the Santiago city morgue. While her prose at times verges on soap opera, that is also one of its charms. She can just as deftly depict loving tenderness as convey the high fire of eroticism. And when you've successfully mingled sex and politics with a noble cause, how can you go wrong?   While the translation by Margaret Sayers Peden is at times awkward (for example, ''pythoness'' and ''chiromancy'' instead of ''fortune teller'' and ''palmistry'') and could use more colloqualisms and contractions, on the whole it's a supple piece of work.
LEAD:  OF LOVE AND SHADOWS


Jazz: Dick Wellstood At Carlyle Bar's Piano
LEAD: DICK WELLSTOOD, the pianist who was the stylistic model for the entertainment at Hanratty's on Second Avenue until the room dropped its music policy (it is now closed entirely), has found a new musical home, music policy (it is now closed entirely), has found a new musical home, if only for the summertime.


WHEN SHIPS WERE PALACES ON THE WAVES
LEAD: HEROIC-SCALED HULLS dominate the boldly graphic posters at the entrance to ''The Great Liner: Trans-Atlantic Passage Between the Wars,'' an exhibition of nautical memorabilia that will be at the South Street Seaport Museum Gallery, 213 Water Street, through Jan. 3.
The show's red-white-and-blue posters by A.


Street Fashion; Hot Dots: The Dress That's Everywhere At Once
LEAD: CALL it the Lunch Dress: it's seen most frequently on elegant women rushing to their midday appointments at one or another of New York City's best restaurants.


Headliners; Confessional Politics
LEAD: Asserting that ''the best policy is to be as straightforward as possible,'' Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, a Democratic Presidential candidate, stood by with less than his usual sang-froid last week as his wife, Kitty Dukakis, disclosed that she had once been addicted to amphetamines.
She said her dependency started when she was 19 with a prescription for diet pills and lasted 26 years, though she had been free of it since seeking treatment five years ago.


Dealing With a Hazard: Asbestos Guide
LEAD: Given the growing concern - and confusion - over the best way to deal with the presence of asbestos in some 733,000 buildings nationwide, a publication put out by the National Institute of Building Sciences, called ''Model Guide Specifications: Asbestos Abatement in Buildings,'' might offer some assistance.


DOROTHEA L. DIX: AN EARLY ADVOCATE FOR WORLD'S MENTALLY ILL
LEAD: Dorothea L. Dix, author and teacher, humanitarian, healer and crusader for the poor and mentally impaired, was born in Hampden, Me., in 1802 and died in Trenton on July 18, 1887.


In Sultry New York, Tourists Are Undaunted
LEAD: On a sweltering day, when temperatures reached 93 degrees in Central Park and many New Yorkers fled for the beach, tourists nonetheless came in droves to the Visitors Center in Times Square.


Headliners; Death for a Serial Killer
LEAD: The appeals will take years and there is a possibility of a new trial.
Nevertheless, a 27-year-old Cornell University graduate is now in line to become the first person to die in Connecticut's electric chair since Joseph (Mad Dog) Taborsky was electrocuted in 1960 for killing seven people in a robbery.


WALTER E. KINGSTON
LEAD: Walter E. Kingston, an authority on powder metallurgy, died of cancer of the liver on July 4 at his home in West Caldwell, N.J.
He was 81 years old.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  CRAFTS ON SOCIETY HILL


Cardinals' Streak Is Snapped
LEAD: Bob Brenly knocked in two runs with a homer and a single as the San Francisco Giants beat St.
Louis, 3-1, snapping the Cardinals' nine-game winning streak.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Amityville  $227,500
289 South Bay View Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 26-year-old waterfront ranch; eat-in kitchen, dining room sunken living room; taxes $3,600.
Bayport  $235,000
106 Fairview Avenue
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; den, basement, office, enclosed porch; taxes $4,000.


THE TRASH THAT WON'T GO AWAY
LEAD: One of the points that stands out most forcibly in the article ''Toxic Ash: Garbage That Won't Go Away,'' on June 21, is that garbage-to-energy plants are no cure for the trash that is slowly engulfing us.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.67
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.25
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.60
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.52
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


ILLNESS, CANCER; PROGNOSIS, GOOD; REACTIONS, UNEXPECTED
LEAD: SEVERAL months ago, my husband went to see a doctor about a puzzling pain in his lower right side.
He returned with that diagnosis we all dread: probable cancer.


LANESA L. WHITE WED TO DR. FRANK LEANA JR.
LEAD: Lanesa Legvold White, a daughter of Mrs.
Sam Legvold of Ames, Iowa, and the late Mr.
Legvold, and Dr.
Frank C. Leana Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leana of Watertown, N.Y., were married yesterday at the couple's home in Manhattan.


CRIME
LEAD: Of recent debut mystery novels, THE INCURSION by Dirk Hanson (Little, Brown, $16.95) stands out.
Many first novelists tend to write from their own background, and Mr.
Hanson is no exception.
He is a specialist in computer technology and has written a book about it, ''The New Alchemists.'' In ''The Incursion'' he sticks to the things he knows.


CHILDREN
LEAD:  Fables and Legends: Aesop's Fables, Volume One  MCA Home Video. 30 minutes. $14.95.
The idea here is to pretend that a group of children are lolling around a campfire while adults entertain them by reciting some of Aesop's legendary fables.
We move from the reality of the woodsy scene to the animation of the stories - ''The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing,'' ''The Goose That Laid the Golden Egg,'' ''The Dog in the Manger'' and so on.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article in The Times Magazine last Sunday, ''Pop Fiction for Smart Girls'' by Rae Lawrence, described the writer's effort to have her first novel published while she worked as a secretary.
When she began the novel, she had been employed for four years in that capacity at a real estate firm.
The article left the impression that Ms.


Judge Blocks a Plan to Burn Barge's Garbage in Brooklyn
LEAD: A State Supreme Court Judge has temporarily barred New York City from burning refuse from the garbage barge Mobro in a Brooklyn incinerator.


A Shield, Needlessly Dented
LEAD: Most judges observe a simple rule when interpreting a law: If it's clear on its face, don't dig into its history looking for some more subtle meaning.
New York enacted such a statute in 1970, the first state law in the nation shielding journalists, their notes and unused film footage from prosecutors' subpoenas.


INSIDE
LEAD: Woes Amid the Wealth
Prosperity creates its own special problems, a report on the future of Fairfield County, Conn., warns.


HER WIT AND HIS HEART MAKE A MOVIE TEAM
LEAD: LIKE MOST MOVIE MAKERS, Frank Perry didn't stop to think how his latest film would fit into the body of his work when he began shooting it.
He thought about how funny the script was.
The movie, ''Hello Again,'' by Susan Isaacs, is the story of a Long Island housewife who dies and is brought back to life by her occultist sister a year later.


Pop Music
LEAD: Alternative, independent, post-punk, new wave - whatever it's called at the moment, this is the week for it.
During the day, music moguls, would-be moguls, producers, performers and disk jockeys will convene at the Marriott Marquis Hotel in New Music Seminar 8, with panel discussions and hobnobbing Sunday afternoon through Wednesday (for seminar information, call 722-2115).


IMPROMPTU TOPPINGS MAKE PIZZA AN EASY SUMMER TREAT
LEAD: HOMEMADE pizza is one of the easiest dishes to make for weekend guests during the summer.
If you have a food processor, the dough can be prepared in seconds.
Of course, a couple of hours is needed for rising, but dough can be made beforehand, allowed to rise and frozen until it is needed.


'WOP BOP ALOO' IN BRIDGEPORT
LEAD: AT the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport, they've built a repertory of representative musical ''decade shows,'' from ''Speakeasy'' (the tunes of the 20's) to ''Ticket to Ride'' (the sounds of the late 60's).
A sampler of what hit the pop charts during the early 60's - and the late 50's - ''Wop Bop Aloo Bop Awop Bam Boom,'' a chaotic collage subtitled ''A Rock 'n' Roll Dance


Changing Styles
LEAD:  To the Editor:


IMPROMPTU TOPPINGS MAKE PIZZA AN EASY SUMMER TREAT
LEAD: HOMEMADE pizza is one of the easiest dishes to make for weekend guests during the summer.
If you have a food processor, the dough can be prepared in seconds.
Of course, a couple of hours is needed for rising, but dough can be made beforehand, allowed to rise and frozen until it is needed.


KATHERINE VOSSEN MARRIES
LEAD: Katherine Vossen and Stephen R. Wilson, a correspondent in Rome for The Associated Press, were married yesterday in the Little Sanctuary of St.
Albans School in Washington.
Canon Charles Martin, headmaster emeritus of St.
Albans, performed the Episcopal ceremony.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.


All-Star Umpires, 2 Players Named
LEAD: Don Denkinger of the American League heads a list of six umpires who will work the All-Star Game in Oakland, Calif., Tuesday night.


Priming the Jobs Pump
LEAD: To the Editor:


photo of scene from stage adaptation of ''1984'' (Jiri Zizka)
LEAD: THE CARPET ON THE LIVING room floor had a black and white checkerboard pattern.
Jiri Zizka still remembers watching his father use the carpet as a kind of graph paper, plotting the coordinates by which thousands of Prague citizens would take part in exercise demonstrations.


STEVE MARTIN REVISES 'CYRANO'
LEAD: THE ROOMS IN STEVE MARTIN'S house flow into each other like tributaries joining a giant river.


Directors' Strike Called for NBC And 2 Studios
LEAD: The 8,400-member Directors Guild of America said today it would begin a strike Tuesday morning against NBC, Warner Brothers and Columbia Pictures.


HOW SHOULD THE METS HANDLE THE RIFTS ON THEIR TEAM?
LEAD: Perhaps the best solution to the Mets' problems is to hire a psychologist, psychiatrist or therapist to help the individual players and the team as a whole deal with all of their pressures.
Why not?
Most of the rest of New York is in therapy!
TINA FRIEDMAN
New York


TATTERED REMINDERS OF WORDS TO INSPIRE A CHILD
LEAD: THERE they lie.
Mute evidence to the destructibility of all things.
Once they stood upright, their spines proudly declaring: ''Shelley's Poems,'' ''Tennyson's Poems,'' ''The Golden Treasury of Songs and Lyrics,'' by Francis T. Palgrave.
There are others too, slowly deteriorating.
The leather has disintegrated and the gilt lettering crumbled.


North Wins The Public At Expense Of Superiors
LEAD: AFTER all those months of waiting, all those months of television pictures of the mute marine ducking out of his house and into his car, Ollie North talked last week, and the nation liked what it heard.
Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, most people concluded, was neither a nut nor a lone wolf but a classic specimen of manly rigor and character - not a national hero, as President


OCEAN GROVE TO HEAR THE SOUND OF SOUSA MUSIC ONCE AGAIN
LEAD: JOHN PHILIP SOUSA, ''the March King,'' who was not asked back to this seaside Methodist resort after he mocked Prohibition in the 1920's, will soon make a triumphant return here - at least in spirit - to the Great Auditorium.


The Trial Begins At Chernobyl
LEAD: Chernobyl in the Soviet Ukraine has been a virtual ghost town since April 26, 1986, the day of the disastrous explosion of the nuclear reactor 11 miles away.
Last week, a handful of people returned, not to live there, but to attend the trial of the men the Soviet Government says were responsible for the world's worst nuclear accident.


The American Approach: On AIDS, We Have More Answers Than Questions
LEAD: AS AIDS has grown from a handful of mysterious cases in New York and California into a deadly worldwide epidemic, it has also become a vexing political issue.
In forums ranging from local school boards to the White House, struggling officials debate what to do.
For better or worse, they are devising policies that are increasingly inconsistent with one another.


Fountain of Relief
LEAD: Liz Westfall and her 15-month-old son, Connor, beating the heat under a sprinkler at John Jay Playground at 77th Steet off York Avenue.


FUND TO STIMULATE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
LEAD: THE county now has a green light from the State Legislature to open a $4 million coffer to communities that want to build affordable housing.


PAMELA DONOVAN MARRIES
LEAD: Pamela Jane Donovan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Donovan of Morristown, N.J., was married there yesterday to John Andrew Gehret, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John F. Gehret of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Christopher Muldoon performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Assumption.
Mrs.


FOOD FOR THE HUNGRY
LEAD: More than one million meals were provided for hungry people in the county last year, 63 percent more than in 1985, according to figures compiled this month by the Coalition for the Homeless in Westchester.


Religion Notes; Indian Week-Bible Week Observance: a Conflict
LEAD: When the National Council of Churches called on its membership recently to observe American Indian Week over the Thanksgiving holiday next November, it thought the matter relatively noncontroversial.
The other day, however, an angry letter arrived at the council offices complaining that the observance ''raises a conflict that disappoints and saddens.


Saberhagen Wins 15th As Royals Defeat Jays
LEAD: Bret Saberhagen pitched a three-hitter and won his 15th game of the season today as the Kansas City Royals beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 2-1.


THE QUICK KILL WILL KEEP THINGS LIVELY
LEAD: QUICK, decisive victories are not worth a hundreth of a point more than long, slogging ones.
But they do enliven your tournament.


'SNOW WHITE' AT 50: UNDIMMED MAGIC
LEAD: BEFORE STEVEN SPIEL-berg and George Lucas, before ''The Wizard of Oz,'' before all other animated cartoon features, there was Walt Disney's ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.''


MISS FLANIGAN WED TO DR. MARC YLAND
LEAD: Kathrynne Edwards Flanigan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur C. Flanigan of Riverhead, L.I., and Dr.
Marc Joseph Yland, the son of Jos G. M. Yland of Doorwerth, the Netherlands, and Marianne Smoor of Wassenaar, the Netherlands, were married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Riverhead by the Rev.


Fairfield Finds Problems in Success
LEAD: As the year 2000 approaches, Fairfield County faces growing problems tied to its fabled prosperity, particularly a labor shortage and a dearth of affordable housing, according to a report by an advisory group of 800 public and private leaders.


CARLTON PENAVERA-CABOT IS MARRIED TO CARLA PELLEGRINO IN MASSACHUSETTS
LEAD: Our Lady of Victory Roman Catholic Church in Centerville, Mass., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Carla Anne Pellegrino and Carlton PenaVera-Cabot.
The Rev.
Robert G. McMillan performed the ceremony.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: THE Cleveland Cavaliers plan to fight attempts to void a draft-day trade that sent Keith Lee, a forward with the Cavaliers, to the Portland Trail Blazers for Jim Paxson, a guard.
The deal reportedly was contingent on Lee's passing a physical examination administered by the Portland team doctor, and the Blazers contend that it's no deal since the condition of Lee's knees endangers his playing career.


Data Bank: July 12, 1987
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
I Q'87
IV Q'86
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,735.2
$3,696.1
$3,655.9
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.8
1.1
3.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
I Q'87
IV Q'86
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$136.6
$144.5
$126.9


KAREN CROW WEDS CAPT. C. P. EVANS
LEAD: Karen Lisa Crow, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lon Worth Crow Jr. of Coral Gables, Fla., was married yesterday to Capt.
Christopher Paul Evans of the Army Medical Corps, a son of Dr.
Alfred S. Evans of Madison, Conn., and the late Brigitte K. Evans.
Bishop James L. Duncan, who is retired from the Diocese of Southeast Florida, performed the ceremony at St.


INVESTING
LEAD: ANALYSTS who monitor stock purchases and sales by corporate insiders have been reporting levels of insider bullishness in recent weeks that in the past have often preceded major market upswings.
The readings surprise some analysts, who note that insider buying tends to be heaviest around market lows, rather than after large advances.


Potato Chips With Hawaiian Crunch
LEAD: The lowly potato chip is not rated very high on the ladder of four-star gastronomic delights.
It is probably not rated at all compared with glistening Beluga caviar, translucent slices of smoked salmon, plump fresh foie gras and slivers of crisp black truffles.
But on the island of Maui in Hawaii can be found a potato chip that can compete with the finest of foods and renders all other potato chips pedestrian.


RANDI GOLDBERG TO WED
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Goldberg of New York of the engagement of their daughter, Randi Sue Goldberg, to Steven Fredric Wasserman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Wasserman of Baldwin, L.I.
Ms.
Goldberg graduated last month from the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law of Yeshiva University and is to join the New York law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae in the fall as an associate.


Looking Forward to the Casino Society
LEAD: THOUSANDS of pages have been written on the question of what American industry must do to become competitive in the world market, or at least in the American market.
Experts usually tell us that we must learn to make desirable products of good quality at reasonable prices.
The same experts, faced with the question: ''How do I become the major league batting champion?


Bo Jackson's New Hobby: Football
LEAD: Bo Jackson, the rookie outfielder for the Kansas City Royals, said today that he would like to play for the Los Angeles Raiders in the National Football League as a hobby ''like hunting or fishing.''


Hidden Cost
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Rockland Hires an Expert for Mountains of Paper
LEAD: Hour after hour and day after day, Peter J. Scheibner must work, live and listen to his enemies.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Jacksonville, Fla.; A Lift Along The Riverfront
LEAD: A $42 MILLION retail and restaurant complex called Jacksonville Landing opened last month on the banks of the St.
Johns River here, and hopes are high that it will give the heart of this northern Florida city a needed commercial lift.


BOSTON LOSES PRIZE LOBSTER
LEAD: A 30-pound giant lobster scheduled for display at the New England Aquarium here died after a fall from a scale, an aquarium spokeswoman said Friday.


AT VELCRO MILL, THE IDEAS KEEP COMING
LEAD: Every week Ted Krantz, president of Velcro U.S.A., and Richard Kuhl, the vice president, get calls and letters from people around the country who say they have the ''ultimate Velcro idea.''


Quality Housing: Cons and Pros
LEAD:  To the Editor:


What Is to Be Done About the Bork Nomination; Liberals, Wake!
LEAD: To the Editor:


And Baby Makes Five Billion: U.N. Hails a Yugoslav Infant
LEAD: The United Nations proclaimed an eight-pound boy born today as the five billionth human now living on the planet and began celebrations to welcome the baby, Matej Gaspar.


ANDREA GODBOUT BECOMES A BRIDE
LEAD: Andrea Godbout and John C. Gulla were married yesterday at the Tavern on the Green in New York by the Rev.
Victor Marchioro, a Presbyterian minister.


LESSONS LEARNED
LEAD: BACK when hula hoops were de rigueur, shooting color-print film demanded extraordinary patience.
One took a roll of exposed film to the corner drugstore, or put it into a mailer and shipped it off to Kodak, and waited.
Some two, three or four weeks later, the prints and developed negatives would wend their way back.


Indian Cemetery: Peace in Delaware
LEAD: IT took two years, but the Delaware General Assembly finally passed compromise legislation that satisfies archaeologists studying unearthed human remains and Nanticoke Indians seeking to protect the dignity of their ancestors.


On East Side, Bars Upset Residents
LEAD: Once, the summer predawn hours on many streets in the East 80's were quiet, and a dog walker could stroll at 1 A.M. past the murmur of conversations winding down in bars and restaurants.


HOW SHOULD THE METS HANDLE THE RIFTS ON THEIR TEAM?
LEAD: Running to the news media and letting themselves be interviewed by reporters and television sports broadcasters is not a way to settle problems.
There is an old saying: You do not wash your dirty linen in public.
They would have been better off venting their anger to each other instead of making a public display.


Priests Increasing Rapidly in the Third World
LEAD: Someday priests from Asia and Africa might have to look after Roman Catholics in countries that once sent off boatloads of missionaries, according to Vatican documents showing that the number of priests is rapidly growing in third world countries while declining in Europe and the United States.


A German Controversy: What To Do? Bavaria Has Some Strict Ideas
LEAD: TO the accompaniment of a sensational and sometimes anguished debate, the southern state of Bavaria last month put into effect some of the stiffest AIDS regulations yet ordered anywhere in the world, including mandatory blood tests for prostitutes, drug addicts, prison inmates, applicants for civil-service jobs and some foreigners seeking residence in Bavaria.


HOW-TO
LEAD:  Building Bookcases  Woodworking Series.
DIY Video Corporation, 5250 Seventy-Seven Center Drive, Charlotte, N.C. 28210. 40 minutes. $19.95.
This cassette gives the viewer a good demonstration of the techniques involved in building an attractive bookcase - providing one has access to a well-equipped power-tool workshop.


Player Cards a 67, Leads Seniors by 2
LEAD: It seemed to Chi Chi Rodriguez and almost everyone else that it would be a two-man race between him and Gary Player in Sunday's final round of the United States Senior Open.


Medical Care Sharply Curtailed by Doctors' Protest in Florida
LEAD: Protesting a steep increase in malpractice insurance rates, many physicians in the two most populous counties in South Florida have sharply curtailed their services since the beginning of the month.


WHY THE SKY IS BLUE
LEAD:  MEDITATIONS AT SUNSET  A Scientist Looks at the Sky.
By James Trefil.
Illustrated by Judith Peatross. 208 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $16.95.


Financing Housing For Affordability
LEAD: In September 1984, Governor Cuomo announced new regulations for New York State that were supposed to induce banks to invest a billion dollars in poor neighborhoods.
Federal banking regulations, however, made the program unworkable and it died.


Kyoto Has Fans For All Reasons
LEAD: The dark old storefront of Miyawaki Baisen'an, with the silver, gold and vivid pigments of its sheaves of fans gleaming faintly from the dim interior, bespeaks a tradition that goes back over a thousand years, to the first flowering of classical Japanese culture.
Heavy fans made of cypress slats held together with silk cords were part of the formal accouterment of the aristocrats who attended the imperial court during the Heian period (794-1185) and thereafter.


Q. &amp; A.: CLEANING GUTTERS, CAULKING CRACKS, REMOVING PAINT
LEAD: Q. LIKE many other homeowners, I have a continual problem each fall with leaves and other debris accumulating inside the rain gutters around the outside of my house.
I deal with this in the same manner as most homeowners do - by climbing up on a ladder and scooping all the debris out of the gutters.


Now Batting Against Jim Crow...
LEAD: AS THE baseball season reaches its midpoint, it is time that we reflect on a player who literally changed the very face of the game.


Court's Ruling Of Shield Law
LEAD: Many journalists have long argued that to insure the existence of an independent press they should be shielded from prosecutors who try to compel them to reveal the names of sources.
In fact, some reporters argue that the First Amendment implicitly gives them this right.
Similar protection has been sought for reporters' notebooks, tapes, films and other raw material used in gathering the news.


NOT WHAT THEY EXPECTED
LEAD:  SUMMERTIME  By Maureen McCoy. 300 pp. New York: Poseidon Press. $15.95.


The Stars Below
LEAD: The middle-aged couple, sweltering through a night at the beach when the heat wouldn't stop, decided to go for a swim.
Why not?
They would hardly be missed by children and old folks long asleep.
They put on bathing suits and slipped out onto the beach, sloppy and cool at low tide.


Western Outpost of Festivals
LEAD: As you drive in to Telluride, Colo., your eye is drawn to the peaks behind the town - Ajax, Telluride, Ingram.
The purple-black of raisins and snow capped, they rise like softened pyramids more than 4,000 feet from the valley floor, and the floor itself is nearly 9,000 feet above sea level.
Part of the San Juans,


Maine
LEAD: To the Editor:


COLLEGE FACULTIES FACING REFORMS
LEAD: AT A RETREAT at Fairleigh Dickinson University here recently, members of the state's Board of Higher Education met to ponder their agenda for the next five years.


Seth, Not Death
LEAD:  To the Editor:


New York Inspectors Cite Food Outlets For Health Offenses
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 17 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


New Yorkers,
LEAD: IT all boils down to whether people really want to hear the truth.
They should want to hear it, they often say they want to hear it, but when it comes to actually hearing it, forget it.


Jazz: Jungle Orchestra
LEAD: THE original ''jungle band'' was the early Duke Ellington Orchestra that played exotic arrangements to match the ''jungle'' decor for the Cotton Club's legendary stage shows.
Pierre Dorge and the New Jungle Orchestra, an 11-piece band from Copenhagen making its New York debut at Sweet Basil this week, deliberately evokes this tradition of ''chinoiserie,'' or cheerfully inauthentic exoticism in jazz.


MARINES, UNEASY AT FIRST, NOW SEE NORTH AS HONOR TO CORPS
LEAD: The Hawk Room, a lounge area at the basic training school for Marine Corps officers at Quantico, Va., has been crowded daily with off-duty second lieutenants following the Iran-contra hearings on television.
After every testy exchange between committee counsels and Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, the Marine Corps battle cry rings out: ''Arugah!


Classical Music
LEAD: Mostly Mozart is in full swing this week, offering another encounter with Helmuth Rilling conducting Bach for those who liked (or missed) his Easter performances at Carnegie Hall.
He leads the B Minor Mass with a good solo quartet Friday and Saturday at Avery Fisher Hall.
Earlier, Tuesday and Wednesday, Frank Peter Zimmermann will play Mendelssohn's ''other'' violin concerto, the youthful one in


Jaguar Recalls 3,500 Sedans
LEAD: Jaguar is recalling about 3,500 1986 XJ6 sedans in the United States for replacement of possibly defective microswitches that affect the cars' stop lights and cruise control mechanisms, said Jaguar Cars Inc., the New Jersey-based importer of the British luxury car.
No reported accidents have been attributed to defective switches, Jaguar said.


WHAT'S NEW IN ZOOS
LEAD: IT is still the same ingredients - tigers and giraffes, hot dogs, sunshine and, with any luck, some penguins - that make up an ideal afternoon at the zoo.
But the hot dogs may be free now, part of a new marketing ploy, and information about the sun may be plugged into a computer program for future attendance analyses.


Growing Up With Privilege and Prejudice
LEAD: Karen Russell's articulate indictment of racism in this country is right on the mark, and comes at an opportune moment, as we celebrate the 200th anniversary of our Constitution.
I would disagree only with Ms.
Russell's contention that the conservative movement under the leadership of President Reagan has resulted in a return to the old racism of the 1950's and before.


ALICE COMISKEY ENGAGED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Campbell Comiskey of Watertown, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alice Campbell Comiskey, to Steven James Serenska, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Serenska of Middletown, N.J.
Miss Comiskey and her fiance, both graduates of Williams College, plan an October wedding.


A Country, Not a Lament
LEAD: By the end of the first day, a journalist visiting Israel again is convinced that things have become so complicated that he knows nothing anymore and that there are no solutions to anything.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  A LOOK AT WUSHU  Wushu is the word for martial arts that are indigenous to China, and its most proficient American practitioner is probably Mark Salzman, who will give a demonstration at 7:30 P.M.
Wednesday in the auditorium of the Yale Art Gallery on Chapel Street in New Haven.


Reagan Signs Bill on Spending
LEAD: President Reagan today signed a $9.4 billion spending bill, voicing misgivings about many items but saying he did not want to hold up loans for farmers in the summer growing season.


WHAT'S LEFT OUT OF LITERATURE
LEAD: READERS of the essays in The Book Review have been recently familiarized, whether they like it or not, with the old debate on whether less is, in fact, more.
Like so much literary debate, it is most interesting for what it deflects.
That is to say, it is very American, and very contemporary, to see this as an esthetic issue, refusing to consider literature as taking place in a larger social and cultural framework, of literature having reference at all.


RECORDINGS
LEAD:  Silos: 'Cuba'  Record Collect RC-22, LP only; Box 20845, Tompkins Square Station, New York, N. Y. 10009


Australia Gives Labor Premier 3d Straight Term
LEAD: Prime Minister Bob Hawke won a third term today, apparently increasing his legislative majority, and pledged to continue the Labor Party's restructuring of the Australian economy.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: JULY 12, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $4.95.) A
rich orphan comes of age as she travels the world.
2
2
LAST OF THE BREED, by Louis L'Amour.
(Bantam, $3.95.) The adventures of a United
States Air Force major in Siberia.


The Book Clubs, Chapter 2
LEAD: THE first suggestion of a sultry New York summer was already in the air when he arrived from Lisbon.
But the youthful, elegantly dressed executive did not seem to notice.
His mind was on other things: The takeover was complete; the family dynasty that had controlled the publishing empire for years had bowed out.


Fueled, Funded For a Record
LEAD: For years, the father-and-daughter team of Dick and Kim LaHaie was a curiosity in the split-second world of professional drag racing - a shoestring operation competing head to head with million-dollar teams in a sport where poor guys usually go home early.


SHEILA M. MURPHY BECOMES THE BRIDE OF JAMES BUCKLEY
LEAD: St.
Mary of the Bay Roman Catholic Church in Warren, R.I., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Sheila Mary Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Murphy of Warren, to James F. W. Buckley, a son of Judge and Mrs.
James L. Buckley of Sharon, Conn., and Washington.


Warren Buffett's Pricy 'Bargain'
LEAD: Is Warren Buffett, the master investor, worth two times book value?
That seems to be the issue in valuing the conglomerate he oversees, Berkshire Hathaway Inc.
The thinly traded shares were quoted last week at about $3,500, versus a book value around $2,600.
But one investment adviser contends they should be worth $5,200.


ANN ELIZABETH JACOBUS IS WED TO V.J. KORDAHL
LEAD: Elizabeth Jacobus, a daughter of George H. Jacobus of Delray Beach, Fla., and Elizabeth Jones Jacobus of Dallas, was married yesterday to V.James Kordahl, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Kordahl of San Francisco.
The Rev.
Douglas Verdin, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Edgartown, Mass., home of the bride's father and stepmother.


SEDUCED BY BOOKS, FROTHY ROMANCES TO TRUE ADVENTURE
LEAD: WHEN I was growing up, reading was considered, by parents, as a necessary evil.
It ranked above listening to the ''Make Believe Ballroom'' or talking on the phone, but below saving laundry instructions from new clothes or cleaning the bathroom.
Most parents believed -naively - that a book wouldn't attack you in the back seat of a car.


Reaching the Hard-to-Reach: Aid for Addicts
LEAD: A man at 110th Street and Lexington Avenue tried to write his name on a sign-up list for a drug treatment program but his hand kept falling off the page.


Dr. Anthony C. Cahan Wed To Mary Beth Hyer, Nurse
LEAD: Mary Beth Hyer, the daughter of Mary Hyer of Amagansett, L.I., and John V. Hyer of Bedminster, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Anthony C. Cahan, a son of Mary Sykes Cahan of New York and Dr.
William G. Cahan of New York.
Justice Alvin Schlesinger of New York State Supreme Court performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's mother.


PAY RAISES VOTED AS BITTER SESSION CLOSES IN ALBANY
LEAD: Ending one of its most contentious periods in years, the New York State Legislature concluded its 1987 session at 5:51 this morning, passing a host of last-minute bills that ranged from a 33 percent pay increase for legislators to a restructuring of the state's economic development programs.


Keeping Heat on Panama's Military
LEAD: Panama's military-controlled Government offered conciliatory gestures with little success last week.
The civilian President, Eric Arturo Delvalle, broadcast an appeal for ''a truce in our passions'' aroused in five weeks of political turmoil.
He called for a speedy investigation of ''grave charges'' of corruption, electoral fraud and political murder, which a former associate had leveled against the military commander, Gen.


BOATERS ON THE SOUND: THE MORE, THE RISKIER
LEAD: MARINE officials in Westchester and other areas along Long Island Sound are familiar with stories of the inexperience and foolhardiness of boaters on the Sound.


DR. KATHERINE A. LINDBERG MARRIES WAYNE K. CANNER
LEAD: Dr.
Katherine Atwood Lindberg, a dentist, was married yesterday to Wayne Kendall Canner, an account manager in Atlanta for the General Electric Company.
The Rev.
Lawrence Provenzano performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Westerly, R.I.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''All roads now bypass North and lead to Poindexter.
What he is going to say now is the mega-question.'' - Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois.  [ 13:1. ]


For the Camper, No Dearth of Sites
LEAD: CAMPERS in New Jersey can literally tour from site to site.
More than 130 well-equipped campgrounds dot the state, from the mountains in the north to the southern shore.


HERBERT VAN INGEN 3D MARRIED TO CISSY WADE
LEAD: Trudy Treanor Wade, the daughter of Trudy Crockett Wade of Atlanta and George Emmett Wade Jr. of Columbus, Ga., was married yesterday to Herbert Terrell Van Ingen 3d, a son of Mrs. and Mrs.
Van Ingen Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.


A Livelier Ball? Let's Check the Statistics
LEAD: IS the 1987 baseball juiced up or isn't it?
An exceptional number of home runs flying over fences during the first half of this season has stimulated this discussion, which seems to arise every few years when scoring statistics fluctuate.


Cable TV
LEAD: Bravo's Wednesday night double bill of Martin Scorsese dramas, ''Who's That Knocking at My Door?'' (1968) and ''Mean Streets'' (1973) affords cable viewers a rare chance to study the development of a major American director on his native turf.
Most of the Scorsese features since - ''Taxi Driver,'' ''New York, New York,'' ''Raging Bull,'' ''King of Comedy'' and ''After Hours'' - have used New York as a background.


My Blue Heaven: What If Tenants In the Projects Owned the Place?
LEAD: SALES of new homes plummeted 14.9 percent in May, the biggest decline in five years, according to the latest Commerce Department reports.
The reason for the decline, the department noted, was that first-time home buyers had been driven out of the market by rising mortgage rates.
But those same economic forces, which for May pushed down the National Association of Realtor's affordability index - a measure of the feasibility of home buying for middle-class people - can also drive some of the poor into substandard or doubled-up housing, and prevent some of them from finding any housing at all.


Sikh Terrorists Kill 72 in Attacks on Buses in India
LEAD: Sikh terrorists killed dozens of Hindu bus passengers last week, touching off a new round of sectarian violence and challenges to Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's Government.
On Monday night, 38 bus passengers were shot to death and more than 20 wounded in the northern state of Punjab, where Mr.
Gahdhi had dismissed the Sikh governor in May in an effort to restore public order.


REMEMBERING BENNETT WITH LAUGHTER AND LOVE


SARAH CHUBB HAS WEDDING
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of St.
John-on-the-Mountain in Bernardsville, N.J., yesterday, Sarah Caldecot Chubb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Percy Chubb 3d of Bernardsville, was married to Pascal Emile Sauvayre, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Georges Sauvayre of Milan, Italy, and Montpellier, France.


A CONNECTICUT WEDDING FOR BETTINA MARIA BRETZ
LEAD: Bettina Maria Bretz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hilbert Mohrhenn Bretz of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Marc Bernhard Terfloth, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Boerries Herbert Terfloth of London and Montreal.
The Rev.
Dr.
John W. Bishop performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.


NORTH POPULARITY WON'T CURB PANEL, LEGISLATORS SAY
LEAD: Members of the Congressional select committees say the favorable public reaction to Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's testimony does not lessen their determination to conduct an aggressive investigation into his activities and the Reagan Administration's policies on Iran and Nicaragua.


Supreme Moment
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Superbanks
LEAD: To the Editor:


FREDERIC SIEGEL, A LAWYER, AND BARBY KOGON TO WED
LEAD: Barby Kogon, an account executive at the New York public relations firm of McGrath Power Associates, and Frederic J. Siegel, counsel to the New York law firm of Rosenthal Herman &amp; Mantel, plan to be married next summer.
The couple's parents are Dr.
Paul and Dr.
Lorraine Siegel of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and Mr.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A Travel Advisory item June 14 gave an incorrect telephone number for Vermont tourist information.
The correct number is 802-828-3236.


A Critic Mourned
LEAD:  To the Editor:


PANAMANIANS PROMISE MORE PROTESTS
LEAD: Opposition leaders today vowed to continue increasing their protests against Panama's military leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, whose police resorted to tear gas and buckshot on Friday to reassert his authority.


N.Y. Courts Must Expedite Arrest Review
LEAD: New York City said last week it would appeal, but prisoners' rights supporters were jubilant.
A Federal District Court judge in Manhattan had ruled that a suspect arrested without a warrant must be released after 24 hours unless ''probable cause'' has been established.


The Barge Stops Here
LEAD: Although some people think New York City has enough of its own garbage to worry about, its officials have agreed to take on the world's most famous trash heap.


Cabaret: Claiborne Cary in Varied Bill
LEAD: CLAIBORNE CARY, a small, pert, unusually talented singer and comedienne, has arrived at Jan Wallman's, 49 West 44th Street, with the kind of brilliant cabaret act that does not happen overnight.


RECALLING A ONE-OF-A-KIND GRANDFATHER
LEAD: IT'S FUNNY, sitting around talking about the time that Grandpa ate live minnows.
In fact, my cousin Barbara Jean mentioned that he didn't even clean them off; he just picked them up out of the net and swallowed them.


WRITING A WINNING SITCIM: CAN THE CRAFT BE TAUGHT
LEAD: SOMETIMES IT SEEMS THAT almost everyone in Los Angeles has an idea for a situation comedy.
Waiters, secretaries, taxi drivers, masseurs and college professors happily confide in strangers about the script that they're writing during their off-hours.
When the American Film Institute announced last summer that it would be holding a three-week workshop for comedy writers hopeful of breaking into television, the institute received scripts from 355 applicants for the 10 openings in the workshop.


Turmoil in Haiti Stalls Political Progress
LEAD: After more than three weeks of turmoil, a political stalemate has developed in Haiti with the troubled country's march toward democracy stalled and the fate of its presidential election in question.


Court in Jersey Bans Builders' Payments To Repair Roadways
LEAD: The State Supreme Court has struck down a Bernards Township ordinance requiring developers to help pay for road improvements even if they have no direct link to their new construction.


Ballet: New Casts in Bolshoi Program of Excerpts
LEAD: THE ''highlights'' programs that have been presented by the Bolshoi Ballet during its season at the Metropolitan Opera House are both a blessing and a curse.
Nerves and a go-for-broke attack can diminish that wonderful Bolshoi quality of engagement or total immersion in the dance, as they did in some of the new casting and new divertissements offered in performances on Wednesday and


T-Shirts Crowding Bottles at Famous Boston Bar
LEAD: In the old days, neighbors of the Bull and Finch on Beacon Hill would routinely drop by for a cheeseburger and a mug of draft beer.
These days they complain to the management about the noise and exhaust from the tourist buses regularly depositing visitors at the bar that inspired the television series ''Cheers.


HOW SHOULD THE METS HANDLE THE RIFTS ON THEIR TEAM?
LEAD: It doesn't appear Davey Johnson is capable of managing his players on and off the field this year.
A manager is someone who is an authority figure who has the ability to control situations and control those he manages.
If Johnson cannot counsel his players, then Frank Cashen or Messrs.
Wilpon and Doubleday need to step in, take charge and, if necessary, trade those players we have come to look upon as stars.


CHOOSING A CONTRACT
LEAD: A SINGLE bridge deal is rather like archery: From a choice of possible targets you must select the easiest, and then you must contrive to hit it.
Both stages of the effort may be difficult: Several targets may seem equally attractive, or unattractive.


BETH SMITH, THERAPIST, WED TO CHARLES KNIGHT
LEAD: At St.
John's Episcopal Church in Wheeling, W.Va., yesterday Beth Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold W. Smith Jr. of Ridgewood, N.J., was married to Charles Knight, the son of Eva Knight of McMechen, W.Va., and the late Charles Knight.
The Rev.
Richard Smith, United Methodist chaplain at Community Mental Health in Clairsville,


Two More Escapees Caught
LEAD: Two escaped convicts were recaptured today, the police said.
Michael Romero and John Schmidt were the third and fourth escapees captured since seven inmates pole-vaulted out of the state prison a week ago.
Two teen-agers who were briefly held hostage by the pair today were freed after suffering minor injuries, the police said.


Streetscapes: Graham Court; Grande Dame Tries to Regain Her Respectability in Harlem
LEAD: IF Harlem has an equivalent to the Dakota, the famed apartment building on Central Park West, it is Graham Court, a full blockfront on Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard, from 116th to 117th Streets.


IMAGES OF THE JEWISH SOJOURN IN GERMANY IN THE LIGHT OF ITS TRAGIC OUTCOME
LEAD: BY CURRENT STAND-ards, the exhibition ''Jews in Germany Under Prussian Rule'' is plain fare, a series of black-and-white montages that puts the emphasis on solid, point-by-point information.
The New York Public Library at Fifth Avenue (where it can be seen through Aug. 22, before returning to West Germany), seems an appropriate home for such a show:


Boy Scouts Win: It's a Man's Job
LEAD: Catherine N. Pollard sought to become a leader of boys because she likes teaching and sports, and because no one else would do it.
But the Boy Scouts of America rejected her application, maintaining that its troops should be led only by men, and last week they were upheld by the Connecticut Supreme Court.


Tampering With Art Is Hollywood's Art
LEAD: To the Editor:


Investment Accounts Gain Favor as Way To Pay College Costs
LEAD: An old-fashioned idea for financing college education is again winning converts: encouraging families to save and invest, rather than borrow, to pay for tuition.


IMPROMPTU TOPPINGS MAKE PIZZA AN EASY SUMMER TREAT
LEAD: HOMEMADE pizza is one of the easiest dishes to make for weekend guests during the summer.
If you have a food processor, the dough can be prepared in seconds.
Of course, a couple of hours is needed for rising, but dough can be made beforehand, allowed to rise and frozen until it is needed.


HOW SHOULD THE METS HANDLE THE RIFTS ON THEIR TEAM?
LEAD: The simple solutions to the Mets' current internal strife would be to trade this one, or fine that one, or just simply put a clamp on news media contact with all players.
Yes, it would be simple - but it would deal only with the symptoms and not with the problem.


ANNE DAVIS BECOMES A BRIDE
LEAD: At Trinity Episcopal Church in York Harbor, Me., Anne Mumford Davis, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Davis of Villanova, Pa., was married yesterday to Jon Milton Peterson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton V. Peterson of Fairfax, Va., and York Harbor.


Door Opens Wider For Nicaraguans
LEAD: It was a Nicaraguan woman whose case prompted the United States Supreme Court to vote in March to reject the Government's strict standard for granting asylum to aliens.
Last week the Reagan Administration said it would ease the standard and delay deportation for all her countrymen in exile here.


CONFIDENCE DOWN IN BRONX LEADERS
LEAD: When Melvina Vandross, a social worker, tired of seeing drug dealers on the corner near her home in the Fordham Hill section of the Bronx, she first took her concerns to her State Senator.
But when she felt he was not responding quickly enough, she turned to a local community group.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  ACROBATS AND MAGICIANS  Although what the Chinese Golden Dragon Acrobats and Magicians of Taipei offer isn't new - the show has its roots in 200 B.C. - it certainly is exciting.


Provencal Fare Beyond Baumaniere
LEAD: It's astonishing how two rather insignificant words - Les Baux - can conjure up such blissful, romantic images for generations of American travelers to France.
For decades, travelers have been making gastronomic pilgrimages to Les-Baux-de-Provence, the tiny perched village that is home to L'Oustau de Baumaniere, the luxurious restaurant that has held on to its coveted three


CHINA'S CULTURAL CRACKDOWN
LEAD: HARSHLY, AND WITH a dramatic suddenness, the climate of free expression that blossomed last summer and developed throughout the fall in China has chilled.
Nearly all intellectual and creative life has been stifled by a renewed compulsory obeisance to Marxist and Maoist dogma.
Young intellectuals and artists who just six months ago captivated foreign scholars and journalists with their refreshing candor now refuse to meet with them for fear of being singled out for criticism, or even banished to some remote province.


Talking: Exteriors; Keeping A Home In Shape
LEAD: THE exterior of a property - whether condominium, co-op or single-family house - is both image and protection.
It makes the initial statement about that home, an impact brokers call curb appeal.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  THE COLONEL'S DAUGHTER: And Other Stories, by Rose Tremain. (Owl/Holt, $7.95.) On the surface portraits of British decorum, Rose Tremain's characters harbor ''feelings of jealousy, anger, vengeance and loss, emotions so intense they constantly threaten to break through to the surface,'' Caryn James said in The Book Review in 1984.


ADVERSITY IS JUST AROUND THE CORNER
LEAD:  THE GREAT DEPRESSION OF 1990  By Ravi Batra. 235 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $17.95.


RECORDINGS
LEAD:  Of a Mesh: 'Broken'  109 Records, 109 St. Mark's Place, New York, N. Y. 10009


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; The Radon Risk Brings a Surge in Testing
LEAD: THE Harrisons have been concerned about radon. ''For the minimal cost and peace of mind, we decided to have our house tested,'' said Mary Ann Harrison.


Sports of The Times; Odd Holiday For Doctor K
LEAD: A young man in a light-blue summer suit was wearing, uncustomarily, spectacles, with blue rims whose color coordinated with his suit.


Tug-of-War at the Top Roils India's Politics
LEAD: At any other time, Mithilesh Kumar Sinha would have been dismissed as an eccentric embarked on an impossible quest for the Indian presidency.


A Defiant Tale of Evasive Actions
LEAD: During a gripping week at the witness table, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North proudly gave his version of the Iran-contra affair.
And at week's end, members of the Congressional committees said the stacks of laudatory telegrams piled several inches high on the table in front of the colonel had not lessened their determination to pursue their inquiry - although at times it seemed to have muted their tone.


Landlords Manipulate Market: Thoudsands of Apertments Deliberately Kept Vacant
LEAD: SALES of new homes plummeted 14.9 percent in May, the biggest decline in five years, according to the latest Commerce Department reports.
The reason for the decline, the department noted, was that first-time home buyers had been driven out of the market by rising mortgage rates.
But those same economic forces, which for May pushed down the National Association of Realtor's affordability index - a measure of the feasibility of home buying for middle-class people - can also drive some of the poor into substandard or doubled-up housing, and prevent some of them from finding any housing at all.


LYNDA J. JOHNSON BECOMES A BRIDE
LEAD: Lynda Jane Johnson, the daughter of Mrs.
Robert E. Bald of Ridgewood, N.J., and the late Dr.
Philip Martyn Johnson, was married yesterday to Mark Anthony Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harley R. Miller of Quakertown, Pa.
The Rev.
Richard B. Anderson and the Rev.
John E. Soleau, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.


TWO PIANISTS JOIN WESTCHESTER CHAMBER FESTIVAL
LEAD: THE Westchester Chamber Music Festival is back for its third season at the Martha Guinsberg Pavilion in Crompond, with two world-renowned pianists leading the guest-artist roster: John Browning, who plays the Franck Quintet today at 4 P.M., with members of the resident Westchester Chamber Virtuosi (the Debussy Quartet and the charming String Trio by Jean Francaix complete the program) and Menahem Pressler, whose choice July 26 will be the Brahms A major Piano Quartet.


DINA A. MIGLIO MARRIES EDWARD ROJAS, LAWYER
LEAD: At St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Manhasset, L.I., yesterday, Dina Ann Miglio, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore Miglio of Manhasset and Southampton, L.I., was married to Edward J. Rojas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eduardo Rojas of Miami.


Chrysler Fined for Safety Violations
LEAD: Just as Chrysler's chairman, Lee A. Iacocca, had finished apologizing for ''dumb'' and ''unforgivable'' behavior involving disconnected odometers, he had a new, potentially more serious problem to confront.
Last week, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration fined his company more than $1.5 million for 811 violations, including willfully exposing workers to lead and arsenic.


Limiting Your Liability for a Rental Car
LEAD: SHOULD you buy accident coverage when you rent a car?
Until recently, the answer for most people was no: Customers were only expected to pick up the first $500 of damage if they declined to pay the $5 daily fee for insurance coverage. ''It was a ridiculous price,'' to cover so small a risk, said J.


Outdoors; Exploring Wildlife of China
LEAD: ABC-TV's final Mutual of Omaha Spirit of Adventure Series for the season, ''Uncovering China's Hidden Wildlife,'' is a splendid production that serves to remind us that man, this planet's ultimate predator, now holds the fate of so many less fierce and less adaptable creatures in his hands.


Cuomo Finally Puts His 'Hamlet' Image to Rest
LEAD: ASK state lawmakers to list the accomplishments of the 210th session of the Legislature and they will cite a tax cut, a program to rebuild New York City's transit system, a restructuring of the corporate tax code and a plan to allocate cheap upstate hydropower.


A SPY IN THE HOUSE OF SAUD
LEAD:  THE SAUDIS  Inside the Desert Kingdom.
By Sandra Mackey. 433 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


Don't Count Out Conservatism
LEAD: If Irving Kristol is so sure that ''the basic conservative trend will persist,'' why does he see the need to advocate that it is ''time . . . to strike a bargain'' (''Don't Count Out Conservatism,'' June 14)?
Methinks Mr.
Kristol is whistling in the dark, trying to rally his ''new breed of conservative activists'' - his ''Force'' - before they lose whatever bargaining strength they may still possess.


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  Global Market Growth


Las Vegas


Abolish Medicare, Broaden Medicaid
LEAD: The Reagan Administration's naivete in sending a limited ''catastrophic illness'' Medicare bill to Congress is now being graphically demonstrated.
Lots of Congressmen want to turn it into a traditional legislative ''Christmas tree'' with goodies available for everybody.
Hence the proposals to add drug benefits, increased home care and nursing home coverage, etc.


FRATERNITIES ADMIT WOMEN INTO RANKS
LEAD: ERIC B. TWOMBLY of Mystic joined Delta Psi, a social fraternity at Trinity College in Hartford, because that was the fraternity his father joined when he was at Yale 40 years earlier.


Mountains And Mystique
LEAD: The reduction of one of our planet's more awesome natural wonders to something less than what it is began long before this recent attempt at geological emasculation so cogently described by Malcolm W. Browne (''Can You Top This?'' June 14).
It was in 1863 that the (then) world's highest mountain was renamed by the British for one of their own, Sir George Everest, probably as a too generous reward for a lifetime of service in mapping the Empire.


AT MOSQUE, MEDICINE WITH A MESSAGE
LEAD: They begin gathering early each morning to wait for the doctors: women wrapped in traditional Islamic black veils, many with their faces tattooed in the style of Bedouin tribes; worn men wearing the conical felt hat of the Egyptian peasant, or fellaheen.
They sit on the ground patiently under the shade of an awning in front of the mosque.


BATTLING WITH UNRULY NATURE
LEAD: SO seductive was the unexpected conspiracy of light and warmth that occurred during that spring weekend that some of my neighbors took to cavorting about half-naked out of doors.
They weren't the only creatures to be distracted.
The first ants of the season wandered into the kitchen, still sluggish, so easy to squash.


NEW JERSEY JOURNAL
LEAD: ON BECOMING JERSEY FRESH


Tent City: Scratching to Find Shelter for Nation's Homeless Families
LEAD: SALES of new homes plummeted 14.9 percent in May, the biggest decline in five years, according to the latest Commerce Department reports.
The reason for the decline, the department noted, was that first-time home buyers had been driven out of the market by rising mortgage rates.
But those same economic forces, which for May pushed down the National Association of Realtor's affordability index - a measure of the feasibility of home buying for middle-class people - can also drive some of the poor into substandard or doubled-up housing, and prevent some of them from finding any housing at all.


Lake George Views: Adirondack Appeasement
LEAD: Building in the 6 million-acre Adirondack Park in upstate New York can be a delicate undertaking.
In many new projects, the Adirondack Park Agency can dictate exactly how much land remains untouched and which trees may be chopped down. ''It's a very difficult place to develop,'' said Peter J. Cornell, an executive vice president with the Galesi Group of Rotterdam, N


PAIGE R. GILLETTE MARRIES LAWYER
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York yesterday Paige Renee Gillette, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Gillette of Palm Beach, Fla., New York and Southampton, L.I., was married to Thomas Carter Louthan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carter Thomas Louthan of Short Hills, N.J., and Wainscott, L.I.


BRITISH THEATER'S CHANGING OF THE GUARD
LEAD: WHILE NEW YORK THEA-TERGOERS were busy decrying the Anglicization of Broadway this spring, the London theater flew into a panic over the specter of ruthless Broadway-style economics in the West End.
For the first time since World War II, four neighboring straight-play houses on Shaftesbury Avenue were bereft of tenants.


Why Business Is Barging Into the Classroom
LEAD: IN Alabama a few weeks ago, the General Electric Foundation donated $1 million to upgrade the Lowndes County public schools.


Music: Marilyn Horne in 'Orfeo edridice'and 'Orlando Furioso' Excerpts
LEAD: MARILYN HORNE, who has been fighting a bad cold, canceled her scheduled Mostly Mozart appearance Tuesday and - so said a friend of the singer - nearly canceled Friday night's concert of Vivaldi and Gluck.
This is reported for the edification of those who were present, who will have been congratulating themselves for catching Miss Horne at the very top of her form.


LARRY BROWN SAYS OFFER WASN'T MADE
LEAD: Larry Brown said yesterday that he had not been contacted again concerning the Knick coaching job despite reports that the team had shown renewed interest in him.


Drysdale Brushes Back Pitchers and Batters for Beanings
LEAD: DON DRYSDALE, thinking back to a different era in baseball, recalled how, one opening day, Jim Ray Hart of San Francisco went to bat for the first time and ''got it right in the coconut.'' The pitcher was Bob Gibson.


SIGN OF TIMES AT TAJ MAHAL: BARBWIRE
LEAD: The Taj Mahal, the classic monument to personal grief and architectural splendor, has become a barometer of India's smoldering ethnic vendettas.


Tiffany to Publish One-Shot 'Magazine'
LEAD: As part of its celebration of its 150th anniversary, Tiffany, the fabled retailer, will publish a strictly upscale, one-shot publication in magazine format that will not cost it a cent.
In fact, it will probably make some money because it will carry advertising - a lot of advertising.


SPECTRUM CONTROL INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 32
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPECTRUM CONTROL INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 32
1987
1986
Sales
9,004,000
6,730,000
Net inc
411,000
869,000
Share earns
.08
.16
6mo sales
16,493,000
12,256,000
Net inc
786,000
1,596,000
Share earns
.15
.30


Advertising; Teen-Agers Are Target Of Spirals
LEAD: NEVER underestimate the power of teen-agers. The Borden people certainly do not.


UNIFIRST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIFIRST CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Revenue
44,980,000
29,032,000
Net inc
2,128,000
2,099,000
Share earns
.42
.41
9mo rev
115,055,000
84,751,000
Net inc
b6,859,000
6,056,000
Share earns
1.36
1.20


For Deserter, Vietnam Is Past at Last
LEAD: For Douglas G. Beane, 17 years of living under an alias in Australia was not enough to distance himself from the Vietnam War and the ostracism he felt after he deserted the Marine Corps.


IIS INTELLIGENT INFORMAION SYSTEMS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IIS INTELLIGENT INFORMAION SYSTEMS LTD (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,054,000
2,687,000
Net inc
702,000
624,000
Share earns
.18
.16
The company said earnings are calculated using the exchange rate at March 31 of 1.6 New Israeli Shekels for each U.S.


Walsh's Task Viewed as Tougher Now
LEAD: Federal law-enforcement officials and prominent defense lawyers say the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair could find it difficult, perhaps impossible, to obtain criminal convictions against Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and several other principals in the case.


A Bit of Old-World Italy in New-World Brooklyn
LEAD: A hundred men carrying the giglio, an 8,000-pound tower, and a small band through the streets of Williamsburg yesterday as part of the 16-day-long feast of San Paolino.
The festival was but one way New Yorkers spent a hazy, hot, humid Sunday.
Page B3. (The New York Times/Dith Pran)


Israeli Visa Policy on Arabs Keeps Families Apart
LEAD: This summer, about 45,000 Arabs will cross the Jordan River on special visas that allow them to spend three months in Israel.


AMERICAN AIR VENTURE IS REPORTED
LEAD: American Airlines has offered a group of European airlines a model of its sophisticated Sabre computer reservation system in a deal similar to that concluded last week by United with three European carriers, according to officials close to the airline industry.


MBS TEXTBOOK EXCHANGE reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MBS TEXTBOOK EXCHANGE (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,926,000
6,029,000
Net loss
268,000
412,000
9mo sales
23,226,000
20,458,000
Net inc
395,000
b47,000
Share earns
.09
-
b-Net loss  The company said the increase in earnings resulted primarily from the acquisition of additional facilities with the proceeds of its second public offering in August 1986.


Collapse of Circus Tent Injures 44 in Wisconsin
LEAD: A circus tent battered by winds collapsed Saturday afternoon, injuring 44 people as spectators scrambled for safety, officials and witnesses said.


Most Support Wide AIDS Testing, Gallup Reports
LEAD: Most Americans favor widespread testing for infection with the AIDS virus, according to the latest Gallup Poll.


Fire Department Keeps List of AIDS Victims
LEAD: For the last two years, the Albany Fire Department has been compiling a list of residents with AIDS so that firefighters answering medical emergencies will wear rubber gloves and take other precautions in handling the patients.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aegon N.V. is issuing 13.66 billion yen of 8 1/8 percent dual currency bonds due 1992 at 101 5/8 through Nikko Securities Co. (Europe).
While interest is payable in New Zealand dollars, the bonds are redeemable 80 percent in yen and 20 percent in New Zealand dollars.


ALLIED BANKSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIED BANKSHARES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
868,000
b851,000
Per share
.26
.32
Shares outst
3,317,890
2,658,003
6mo net inc
2,184,000
b1,508,000
Per share
.72
.57
Shares outst
3,037,697
2,657,944


BLACK GUERRILLAS AND WHITE FOES OF PRETORIA FIND COMMON GROUND
LEAD: Members of a mostly white delegation of dissidents from South Africa found at a conference here that they had more in common with black exiles fighting to end white rule than they had expected.


CENTRAL BANCORPORATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL BANCORPORATION INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
13,239,000
11,978,000
Per share
.89
.81
6mo net inc
b27,600,000
22,987,000
Per share
1.86
1.55
b-Includes an after-tax gain of $2,222,000 from the reversion of the company's retirement plan.


On a Bahamas Cruise With No Way Ashore
LEAD: Eight stowaways have been riding the high seas in a legal muddle, stuck for six days on a cruise ship that makes daily round trips between Miami and the Bahamas.


DOCTORS' DILEMMA: UNIONIZING
LEAD: Complaining of inadequate wages, poor working conditions and callous management, an unlikely group of workers in Minnesota is threatening to unionize: doctors.


When Lights Went Out: New Yorkers Remember
LEAD: Where were you when the lights went out?
Yesterday, interviewed on the streets of New York City, some people remembered.


New Magazine on Care For the AIDS Patient
LEAD: The first issue of AIDS Patient Care: a Magazine for Health Professionals is due to be published next week by Mary Ann Liebert Inc., a New York publisher.


Africans Cite War's Toll on Children
LEAD: Life has become a doubtful proposition for the four million children caught in the crossfire of Africa's wars.


COATED SALES reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COATED SALES (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
25,249,646
20,016,646
Net inc
2,360,568
1,366,876
Share earns
.12
.08
Shares outst
20,126,187
17,739,864


Climber Killed in Oregon
LEAD: Three climbers ascending Mount Hood fell into a crevasse Saturday, killing one man, seriously injuring another and forcing the third man, who was also injured, to crawl out for help, the authorities said.
The climbers, who were roped together, fell into the fissure about 2:15 P.M. at about the 10,700-foot level after one of the men slipped.


A FILM MAKER AND JOURNALIST
LEAD: Peter Gimbel, a film maker and underwater photojournalist who filmed the sunken Italian luxury liner Andrea Doria and the great white shark, died of cancer yesterday at his Manhattan apartment.
He was 59 years old.


2 KILLED IN QUEENS AS GUNMAN IN CAR FIRES AT RANDOM
LEAD: Nine people were shot, two fatally, by a gunman who fired randomly from a car as he sped by two locations used by drug dealers in Hollis and Springfield Gardens, Queens, last night, the police said.


6 Sri Lankan Soldiers Killed By Land Mine Blast in North
LEAD: Six soldiers were killed by a land mine and Tamil separatists set fire to a school in northern Sri Lanka today, officials said.


Washington Talk: Briefing; THE BORK NOMINATION
LEAD: Conservative supporters of Judge Robert H. Bork, President Reagan's latest nominee for the Supreme Court, are engaging in some second-guessing.
It might have been better, they say, if the President had named Judge Bork to one of the Court openings that occurred when Republicans controlled the Senate and the President was in a stronger position to get his way on Capitol


HARPER INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARPER INTERNATIONAL (AMEX)
Year to April 30
1987
1986
Revenue
30,725,000
27,688,000
Net inc
1,660,000
1,434,000


The Editorial Notebook; How Japan Won the VCR Race
LEAD: No product better embodies America's loss of industrial competitiveness than the VCR.
Japanese and Korean companies have now produced 100 million video cassette recorders.
Yet the VCR's predecessor, the video tape recorder, was a wholly American product, invented by Ampex in 1956.
Why did American companies squander this rich opportunity?


Kathryn Toepfer Wed To Howard R. Permut
LEAD: Kathryn Emelia Toepfer, a manager in the travelers' check product management group of American Express, and Howard Roy Permut, director of planning for Metro-North Commuter Railroad, were married yesterday at the Tappan Hill Restaurant in Tarrytown, N.Y.


GATEWAY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GATEWAY BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,078,397
718,941
Per share
.38
.35
6mo net inc
1,980,575
1,381,588
Per share
.69
.67
The company said results were adjusted to reflect the 10-for-1 stock split which was effective Sept.


No Headline
LEAD: A subsidiary of a company controlled by Robert Holmes a Court has acquired 5.35 percent of Sears P.L.C., a British retailer that owns Selfridge's Department Store in Oxford Street, London.
The holding was purchased by J. N. Taylor Ltd., a unit of Bell Resources.


Imperiled, Creatures Brave City
LEAD: Up on the Throgs Neck Bridge, the rare peregrine falcon nests among beams and girders while traffic rumbles nearby.


Yankees Get Trout In Deal With Cubs
LEAD: The Yankees ended their sometimes desperate search for another starting pitcher yesterday, acquiring Steve Trout from the Chicago Cubs a day after he pitched his second successive shutout.
Trout, who will be 30 years old July 30, will become the fourth left-hander in the team's five-man starting rotation.


TOKYO OFFICIAL PLANS U.S. VISIT ON TOSHIBA CASE
LEAD: Japan's trade minister is expected to visit the United States this week to try to deflect mounting criticism over the Toshiba Machine Company's illegal sale of high-technology machinery to the Soviet Union.


EVEN IN YUGOSLAVIA, A RICH-POOR SPLIT
LEAD: Slovenes are political realists, so no one here in their capital raises the subject of separating from Yugoslavia except to reject it.


Gunman Kills Seven In His Own Family And Then Himself
LEAD: A man shot seven members of his family to death, possibly over a period of two days, and then killed himself when the police went to his home, the authorities said today.


Search Service Stresses Fixed-Income Markets
LEAD: Joseph S. Crisanti, a co-founder of a credit rating company well known on Wall Street, is starting a new business.


DCNY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DCNY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,252,565
3,826,437
Per share
.16
.48
6mo net inc
2,894,868
16,937,429
Per share
.36
2.11
Share earnings reflect a 2-for-1 stock split paid in May.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  HEMINGWAY.
By Kenneth S. Lynn.
Illustrated. 702 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.95.


MUSIC: ROZHDESTVENSKY CONDUCTS AT TANGLEWOOD
LEAD: It has been said that artists make the most eloquent spokesmen for detente, a notion suggested by Gennadi Rozhdestvensky's appearance Saturday night at Tanglewood.
The Soviet conductor, who led the Boston Symphony Orchestra in performances of works by Sibelius, Mussorgsky and Scriabin, brought to the music an easy command and a dramatic sensibility that prompted long standing ovations on a night when oppressive heat might have discouraged enthusiastic response.


Injured Rider Quits; Frenchman in Lead
LEAD: Sean Kelly, who has been ranked among the leading professional bicycle racers in the world for the last three years and was an early favorite in the Tour de France, injured his left shoulder in a crash this morning and quit the race.


RIDGEWOOD PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RIDGEWOOD PROPERTIES
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,219,000
2,498,000
Net inc
88,000
256,000
Share earns
.11
.29
9mo rev
15,940,000
8,247,000
Net inc
4,508,000
1,514,000
Share earns
5.75
1.83


PLANTERS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLANTERS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,144,000
2,040,000
Share earns
.31
.29
6mo Net inc
4,338,000
3,969,000
Share earns
.63
.57


Grand Jury Is Said to Join Inquiry Into Military Contractor in Illinois
LEAD: A grand jury is investigating the Sundstrand Corporation, accused by Government auditors of overcharging the Federal Government more than $130 million on a wide range of military contracts, according to a published report.


Horton Helps Cards Defeat Giants, 3-2
LEAD: Ricky Horton won his ninth consecutive game dating back to last season, and Terry Pendleton hit a home run today as the St.
Louis Cardinals defeated the San Francisco Giants today, 3-2.


New Law School Courses Stress Family
LEAD: As concerns grow about surrogate parenthood, no-fault divorce and other issues that affect families, an increasing number of American law schools are reassessing and changing the way they teach family law.
They are giving students more practical experience in casework and adding other disciplines, like sociology and economics, to their curriculums.


Stability Seen for Yen
LEAD: The yen's foreign-exchange rate against the dollar seems to have settled, Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa said in a weekend speech here.


A Quiet Protest in Seoul
LEAD: An Anglican Church priest praying yesterday before a group of riot policemen.
About 500 church members staged a sit-in to protest a police chase Thursday that ended on the grounds of their cathedral and the raiding of the bishop's residence.
Riot police were called out, but there was no violence. (


CURRENCY'S FALL FRIGHTENS LEBANESE
LEAD: Lebanon was traumatized Friday by a sharp decline in the value of its currency, raising some fears that the country was on the brink of bankruptcy.


Networks Will Carry Washington Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 9 A.M. on the ABC, CBS and NBC television networks, on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New York.


Sale of Arden in Sight
LEAD: Eli Lilly &amp; Company, the pharmaceutical concern that plans to sell its Elizabeth Arden cosmetics and fragrance division, said Friay that it was likely that a buyer would be announced later this month or in early August.
Wall Street analysts and industry sources said that Lilly, which bought Arden in 1971 for $37 million, could sell it for $600 million.


'INDIA: END OF EMPIRE'
LEAD: THE British flag over India was lowered 40 years ago.
A new nation was born, but immediately fell into disorder.
Why it did is the subject, more or less, of ''India: End of Empire,'' a three-part documentary series that began last week on Channel 13.
Tonight's episode, ''The Muslim Card,'' at 11 o'clock, gives us a clue: recalcitrant politicians.


POINDEXTER MEMO SAID TO DESCRIBE INFORMING REAGAN PLAN TO USE IRAN PROFITS
LEAD: The chairman of the Senate Iran-contra committee said today that Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter, the former national security adviser, had written a memo saying President Reagan had been told of plans to use profits from the Iran arms sales for covert operations other than supporting the contras.


2 Pretoria Foes and Woman Reported Slain in Swaziland
LEAD: White gunmen shot and killed two members of the outlawed African National Congress guerrilla group and a female companion in Swaziland, South African news agencies said Saturday.


Paraguayan's Control Is Questioned
LEAD: For the best part of three decades, Paraguayans could safely assume that everything important, unusual or even illegal that occurred here was part of one scheme or another by Gen.
Alfredo Stroessner to perpetuate his dictatorship.


COGNOS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COGNOS INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,500,000
15,500,000
Net inc
1,500,000
1,000,000
Share earns
.17
.13


Canada Examines 174 Said to Be Refugees
LEAD: A group of 174 people who claim to be refugees from India arrived at a tiny fishing village in Nova Scotia off Canada's east coast today, Federal Immigration Minister Benoit Bouchard said.


CITY NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITY NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
8,234,000
6,613,000
Per share
.45
.36
6mo net inc
b18,505,000
13,038,000
Per share
1.01
.71
b-Includes a $2 million gain from the sale of the company's payroll-processing base and the sale of assets relating to a maturing leveraged lease.


Bridge: 19-Year-Old on Title Team In Nassau-Suffolk Tourney
LEAD: Very few teen-age players have ever won a major New York team title.
The number increased Saturday when 19-year-old Debbie Zuckerberg of Flushing, Queens, won the knockout title in the Nassau-Suffolk Regional Championships together with Phillip Martin, Allen Kahn and David Rosenberg, all of Manhattan.


War Crimes Trial in Turmoil On Move to Change Lawyers
LEAD: The five-month-old trial of John Demjanjuk, who is accused of being a Nazi war criminal, was thrown into turmoil today by the announcement that his chief lawyer, Mark O'Connor, has been dismissed because of legal and personal differences with the Demjanjuk family and his assistant defense attorneys.


BARFIELD HIT LEADS BLUE JAYS PAST ROYALS
LEAD: Jesse Barfield snapped a 2-2 tie with a run-scoring single in the seventh inning today and Jim Clancy had a career-high 11 strikeouts as the Toronto Blue Jays edged the Kansas City Royals, 3-2.





Correction
LEAD: A front-page headline and article Saturday on Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's testimony in the Iran-contra hearings misstated part of what he said about a plan by William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence, for a secret fund for covert operations.
A corrective article appears today on page A1.


IT'S THE SEASON OF THE HEAVY HITTERS
LEAD: SOMETIMES they have done it in explosive spurts; at other times they have displayed devastating slugging over longer stretches.
In a season that has been dominated by debates over the liveliness of the baseballs, they have caused people to overuse their calculators and computers in daily computation of projections for season totals of hitting statistics that grow like Jack's beanstalk.


RURAL CREDIT UNION IS LENDING HOPE
LEAD: In a row of red brick storefronts in the middle of this windswept farm town is a special business whose commodities are money and hope.


Mexico Succession: A Diviner's Sport
LEAD: Inflation is at a record 125 percent, Fernando Valenzuela is having an off year with the Los Angeles Dodgers, and several new soap operas have just gone on the air here.
But Mexicans seem obsessed with a single question these days: Who will be the country's next President?


Sex Barrier Falls at State Bar Group
LEAD: Maryann Saccomando Freedman says that if anyone told her two years ago that she would be president of the New York State Bar Association, ''I would have thought they were from the moon.''


JOHNSTOWN SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSTOWN SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b285,806
c29,182
Per share
.15
-
6mo net inc
b928,290
c392,065
Per share
.48
-
b-Includes pretax gains on the sale of investment securities of $2,332 and $115,764 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


INTERSPEC INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERSPEC INC
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,138,000
2,389,000
Net inc
b750,000
c279,000
Share earns
.23
-
6mo sales
14,571,000
5,357,000
Net inc
b1,450,000
c75,000
Share earns
.45
-
b-Includes tax credits of $272,00 and $525,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


For Unemployment Workers, the Tables Turn &gt;
LEAD: For 12 years, Nona Payton worked as a claims clerk in unemployment offices.
Soon, she will return - as a client.


Brazil Output Weakens
LEAD: Brazil's industrial output in June climbed a relatively weak 5.34 percent from a year earlier, the Government reported Friday.


Saatchi Gains From Isotoner
LEAD: Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton is the beneficiary of a decision by Sara Lee Hosiery to consolidate the products of its Isotoner brand in one agency.


TRANSTECTOR SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSTECTOR SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,735,693
1,885,924
Net loss
168,386
113,725


The Talk of Columbia County; In Rural New York, a Time of Ferment
LEAD: These days it seems like everything is multiplying here in Columbia County.


STAGE: 'MORI EL MERMA,' WITH IMAGES FROM MIRO
LEAD: Mighty peculiar creatures are disporting themselves at the Summerfare festival here.
There are giants with heads of monsters, grotesque torsos, six-foot-long arms and feet to fit dinosaurs.
There are also dwarflike inventions cavorting on pipes high above the stage; their faces might have come direct from designs by Joan Miro, and their whispers, squeals and elusive not-quite-words are what you'd expect to hear if Miro's bright free-form shapes were to leap to life.


Margeotes/Fertita Working for ASCAP
LEAD: The American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers switched its account to Margeotes/Fertita &amp; Weiss a while ago but has just given the agency the O.K. to announce it.


TAYLOR DEVICES reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TAYLOR DEVICES
Year to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,030,500
4,976,980
Net inc
89,846
199,600
Share earns
.04
.09


Canadian Trade Talks
LEAD: Negotiations on a free-trade agreement between Canada and the United States remain bogged down over Canada's insistence on immunity from retaliatory measures.
After 14 months of talks and faced with a Congressional deadline of Oct. 4, Canadian and American negotiators say they are still far apart on major issues.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  An Unusual Trio 9


Correction
LEAD: An editorial yesterday overstated the percentage of respondents in a New York Times/CBS News Poll who think Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North acted on his own in the Iran-contra affair.
The correct figure is 4 percent.


Camper's Lament: 'I Hate It!'
LEAD:  Dear Mom and Dad,
I hate it here. I hate the
kids. The food STINKS.
Come and get me - IM  MEDIATELY. I want to
go home!!
Your son, Billy
P.S. I have poison ivy
ALL OVER!


Tour de France; Italian Ahead
LEAD: Jutta Niehaus of West Germany won the fourth leg of the women's Tour de France in a sprint to the finish line, while Roberta Bonanomi of Italy kept the leader's yellow jersey.
Jutta completed the 32-mile course from Castillon-la-Bataille to Bordeaux in 1 hour 13 minutes 44 seconds.


House Reception Mixed To Accounting Report
LEAD: In a move to head off possible Federal regulations, a panel of accountants and other experts in financial reporting presented a series of recommendations today that they said would greatly reduce the incidence of undetected fraud in company reports.


OSHAP TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OSHAP TECHNOLOGIES
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,178,000
2,556,000
Net loss
114,000
53,000
Figures for both periods are based on a translation rate of 37.37 Belgian Francs to the dollar, the rate on March 31.


Horse Racing; Milesius Outduels Yucca in Lexington
LEAD: Milesius, a long-striding son of Alleged who gets better as the races get longer, swept to a half-length victory over Yucca in the $126,800 Lexington Stakes for 3-year-olds yesterday at Belmont.


At British Open, Bright Outlook for an Englishman
LEAD: KEN BROWN was a struggling and naive 23-year-old golfer when he began the final round of the 1980 British Open at Muirfield, Scotland, in second place.
The slim Englishman was four strokes back of the leader and some people, maybe even more naive than Brown, felt that this was not an impossible obstacle to overcome.


THE DANCE: PERRON AND CHUMA AT JACOB'S PILLOW
LEAD: Increasingly, summer dance festivals seem to exist as much for participating artists as for audiences.
Both the Jacob's Pillow and American Dance Festivals actively offer new, developing and even relatively established choreographers a place and the time to work away from the hectic world of dance in New York City.


Question Box
LEAD: QUESTION: Has the stadium in which the All-Star Game was played at midseason ever been the same one in which the World Series was played after the season?


RIVER FOREST BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RIVER FOREST BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,182,000
1,940,000
Share earns
.55
.38
6mo net inc
5,914,000
3,955,000
Share earns
1.00
.78


COTTO'S SLUGGING SPURS YANKEES
LEAD: With his regular travels between Columbus and New York in the first half of the season, Henry Cotto has earned a spot on the Yankees' all-star commuter team.
Cotto, in fact, likes the trip so much that even as he was enjoying his most glorious day of the season, he was planning yet another trip to Columbus.


Caterpillar Net Drops 15.1%
LEAD: Caterpillar Inc., the world's largest manufacturer of earth-moving equipment, said that second-quarter profit fell 15.1 percent, but it expected earnings to improve for the year.


A WRITER GOES IT ALONE AFTER 40 YEARS IN TEAM
LEAD: After 40 years as a member of one of the most prolific writing teams in Hollywood, William Link is going it alone.


DIGITAL PRODUCTS CORP reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGITAL PRODUCTS CORP (OTC)
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,484,277
3,398,104
Net loss
b2,350,332
272,367
b-Includes a write-off of $1,753,491.


BALLET: ANANIASHVILI AND LIEPA IN BOLSHOI 'RAYMONDA'
LEAD: SHE is 24 years old, he is 25.


FREDERICK'S OF HOLLYWOOD reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FREDERICK'S OF HOLLYWOOD (AMEX)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,005,000
11,238,000
Net inc
119,000
b458,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo sales
44,440,000
37,157,000
Net inc
805,000
214,000
Share earns
.49
.13


Boxing; Aquino Wins Decision
LEAD: Lupe Aquino of Mexico won the World Boxing Council superwelterweight championship with a unanimous decision over Duane Thomas of Detroit.


A WARNING ON SWAPS OF THIRD WORLD DEBT
LEAD: The Group of 30, a study group of leading bankers and economists, has expressed concern over the burgeoning market in third world debt swaps, a business that major money center banks, primarily Citicorp, view as a way to reduce loans to developing countries.


FINANCIAL SERVICES LINE IS ADDED BY BENETTON
LEAD: After scoring major successes first in the manufacture and then in the retailing of casual clothes, Italy's Benetton group is diversifying into the realms of financial services and merchant banking.


2 NEW SMITHSONIAN MUSEUMS FOCUS ON ART OF ASIA AND AFRICA
LEAD: Shortly before his death in May, Dr.
Arthur M. Sackler had almost completed his latest benefaction, the creation of a museum of Asian and Middle Eastern art that would fill one of the few remaining voids in the Smithsonian Institution complex.


GIBSON, C R CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GIBSON, C R CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,831,000
7,457,000
Net inc
293,000
222,000
Share earns
.12
.09
6mo sales
18,562,000
14,902,000
Net inc
755,000
574,000
Share earns
.30
.23


Schools, Jobs and the Year 2000
LEAD: The program, announced last year with much good will, was a credit to a Brooklyn neighborhood coalition and the New York State Bankers Association: Four New York City banks would hire 250 graduates of five troubled city high schools.


Robin E. Hanna Bride Of Seth Mahlon Chilton
LEAD: Robin Ellen Hanna, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Hanna of New York, and Seth Mahlon Chilton, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Neal W. Chilton of Lawrenceville, N.J., were married yesterday at the Burden Mansion in New York by Rabbi Martin Merin.


WEIGHTY PROBLEM
LEAD: Terry Forster is fighting the battle of the bulge again.


Washington Talk: Briefing; METAPHORS BY HEINZ
LEAD: Senator John Heinz, a Pennsylvania Republican, is showing promise as a champion user of mixed metaphors.
The other day, Mr.
Heinz opposed a bill to impose a trade embargo on Angola.
The bill would have obliged the Chevron Oil Company to pull out of Angola, and he said such a move would allow another country to take over Chevron's resources there, to the detriment of the United


Indian Security Forces Kill 5 Described as Sikh Extremists
LEAD: Security forces killed five suspected Sikh extremists they encountered while on patrol, and terrorists shot and killed two people, the police and news reports said Saturday.


Susan H. Adler and Avery E. Neumark Are Wed
LEAD: At Congregation Shearith Israel in New York yesterday, Susan Hannah Adler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney G. Adler of Lawrence, L.I., was married to Avery E. Neumark, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Neumark of New York.
Rabbis Louis Gerstein, Leo Jung and Ralph Pelcovitz officiated.


Top Fund Manager Overcame '81 Loss
LEAD: George Soros, the New York investor who took a seat last week on the board of Fairchild Industries, the military contractor, is a superstar among money managers.


SEEQ TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEEQ TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to June 28
1987
1986
Revenue
11,945,000
8,657,000
Net inc
652,000
b3,784,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
31,173,000
24,299,000
Net inc
390,000
b13,473,000
Share earns
.04
-


WESTERN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,174,657
1,119,096
Per share
.69
.64
Yr net inc
2,475,107
2,719,354
Per share
1.41
1.57


U.S.-Soviet Radio Deal Is Denied By Wick
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Jacobs Cited in New Gillette Stock-Buying Flurry
LEAD: Someone is accumulating stock in the Gillette Company, according to Wall Street professionals, with their speculation centering on Irwin L. Jacobs, the Minneapolis millionaire and corporate raider.


Rowing; East Germans Dominate Swiss Regatta
LEAD: The East German men's rowing team won four of the eight finals today in the second and concluding series of races of the Lucerne International Regatta.


ROYAL BUSINESS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROYAL BUSINESS GROUP
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,343,000
c154,000
Share earns
3.48
.10
9mo Net inc
b5,124,000
c210,000
Share earns
3.95
.11
b-Includes a gain on disposal of discontinued operations of $2,559,000 for both quarters; a tax credit of $1,907,000 and $2,268,000 for the latest quarter and 9 months, respectively; and a gain on extinguishment of debt of $467,000 for the latest 9 months.


The Persian Gulf and the Eve of Another War
LEAD:  To the Editor:


OCE-VAN GER GRINTEN NV reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OCE-VAN GER GRINTEN NV (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
220,500,000
235,480,000
Net inc
11,400,000
11,240,000
Share earns
3.92
3.95
6mo rev
432,600,000
420,260,000
Net inc
19,200,000
18,740,000
Share earns
6.64
6.58
Shares outst
2,894,607
2,851,354


Matthew Oshman, Lawyer, Marries Lisa Diller, Banker
LEAD: Lisa Diller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilfred N. Diller of New York and Hewlett Harbor, L.I., and Matthew Oshman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aaron Oshman of Hillside, N.J., were married last evening at the Water Club in New York by Rabbis Pinchas M. Teitz and Eleazar M. Teitz.


TALKING TOUGH
LEAD: The lightning-fast ring tactics and two-fisted flurries have merely enhanced boxing's self-appointed Macho Man.
The tough image of 25-year-old Hector Camacho came from the fact that he grew up on the streets of Spanish Harlem.


2d Bid for Electrospace
LEAD: Electrospace Systems Inc. received a second offer on June 12, the same day it got a bid from the Chrysler Corporation.
Electrospace disclosed the second bid Friday at the request of the Securities and Exchange Commission staff, according to Robert L. Carrel, executive vice president of Electrospace.


FORST-HUNTER INTERNATIONAL TRADE reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORST-HUNTER INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Year to April 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,763,584
531,046
Net inc
b577,445
c16,942
Share earns
.08
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $245,375.
c-Net loss


Sports of the Times; 'You Can Feel the Energy'
LEAD: FOR more than half a century, the All-Star Game has been the barometer of the Yankees' season.
To know how the Yankees were doing in any July, all anybody ever had to do was look at the American League team.
In the beginning, Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig and Lefty Gomez dominated the All-Star rosters.
When the Yankees were rolling to pennant after pennant, Joe DiMaggio, Bill Dickey and Phil Rizzuto were always in the All-Star Game, then Mickey Mantle, Whitey Ford and Yogi Berra.


First a Small Accident, Then a Big One
LEAD: Firefighters near the scene of a derailment yesterday in Lancaster, Calif.
Three engines and 33 tank cars jumped the tracks when they hit a secion of track damaged in an automobile accident minutes before.
The overturned car, with the driver still inside, center, was not hit by the train.
Workers trying to free him had to scatter when the train approached.


Santiago Journal; What's Cooking? Don't Sniff, It's a Diesel Stew
LEAD: Some evenings, from the middle of Santiago, the sky appears a watercolor of pale pastels, and the snow-topped Andes are streaked pink and blue by the setting sun.


Scars From '67 Riots in Newark Are Still Visible in Central Ward
LEAD: The weeds grow waist-high in the vacant lots along Springfield Avenue here and children play amid shards of broken glass and rubbish that has turned foul in the heat.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Pretrial Detention at Issue
The debate over preventive detention of defendants is fueled by examples of both innocent defendants who were detained and dangerous defendants who were released.
Page A13.
Mozambique Policy Shift
The Administration reportedly held low-level official talks with a representative of rebels in Mozambique, in a marked shift of policy.


On the Road With Iraqi Ambassador
LEAD: When Nizar Hamdoon arrived in Washington nearly four years ago as Iraq's chief envoy to the United States, he spoke halting English and wore French, custom-made white suits with black shirts.
Iraq was still on the State Department's list of countries that supported terrorism and, last among the Arab states, still had not resumed full diplomatic relations with the United States since the 1967 Mideast war.


FNW BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FNW BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,623,000
2,570,000
Per share
.57
.55
6mo net inc
5,287,000
4,761,000
Per share
1.14
1.03
Share earnings reflect a 100-percent stock dividend paid June 1.


METS AND DARLING PAUSE ON AN UPBEAT
LEAD: In the afterglow of their latest victory, the Mets renewed their enthusiasm for a division race and a summer of hot pursuit.
They spoke again about the St.
Louis Cardinals and the nine games that still remain with the National League East leaders, and they seemed to thrive on the thought of a rematch.


ARIZONA GOVERNOR DISMISSIVE OF FOES
LEAD: As if he did not have enough to worry about, Arizona's Governor, Evan Mecham, now faces a determined effort by a citizens' group to recall him from office.


ROBINSON MEMORIES
LEAD: A group of eager 10-year-olds crowded around, trying to catch a glimpse of Jackie Robinson, the famous Brooklyn Dodger. ''Let me see,'' one shouted. ''Wait a minute, it's not your turn,'' another cried as they pushed and shoved.


John Paul Urges Christians To Protect the Environment
LEAD: Pope John Paul II told about 30,000 people who gathered in a mountain glade today that Christians have a moral obligation to protect the environment.


Wolf, Wolf and the Cost of AIDS
LEAD: Everyone will help pay for the treatment of AIDS patients.
The question is whether society will do so with higher health insurance premiums or, via Medicaid, with higher taxes.
At least for now, the better way is insurance.


Strike Paralyzes Israel
LEAD: About 450,000 civil servants staged a one-day strike today to demand higher wages and a shorter work week, paralyzing air traffic and silencing radio and television.
The strike was called by Histadrut, Israel's largest trade union federation which represents nearly all of the country's civilian labor force of 1.4 million.


MCCUMBER WINS
LEAD: Mark McCumber sank a 30-foot putt for an eagle on the 16th hole and went on to a one-shot victory over Bobby Clampett today in the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic.


At the Shangri-La, Beverly Hills Seems Far Away
LEAD: It has no valet parking, no doorman, no concierge, no room service, no restaurant, no bar, no swimming pool, not even a Jacuzzi or sauna.
Yet the Shangri-La Hotel is just what its name implies - a secret haven for a growing number of celebrities who want to be alone in Los Angeles.
They pass the word along to one another.


Motta Open; Valvano Out
LEAD: Dick Motta, the former Dallas Maverick coach whose name has often been heard in connection with the Knicks' coaching vacancy, said yesterday he had not been contacted about the job recently.
Another candidate, Jim Valvano of North Carolina State, said last night that he was never offered the job and would remain the


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: MONDAY, JULY 13, 1987


OUTDOORS: FATE LIMITS CATCH
LEAD: HE who pursues the Atlantic salmon will most enjoy the chase if he is an unlikely blend of gambler, plodder and philosopher.


Anyone Can Be President - Or So One List Implies
LEAD: When Ronald Reagan drives away from the Capitol for the last time in 1989, Snow Lite, Chuck Ott and Punch B. Burger want to be there to take his place.


British Paper Publishes Excerpts of M.I.5 Book
LEAD: Britain's Attorney General said today that he would take legal action against The Sunday Times for publishing excerpts of a banned book on the country's secret service, M.I.5.


Kuwaiti Hanging of 3 Shiites Is Reported in Beirut's Press
LEAD: The Beirut press reported today that Kuwait had executed three convicted Shiite Moslem bombers whose release had been demanded by people claiming to hold American hostages here.  [ Kuwait denied that the three men had been executed.
Kuwait's Interior Ministry, in a statement carried by the Kuwait News Agency, said, ''There is no truth whatsoever to these claims.


ROCK: FETCHIN' BONES, AT NEW-MUSIC SEMINAR
LEAD: ''WELCOME to Hades,'' said Hope Nicholls of Fetchin' Bones, a Charlotte, N.C., quintet, to the sweltering crowd at a CBGB New Music Seminar showcase performance on Saturday.
Nobody needed to be reminded of the heat, but Fetchin' Bones did offer the evening's most distinctive musical distraction.
Miss Nicholls's wacky Southern Yoko Ono mannerisms, richly textured twin-guitar arrangements and an incisive, tightly-meshed rhythm section give Fetchin' Bones plenty of personality.


PLAYER TURNS DUEL INTO ROUT IN U.S. SENIOR OPEN
LEAD: What was expected to be a race between Gary Player and Chi Chi Rodriguez for the United States Senior Open title today quickly became a solo charge to victory by Player, who captured the championship by a record six strokes over Doug Sanders, with Rodriguez seven behind.


Vision of Pig Farms Fuels Buying Spree in Midwest
LEAD: Clifford L. Wolfswinkel always wanted to be a pig farmer.


BANK OF DARIEN reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF DARIEN (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
47,000
c17,000
Per share
-
.03
6mo net inc
b33,000
d59,000
Per share
.06
-
b-Includes a gain of $81,000 from securities.
c-Net income  d-Net loss


BUTLER, JOHN O CO reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUTLER, JOHN O CO (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,502,982
9,919,571
Net inc
1,176,907
1,165,623
Share earns
.18
.18
9mo sales
31,538,316
27,690,671
Net inc
3,196,837
3,022,980
Share earns
.49
.47


Union Balks at Plan To Burn Barge Trash
LEAD: A plan to resolve the fate of the garbage barge Mobro faced another obstacle yesterday when workers at a city incinerator in Brooklyn, citing possible health hazards, said they would not handle the trash.


G.O.P. Hopefuls Backing Away From Reagan
LEAD: For the first time, Republican Presidential contenders have clearly but carefully begun to distance themselves from President Reagan.


14 Injured in Jersey As Porch Collapses
LEAD: At least 14 people were injured Saturday night when a wooden, second-story porch on which they stood collapsed and fell on people standing below them, the police said.


VINER, E A HOLDINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VINER, E A HOLDINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,474,000
6,570,000
Net inc
1,949,000
1,099,000
Share earns
.18
.12
6mo rev
16,949,000
12,604,000
Net inc
b1,987,000
2,674,000
Share earns
.18
.31


HELEN OF TROY (CO)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HELEN OF TROY (CO)(O)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,515,000
8,645,184
Net inc
677,183
322,354
Share earns
.20
.10


U.S MEETS WITH MOZAMBIQUE REBEL FIGURE
LEAD: In a marked shift of policy, the Administration has held low-level official talks with a representative of anti-Government rebels in Mozambique and is actively considering expanding such contacts, according to Government officials.


Natalie Priest Is Dead at 68; Stage, TV and Movie Actress
LEAD: Natalie Priest, a stage, television and film actress, died of cancer Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 68 years old.


European Interest Increases As North Implicates Others
LEAD: Europeans seemed hardly interested in Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North when he began testifying last week, but interest rose sharply when he began implicating higher officials and lecturing Congress on foreign policy.


10 Years After New York Blackout: Lessons Learned
LEAD: Ten years ago today, a power failure erased the glitter of New York's skyline, plunging the city into a blackout that triggered widespread looting and arson.


Massachusetts Tries Incarceration Alternative
LEAD:  To the Editor:


MICROFRAME INC reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROFRAME INC
Year to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,010,001
632,198
Net loss
483,798
1,271,816


Della Femina, Udell
LEAD: Della Femina, Udell, a subsidiary of Della Femina, Travisano &amp; Partners, has become agency for Bidegain Inc. of Salt Lake City, wholly owned United States marketing arm of Babybotte, the French children's-shoe manufacturer, whose products have been available in this country since 1981.
The former agency for public relations and advertising was Richard Weiner Inc.


SILICONIX INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 21
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILICONIX INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 21
1987
1986
Sales
29,024,000
27,950,000
Net inc
1,064,000
2,180,000
Share earns
.08
.16
6mo sales
54,512,000
54,561,000
Net inc
1,875,000
4,427,000
Share earns
.14
.33


MT BAKER BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MT BAKER BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
715,773
621,178
Per share
.46
.52
6mo net inc
1,371,129
1,079,676
Per share
.89
.97
Shares outst
1,541,359
1,112,637


Plainly, The Man For the Job
LEAD: President Reagan's nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court has liberal ideologues howling with fury.
The central issue is already clear: Should a liberal majority on certain key issues be perpetuated, or should the Court evolve towards a conservative majority?


UNITEL VIDEO INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITEL VIDEO INC
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,916,000
4,728,000
Net inc
575,000
400,000
Share earns
.26
.18
9mo sales
17,826,000
13,108,000
Net inc
1,746,000
430,000
Share earns
.79
.20


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It is very frustrating that after five months of hard work by the prosecution we still cannot stand up and say, without a shred of doubt: 'John Demjanjuk, you are Ivan the Terrible.' ''
- Amir Shaviv,
the legal correspondent of
Israeli television.  [ A2:3. ]


Ericka Markman Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Ericka Markman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Markman of Bloomington, Ind., and Joshua Horwitz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Horwitz of Chevy Chase, Md., were married yesterday at the bride's summer home on Little Deer Isle in Maine.
Johanna G. Sherwood, a justice of the peace, officiated.


NEW TWIST FOR BOLIVIA ON ITS DEBT
LEAD: Bolivia and its commercial creditors have amended their 1981 debt-restructuring agreement to allow the country to negotiate a repurchase of its $1 billion in outstanding loans.


Relentless Heat and Raising the Giglio
LEAD: Robert Langone sat at his concession stand at the corner of Havemeyer and North 9th Street, where the annual feast of San Paolino was in progress in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn yesterday.
He was guarding a collection of goldfish swimming around in little bowls of orange and green water.


Business and the Law; Debating a Bill On Job Hazards
LEAD: BUSINESS interests are deeply divided over a Congressional measure that would give workers greater notice about the hazards of their jobs.
Though many opponents of the bill have applauded its goal of informing workers about hazards and creating a safer workplace, they fear more lawsuits.


ROSENTHAL RALLIES FOR 2 SHOT VICTORY
LEAD: Jody Rosenthal shot a six-under-par 66 today to come from six strokes off the pace and beat Ayako Okamoto by two strokes in the du Maurier Classic, one of the four major events on the women's tour.
Rosenthal's 72-hole total of 272 set a tournament record.


In Talk With Polish Officials, Catholics Ask More Freedom
LEAD: Catholic intellectuals urged Communist officials at a meeting to grant more political freedoms and hold talks with Lech Walesa, participants said today.


SURINAME'S FALL FROM PARADISE
LEAD: Until a few years ago, milkmen made the rounds in this little country on the northeast coast of South America just as they did once upon a time in the United States.
Bread was delivered, too.
The stores were overflowing with canned goods, fine wines and cheeses, refrigerators, television sets and electronic gadgets.


Howe Signs Ranger Pact
LEAD: The Texas Rangers signed Steve Howe today to a minor league contract with their Class AAA Oklahoma City farm club of the American Association.


Anatomy of the Skirmishing for a Veto
LEAD: Senator Jake Garn entered the members' dining room on Capitol Hill and quietly began to collar as many of his 44 Republican colleagues as he could find.


FIRST BANCORPORATION OF OHIO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST BANCORPORATION OF OHIO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
8,477,000
7,630,000
Per share
.78
.70
6mo net inc
16,544,000
14,947,000
Per share
1.52
1.37


FIRST KENTUCKY NATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST KENTUCKY NATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,374,000
11,631,000
Per share
.06
.52
6mo net inc
15,245,000
23,392,000
Per share
.68
1.05
The company said it took a $17 million extra provision to its loan loss reserve, about 73-percent of which will be allocated to reserves for debt in less developed countries, with the balance going to strengthern reserves at two of the company's acquired community banks.


Boxing; Tate (19-0) Wins a Middleweight Title
LEAD: Frank Tate outboxed Troy Darrell today to win the vacant United States Boxing Association middleweight title in a unanimous 12-round decision.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Wilander Takes U.S.
Pro Title: In Brookline, Mass., Mats Wilander changed his patient approach in the first set to an attacking strategy in the second to defeat a fellow Swede, Kent Carlsson, yesterday at the United States Pro Tennis Championships.
Wilander, ranked second in the world, recovered from a 4-2 deficit in the first set to win, 7-6, 6-1, for his second victory in the tournament in three years.


No Headline
LEAD: All-Star Roster
$
Starters
American
National
Kennedy, Baltimore
catcher
Carter, Mets
Mattingly, Yankees
first base
Clark, St. Louis
Randolph, Yankees
second base
Sandberg, Chicago
Boggs, Boston
third base
Schmidt, Philadelphia
Ripken, Baltimore
shortstop
Smith, St.


NU HORIZONS ELECTRONICS reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NU HORIZONS ELECTRONICS (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,508,023
3,803,642
Net inc
208,071
143,870
Share earns
.05
.04


Laurie E. Gottlieb Weds B. K. Moss
LEAD: At Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., yesterday Laurie Ellen Gottlieb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Gottlieb of Lynbrook, L.I., was married to Bradley Kevin Moss, a son of Mrs.
Edward Waxman of Cheltenham, Pa.
Rabbi Harold I. Saperstein performed the ceremony.


CONVENIENCE PAYS AT 7-ELEVEN
LEAD: There is a distinct rhythm to each day, observed Kathie Jaroszyk.
In the morning the clientele is mostly workers wanting a cup of coffee.
Toward midday the lunch crowd arrives for soda, hot dogs or prepackaged sandwiches.
In the afternoon children play video games.
In the evening, traffic slows during the dinner hours but picks up as people come in to rent videotapes for the night or pick up snacks, beer or a box of diapers.


Traders Fear Debt Deadline
LEAD: A healthy dollar and weaker inflation helped calm the bond market last week but could not entirely erase the uncertainty of traders about whether Congress will extend the Government's debt ceiling before its expiration on Friday.


(Most of) Boston Awaiting Big Highway Project
LEAD: This city's Central Artery, a grimy green elevated highway, has had few fans except for pigeons since it was built 30 years ago.
A plan to replace the road with a new one underground will not only remove an eyesore but also help the bustling city avoid choking on its traffic.


Pretrial Detention: 2 Sides of an Issue
LEAD: For Ricardo Armstrong, there is the despair of trying to reunite his family after spending four months in a Cincinnati jail for bank robbery before being acquitted of the crime.


SEA GALLEY STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEA GALLEY STORES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,756,000
14,142,000
Net inc
206,000
137,000
Share earns
.07
.05
6mo rev
25,507,000
28,920,000
Net inc
371,000
188,000
Share earns
.12
.06


You'll Need a Death Certificate for Your Last Car
LEAD:  To the Editor:


SHELTON SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHELTON SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
240,000
223,000
Share earns
.29
-
Yr net inc
1,190,000
859,000
Share earns
1.46
-
The company converted to stock from mutual form in August.


WASHINGTON BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b11,219,000
c1,576,000
Per share
-
.31
6mo net loss
b9,168,000
c3,406,000
Per share
-
.68
b-Includes a $12 million increase in the reserve for possible losses on loans in the company's international loan portfolio.


FOREIGN AFFAIRS
LEAD: ''Star Wars'' managers have shifted their research in favor of a crash program for early deployment of a relatively unsophisticated, minimal missile defense, according to evidence dug out by Congressional researchers.


Dr. Jonathan L. Held Marries Alyssa Licht
LEAD: The wedding of Alyssa D. Licht, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Licht of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., to Dr.
Jonathan L. Held, a son of Justice and Mrs.
Gerald S. Held of Brooklyn and Oceanside, L.I., took place yesterday at the Licht home.
Cantor David Benedict officiated.


A New Latin Currency
LEAD: A new currency to finance trade between Brazil and Argentina is expected to be created when Presidents Jose Sarney and Raul Alfonsin meet next week, according to Carlos Eduardo Freitas, a director of the Brazilian central bank.


Labeling Plan Is a Regressive Pizza Tax
LEAD:  To the Editor:


UNITED SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
865,000
137,000
Per share
.50
-
6mo net inc
1,688,000
517,000
Per share
.98
-
United Savings went public in June 1986.


Enforce Litter Laws
LEAD:  To the Editor:


SJNB FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SJNB FINANCIAL
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
190,000
46,000
Share earns
.16
.04
6mo Net inc
197,000
149,000
Share earns
.16
.12


MID-HUDSON SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MID-HUDSON SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
704,000
445,000
Per share
.66
.42
6 mo net inc
1,403,000
1,116,000
Per share
1.33
1.06


The Contras in Costa Rica: A Tangled Tale Is Told in Lawsuit
LEAD: Two American freelance journalists living here are at the heart of an unresolved lawsuit charging that a broad conspiracy surrounded Nicaraguan rebel activities in Costa Rica, including an assassination attempt, drug-dealing and gun-running.


Metro Matters; Limits (Sort Of) On Contributions To Politicians
LEAD: Can laws pervent corruption?


CAPTAIN CRAB INC reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPTAIN CRAB INC (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,768,997
2,967,283
Net inc
110,164
176,283
Share earns
.01
.01
9mo rev
10,287,752
8,055,493
Net inc
301,171
144,838
Share earns
.02
.01


Bork Fight Gives Abortion Rights Convention Something to Shout About
LEAD: Advocates of legal abortion met here over the weekend to map a national campaign aimed at persuading the Senate not to confirm Judge Robert H. Bork as a Supreme Court Justice.


Blurred Lines for Lawmakers in Albany
LEAD: The political and ethical practices of the New York State Legislature are being challenged as rarely before, raising questions that go to the heart of how the Legislature governs 17 million New Yorkers.


MEDITRUST reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDITRUST (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,187,094
1,519,279
Net inc
3,506,001
715,386
Share earns
.33
.26
6mo rev
12,223,855
3,091,630
Net inc
6,861,316
1,528,793
Share earns
.64
.55
Shares outst
10,720,859
2,760,000


Salary Deviations
LEAD: The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, has been looking at Federal executives' pay and has found a few anomalies.


AMITY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMITY BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
436,153
221,523
Per share
.45
.39
Shares outst
920,368
511,058
6mo net inc
740,423
411,335
Per share
.76
.76
Shares outst
920,136
478,432


2 Men Are Shot Dead In Dispute With Youths
LEAD: A 25-year-old man and a guest at his family's new home were shot to death after they chased a noisy group of youths away from a construction site near the house, the police said today.


TEXACO BID SPECULATION INCREASES
LEAD: Robert Holmes a Court, the Australian financier who has accumulated 9.5 percent of Texaco Inc.'s common shares, might increase his holdings to as much as 15 percent in the near future, raising a question of whether he intends to make a tender offer for the giant oil company.


He Keeps Anonymity And Regains Suitcase
LEAD: A man who spent 11 days in jail because he refused to identify himself, then had to picket a police station to get his suitcase back, has left town just as he arrived -anonymously.


TAKING A PAGE FROM TWAIN
LEAD: During his lifetime, Samuel Langhorne Clemens wore many hats - as an itinerant printer, a travel correspondent, a Mississippi River pilot, a gold and silver miner, a laborer in a quartz mine, a businessman and, as Mark Twain, journalist and author.
But the role he never tired of was letter-writer.


VERTEX COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to June 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERTEX COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to June 26
1987
1986
Sales
4,787,000
4,777,000
Net inc
338,000
275,000
Share earns
.10
.08
9mo sales
13,349,000
13,130,000
Net inc
884,000
744,000
Share earns
.26
.23


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, JULY 13, 1987
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-11  President Reagan was told of plans to use profits from the Iran arms sales for covert operations other than supporting the contras in a memo written by Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter, according to Senator Daniel K. Inouye, the Hawaii Democrat.
Page A1


DIRECTORS' PROPOSED STRIKE BRINGS THREAT OF LOCKOUT
LEAD: All members of the Directors Guild of America would be locked out if the guild carries out a threatened selective strike Tuesday, a spokeswoman for film and television producers said today.


Mattingly's Numbers Are on the Rise
LEAD: At season's end the past three years, Don Mattingly's name has been conspicuous by its presence among the American League leaders in a variety of offensive categories.
One year he won the batting championship, another the runs-batted-in title.
He has also led the league's hitters in doubles, hits, extra-base hits, total bases and slugging percentage.


Specialists Report on Dementia
LEAD: No single test can determine the cause of the mind-robbing dementia that afflicts many older people, and doctors must take the time to do their own detailed evaluations of each patient, according to a committee of specialists assembled by the National Institutes of Health.


DU PONT'S '88 GAMBLE: TWO STATES
LEAD: On the basis of his lineage, schooling, appearance and political record, Pierre S. du Pont 4th is unlikely to be mistaken for a riverboat gambler.
Yet he has committed himself to an all-or-nothing political gamble in his pursuit of the 1988 Republican Presidential nomination.


Dr. Thomas F. Waddell, 49, A Founder of Gay 'Olympics'
LEAD: Dr.
Thomas F. Waddell, one of the founders of the Gay Games for homosexual athletes in 1982 and a sixth-place finisher in the decathlon at the Olympic Games in 1968, died at his home in San Francisco Saturday morning.
He was 49 years old.
His wife, Sara Lewinstein, said by telephone that Dr.
Waddell had died of complications related to AI


A Correction: Times Was in Error On North's Secret-Fund Testimony
LEAD: On Friday, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North testified that the Director of Central Intelligence, William J. Casey, wanted to create a secret fund to underwrite intelligence operations - an ''off-the-shelf, self-sustaining, stand-alone entity that could perform certain activities on behalf of the United States.


HUBCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUBCO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,478,895
1,107,424
Per share
.42
.31
6mo net inc
b2,835,649
2,155,764
Per share
.80
.61
b-Includes a non-recurring gain, after taxes, of $400,157, or 11 cents a share, on the sale of the 14th Street, Hoboken office; and an after-tax loss on the sale of securities of $413,773 resulting in a net increase of $256,384, or 7 cents a share.


Not Voting Results
LEAD:  To the Editor:


U.S. ACCUSES ISRAEL OF HARASSING PALESTINIAN-AMERICANS ON VISITS 21&gt;
LEAD: American diplomats have complained to the Israeli authorities that Palestinian-Americans visiting relatives in the occupied territories are being harassed, Israeli officials and Western diplomats say.


The Occasional Cook
LEAD: File this away on a recipe card for the year 2004.
Margaret Collins, a research associate at the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History, contributed an offbeat suggestion to the weekly staff bulletin at the institution, proposing that the ''emergence of 17-year cicadas should be regarded as a welcome opportunity to our gastronomic horizons.


Westinghouse Earnings Up
LEAD: The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said today that its second-quarter earnings rose 10.3 percent, partly because of improved strength in its industrial and commercial divisions.


Bridge; Swiss Team Titles Are Won At Nassau-Suffolk Tourney
LEAD: The Nassau-Suffolk Regional Championships concluded Sunday at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan with Swiss team play on two levels.


For Saudi Investor, Many U.S. Stakes
LEAD: When shares of the Transamerica Corporation shot up last month, rumors ricocheted around Wall Street that the Primerica Corporation or the Ford Motor Company might be preparing a takeover bid.


ISAAC HERSH
LEAD: Isaac Hersh, a former principal of New Utrecht High School in Brooklyn, died Sunday of Alzheimer's disease at the Krever Nursing Center in Miami.
He was 80 years old and lived in North Miami Beach.


Metro Datelines; Magazine Buys Story From Jessica Hahn
LEAD: Jessica Hahn has signed a contract to tell a national men's magazine ''the entire story'' of the sexual enounter that helped bring down the Rev.
Jim Bakker, the television evangelist, Miss Hahn's lawyer said yesterday.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  A New York First


Baseball Votes, Early and Often
LEAD: Is Darryl Strawberry having an All-Star season?
Does the Mets' outfielder really deserve to be a first-team National League selection?
Does Tony Gwynn of the San Diego Padres deserve not to be?


Where Some Art Is a 'Monstrosity' Of Zoning Rules
LEAD: One morning a month ago, Tony Mariani and Freddie Vassallo, the building inspectors here, were driving south on Bay Avenue, heading to work in their yellow Chevy station wagon.
As they crossed Sixth Street, Mr.
Mariani glanced left. ''I do a double-take,'' he said. ''I see a monstrosity.'' There in the side yard of a newly opened art gallery, facing the main street, was a 12 by 11 cartoon-style painting of a porpoise show.


Gimme a B, Gimme . . .
LEAD: Opponents to the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court gave the Capitol a taste of creative sloganeering yesterday.


Ameruso's Trial on Perjury Draws to a Close
LEAD: A former New York City Transportation Commissioner, Anthony R. Ameruso, was described by a prosecutor yesterday as a man driven by self-interest who ignored his lawyer's advice and lied under oath to hide his relationship with a company then doing business with the City Transportation Department.


AAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AAR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
84,079,000
68,595,000
Net inc
4,415,000
3,300,000
Share earns
.42
.36
Yr sales
298,192,000
248,012,000
Net inc
15,361,000
11,506,000
Share earns
1.50
1.27


Oil Rig Count Up by 19
LEAD: The American drilling rig count climbed by 19 last week, to a total of 891, against 663 working rigs at this time last year, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.


Few Traces of the Civil War Linger in Biafra
LEAD: The Biafra babies are adults now.


On a Hot Day, a Practical Side to Fountains
LEAD: Visitors to the Bethesda Fountain in Central Park enjoying more than the cool spray as they sought relief from hot, muggy weather.
More of the same is expected today, with a chance of thunderstorms. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr)


HEALTH &amp; REHABILITATION PROPERTIES TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTH &amp; REHABILITATION PROPERTIES TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,237,000
-
Net inc
1,492,000
-
Share earns
.44
-
6mo rev
4,116,000
-
Net inc
2,996,000
-
Share earns
.88
-
The trust began operations in December.


A Thriving Industry to Do the Pentagon's Work
LEAD: Largely because of President Reagan's six-year military buildup, a mini-defense industry is thriving along the beltway that circles Washington like a concrete moat.


Metro Datelines; Jersey Is Criticized Over AIDS Protocol
LEAD: The state has done little to slow the spread of AIDS among New Jersey prison inmates by failing to educate them about the disease, provide blood tests on demand or segregate convicts who test positive from the general prison population, a lawyer argued yesterday in Federal District Court here.


Whistling Wagner
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Korean Premier and 8 Others Replaced
LEAD: President Chun Doo Hwan replaced the Prime Minister and eight Cabinet ministers tonight in what officials described as an attempt to make the Government impartial in the period before national elections.


Tangled Trades in Pay 'N Pak
LEAD: New York Stock Exchange officials said yesterday that Morgan Stanley &amp; Company did not appear to have the right to cancel a huge stock trade by the Florida investor Paul A. Bilzerian that would have given him control of Pay 'N Pak Stores Inc.


Correction
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the Convex Computer Corporation incorrectly described the prospects of a competitor, Floating Point Systems Inc.
The company has made no statement about the outlook for sales in its fiscal third quarter, which ends July 31.


FASHION NOTES
LEAD: IN the first weeks of July, southern Europe can seem like fashion summer camp as American designers, retailers, forecasters and photographers pour into its resorts for working vacations.


GULL INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GULL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
23,706,000
21,362,000
Net inc
1,829,000
181,000
Share earns
.38
.04
Shares outst
5,035,000
4,094,000
Yr sales
72,907,000
62,111,000
Net inc
4,681,000
1,267,000
Share earns
1.08
.33
Shares outst
4,344,000
3,835,000


Catalogue Stresses Free or Low-Cost Software
LEAD: CALL it what you will -voyeurism, daydreaming or just plain curiosity - people like to read catalogues.
They have changed since the days when Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company first mailed its free catalogues.
The latest innovations are catalogues that are themselves sold, often through bookstores.


On Writing And Talking
LEAD: MITZI, a first-grader, drew a picture of a cowboy and wrote: ''Once there was a cowboy.
I hated the cowboy a lot.
Do you like cowboys?
But I like you a lot.
Sometimes I like the cowboy.
Tuesdays I like the cowboy.
The end.''


Daimler's Chief Resigns After Company Discord
LEAD: The 59-year-old chairman of Daimler-Benz A.G. said today that he would resign as its chief executive.


Bill to Monitor City Contracts Voted by Panel
LEAD: Two key anti-corruption measures appeared headed for different fates yesterday as New York City officials prepared to adopt a system to monitor municipal contracts but put off acting on a plan to restrict campaign donations.


Canada Seizes Freighter Believed To Have Put 174 Sikhs on Shore
LEAD: Canadian Navy and Coast Guard vessels today chased and seized a Costa Rican-registered freighter that is believed to have illegally landed 174 Sikhs in a rocky cove on the southern coast of Nova Scotia on Sunday.


Directors and Producers Try to Avoid a Strike
LEAD: The Directors Guild of America met with studio producers today to try to avoid a strike Tuesday morning that would disrupt most motion picture and television production.


CBS INC. TO SELL MAGAZINE UNIT TO ITS EXECUTIVES
LEAD: CBS Inc., which has undergone a significant restructuring in the last year, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell CBS Magazines for $650 million to a group led by the unit's senior executives.


'Midsummer Night' To Tour City Parks
LEAD: A free outdoor performance of Shakespeare's ''Midsummer Night's Dream'' will be presented by the Riverside Shakespeare Company on July 15 at 6 P.M. in Bryant Park, 42d Street between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas.
The performance is part of a series that will run through July 26.


AN ISOLATED GENIUS IS GIVEN HIS DUE
LEAD: IN some ways, mathematicians are finally beginning to penetrate the mind of Srinivasa Ramanujan.


A Discussion Of a Mercenary
LEAD: At the Iran-contra hearings today, Colonel North was questioned about the activites of David Walker, a Briton who was involved in covert military operations against the Nicaraguan Government.
Following is an excerpts from that exchange, as recorded by The New York Times.


North's Testimony: 'Fall Guy' and Foreign Policy
LEAD: As Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North testified for the fifth day yesterday, members of Congress questioned him about the specific circumstances of the Iran-contra affair and about American foreign policy in general.
Here are excerpts from the testimony, as recorded by The New York Times.
THE 'FALL G


Studying Business History
LEAD: AFTER years of neglect, business history courses are becoming popular, perhaps because of a belief that tomorrow's managers should not operate in a complex world without looking over their shoulders at the past.


SSC&amp;B:Lintas Sets Up Venture With Japanese
LEAD: SSC&amp;B:Lintas Worldwide, one of the Interpublic Group of Companies, has established a joint venture with Hakuhodo of Japan, which already has such a partnership with McCann-Erickson, another Interpublic company.


AT $30 MILLION, IS ANYONE WATCHING?
LEAD: It was another milestone in international communications and satellite diplomacy, officials were boasting at the United States Information Agency.


Networks May Rotate Their Daily Coverage
LEAD: The three network news divisions, faced with intensifying interest in the Iran-contra hearings on the one hand and the loss of millions of dollars in advertising revenues on the other, are planning to cover the remaining weeks of the hearings on a rotating basis, according to several network executives.


Knicks, Ending 84-Day Search, Name Pitino Coach; He Leaves Providence to 'Fufill Dream'
LEAD: Even after Rick Pitino withdrew from consideration for the only professional coaching job he ever coveted, he still hoped he would someday become coach of the Knicks, the team of his playground fantasies.
But not even the young optimist, who gained national prominence in March by guiding Providence College to the Final Four, dreamed that the day would come so soon.


Chevron Capital Sets Financing
LEAD: Chevron Capital USA, yesterday offered $250 million of 9 3/4 percent sinking fund debentures due in 2017 at a price of 100 through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


DESOTO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DESOTO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
118,699,000
131,510,000
Net inc
6,845,000
4,888,000
Share earns
1.73
1.02
6mo sales
209,040,000
228,322,000
Net inc
8,996,000
7,327,000
Share earns
2.27
1.53


SOVIET OFFERING TO SELL PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN FROM SPACE
LEAD: THE Soviet Union is stepping up plans to market photographs taken from satellites in space that have better resolution than those offered commercially in the West, according to Western space experts and Soviet officials.


Adoption of U.N. Peace Plan For Gulf Is Said to Be Likely
LEAD: State Department officials said today that they were confident that the United Nations Security Council would approve a resolution this week calling for a cease-fire in the war between Iran and Iraq.


Drake Bakeries
LEAD: The Ralston Purina Company said it had signed an agreement to sell its Drake Bakeries Inc. subsidiary to a private group led by Drake management.
The management team is supported by Rock Capital Partners L.P., a limited partnership of global investors.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed.
Ralston acquired Drake Bakeries from Borden Inc.


ALLWASTE INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLWASTE INC
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,500,000
2,200,000
Net inc
422,000
81,000
Share earns
.08
.02
Shares outst
5,497,000
3,255,000
9mo rev
16,400,000
6,800,000
Net inc
902,000
256,000
Share earns
.19
.08
Shares outst
4,675,000
3,244,000


JOHN W. HUNTER JR.
LEAD: John W. Hunter Jr., an editor for various New York business publications, died last week, apparently of a heart attack, in his Manhattan apartment.
His body was discovered by a family member on Thursday when he failed to answer repeated phone calls.
He was 55 years old.
Mr.
Hunter, a graduate of the Lawrenceville School and Yale University, was business editor of Look magazine and editor of its subsidiary publication, Insider's Newsletter, in the early 1960's.


PRESIDENT REPEATS DIVERSION DENIAL
LEAD: President Reagan insisted today that he had never been told about any plans to use profits from the Iran arms sales to finance covert operations.


A Top Treasury Officer Is Going to Law Firm
LEAD: J. Roger Mentz, the Treasury's top tax officer and the point man on the Netherlands Antilles controversy, will join the Washington office of Cadwalader Wickersham &amp; Taft, the New York law firm, in September.
His deputy, O. Donaldson Chapoton, will probably succeed him.


Metro Datelines; Murder-for-Hire Suit Dismissed in Court
LEAD: A Federal judge has dismissed a multimillion-dollar lawsuit filed by a woman from Katonah, N.Y., who sought damages from her estranged husband because he tried to have her killed, purportedly to avoid financial obligations to her and the couple's four children.


New Taxi Regulations Bring First Summonses
LEAD: With the first summonses against a largely uncooperative industry, the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission yesterday began enforcing new regulations governing gypsies, liveries and other nonmedallion vehicles.


Staff Earns a Few Bruises As Governor Builds Team
LEAD: Despite minor bruises, sunburn and sore muscles, Colorado's chief executive and his Cabinet and staff say they are delighted with their rugged weekend in the Rocky Mountains.


Rolls-Royce Plans New Jet Engine
LEAD: The aircraft engine manufacturer Rolls-Royce, one of the big three of the industry, is planning to develop a more powerful version of its RB211-524D4D engine for a new generation of medium-range and long-range civil aircraft beginning in 1992, company sources said.
They said the new derivative, called the


Dollar, Mostly Lower, Rises Against the Yen
LEAD: The dollar closed lower against most foreign currencies yesterday, but scored gains against the Japanese yen.


Queens Shootings May Be Tied to Drugs
LEAD: The shooting spree that left two men dead and eight other people injured in Springfield Gardens and St.
Albans, Queens, late Sunday may have been caused by rivalry among narcotics dealers in the area, the police said yesterday.


Hot Books for Hot Days
LEAD: DALLAS, July 13 - Let's face it, sometimes it's just too hot to sit at a computer.
The preferred alternative, dragging the computer to poolside, isn't always practical, unless one is planning to do floating point calculations.
A nice compromise is to curl up by the pool with a six-pack of software and a good computer book.


CHASE MANHATTAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHASE MANHATTAN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b1,400,000,000
c146,000,000
Per share
-
1.65
6mo net loss
1,300,000,000
c289,000,000
Per share
-
3.28
b-Reflects the impact of the previously announced special addition of $1.6 billion to the reserve for possible credit losses which was made in light of recent developments pertaining to the debt situation of refinancing countries.


Sutcliffe Receives Clemente Award
LEAD: Rick Sutcliffe of the Chicago Cubs received the Roberto Clemente Award today for baseball service on and off the field.


Off Broadway Threatened by Dispute
LEAD: The production of Off Broadway plays and musicals has been threatened by a contract dispute between the Society of Stage Directors and Choreographers and the League of Off Broadway Theaters and Producers.


As Deaver Trial Opens, Judge Closes Jury Selection
LEAD: Jury selection in the perjury trial of the former White House official Michael K. Deaver began today, and the judge closed questioning of potential jurors to the public because, he said, he was concerned about their privacy.


WHIRLPOOL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WHIRLPOOL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1986
1985
Sales
1,136,600,000
1,075,300,000
Net inc
47,400,000
52,400,000
Share earns
.65
.71
6mo sales
2,097,600,000
1,945,800,000
Net inc
96,100,000
101,600,000
Share earns
1.31
1.38


Swimmer Killed by Alligator In Spring at a Park in Florida
LEAD: A 22-year-old swimmer was found killed by an alligator today in a spring at a state park about 15 miles south of here, the authorities said.


ONEOK INC reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONEOK INC (NYSE)
Year to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
606,200,000
802,900,000
Net inc
23,900,000
34,700,000
Share earns
1.69
2.52


The Dance: 4 Premieres at Festival
LEAD: Since 1984, the American Dance Festival has sponsored an International Choreographers Workshop that permits choreographers from around the world to attend the festival, take classes and share ideas.
This year, four previous participants in the workshop - choreographers from Indonesia, India, Argentina and Spain - were invited back to create new dances for casts of festival students.


FEDDERS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDDERS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
41,104,000
27,771,000
Net inc
b4,559,000
c3,231,000
Share earns
.30
.25
Shares outst
13,445,000
13,173,000
6mo sales
76,078,000
56,098,000
Net inc
b7,827,000
c5,337,000
Share earns
.54
.41
Shares outst
13,427,000
13,164,000


HEEKIN CAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 14
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEEKIN CAN INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 14
1987
1986
Sales
51,990,000
48,761,000
Net inc
2,041,000
1,947,000
Share earns
.63
.60
6mo sales
97,482,000
91,715,000
Net inc
3,541,000
3,282,000
Share earns
1.09
1.01


No Reason for Optimism About Race Relations; Commission Is Needed
LEAD:  To the Editor:


DANA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DANA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,053,500,000
978,800,000
Net inc
42,500,000
39,300,000
Share earns
.95
.75
Shares outst
44,714,000
52,607,000
6mo sales
2,056,900,000
1,940,400,000
Net inc
73,500,000
73,600,000
Share earns
1.64
1.40


Casey Had 'Fall Guy' Plan As Early as '84, North Says
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North said today that the plan to make him the ''fall guy'' for the Iran-contra operations was first suggested by William J. Casey as early as 1984 when the White House began its secret support for the Nicaraguan rebels.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Although He is regularly asked to do so, God does not take sides in American politics.


U.S. Salutes Victor in Australia; Contrast to New Zealand Is Clear
LEAD: In pointed contrast to its dissatisfaction with the anti-nuclear policies of New Zealand Prime Minister David Lange, the United States has made clear its satisfaction with the re-election Sunday of Prime Minister Bob Hawke of Australia.


Sports People; Fighting a Fill-In?
LEAD: Promoters for Mark Breland, the World Boxing Association welterweight champion, said yesterday that they were searching for another fighter for a scheduled bout in South Carolina after being unable to reach an agreement with Marlon Starling.


New York City Cites Union League in Sex Bias
LEAD: The New York City Human Rights Commission has formally accused the all-male Union League Club, long known as a staid bastion of Republican businessmen, of discriminating against women.


NASA Readies New Assault On Still-Mysterious Lightning
LEAD: LIKE latter-day Ben Franklins sending aloft rockets instead of kites, a team of 30 scientists are preparing to take aim at thunderclouds this week to extract powerful bolts of electricity as part of a far-reaching study of the causes and effects of lightning.


Rescuing an Ancient Egyptian Tomb
LEAD: ONE of the more spectacular tombs of ancient Egypt, the 3,200-year-old burial chamber of Nefertari, Ramses II's favorite wife, has undergone emergency repairs by an international team of scientists and art restorers.
They applied several thousand strips of gauze and rice paper to hold together the flaking wall paintings until a comprehensive restoration is begun on this imperiled monument of the ancient


KRUEGER, W A CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KRUEGER, W A CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
74,235,000
70,407,000
Net inc
4,064,000
4,444,000
Share earns
.13
.14
Shares outst
31,507,284
30,919,248
6mo sales
148,449,000
133,333,000
Net inc
7,110,000
6,813,000
Share earns
.23
.22
Shares outst
31,433,942
30,905,322


Italian Leader Selects A New Prime Minister
LEAD: Italy's President today asked the Treasury Minister, Giovanni Goria, a Christian Democrat, to serve as Prime Minister over the 47th post-World War II Government.


Nation's Physical Plant an '88 Issue
LEAD: The steady decay of the country's roads, bridges, sewers, and rail and water systems - a problem that flared as a major political issue in the early 1980's but then seemed to flame out - is coming back as part of the 1988 Presidential campaign.


Presidents(?) and Press
LEAD: Presidents and the press have sometimes been at odds over the conduct of news conferences in the White House, and the Reagan Administration has come under fire for not holding enough of them.
Now nine Presidential candidates, responding to a questionnaire from the National Press Foundation, say they would do things differently.


Plenum Bidding for Arthur D. Little
LEAD: The Plenum Publishing Corporation, which prints scientific and technical journals, said yesterday that it wants to acquire Arthur D. Little Inc., the management consulting and technology research firm, for about $128 million.


Scouting; Different Kind Of Policy Makers
LEAD: A high school track star attempting the long jump slipped on a wet takeoff board and was injured.
The official in charge of the event was sued, but a jury found that he was not responsible for the accident.


EMANUEL A. HONIG
LEAD: Emanuel A. Honig, a past president of the New Jersey Bar Association, died of a heart attack yesterday at the Walkill Valley General Hospital in Sussex, N.J.
He was 77 years old and lived in Hardyston Township, N.J.


Scouting; Troubled Waters
LEAD: Rick Pitino, the new head coach of the Knicks, becomes the 13th man in 41 years to take charge of New York's National Basketball Association franchise, where many a coach has foundered.
The most successful of Pitino's predecessors was Red Holzman, who in two tenures won 613 games and two N.B.A. championships (in 1970 and 1973).


Textron-Gefinor
LEAD: Textron Inc. said it had agreed to sell it Sheaffer Eaton division to Gefinor S.A. of Geneva for about $135 million.
It said completion was expected by the end of August.
Sheaffer Eaton makes writing instruments and stationery.
The company said proceeds from the sale would be used to reduce the debt incurred in the acquisition of the Ex-Cell-O Corporation in September 1986.


Vatican Backs 3 in Bank Case
LEAD: A senior Vatican official said today that he believed Archbishop Paul Marcinkus and two other Vatican bank executives were unwitting victims of the spectacular Banco Ambrosiano bank crash five years ago.


Controversy Amid All-Star Spectacle
LEAD: This is supposed to be fun, right?
It's the All-Star Game, a spectacle of pitching and power hitting, an extravaganza for the fans and a chance for baseball's biggest stars to strut and mug for the cameras.


Daisy Schapiro Dies; A Child-Care Advocate
LEAD: Daisy C. Schapiro, a lawyer and an early advocate of child care for working parents in New York, died of natural causes Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 93 years old.


Jersey Haulers Win Increase
LEAD: Garbage hauling companies in 13 northern and central New Jersey counties soon will be charging customers 1 percent to 2 percent more under an interim rate increase approved today by the Board of Public Utilities.
The hauling companies applied for rate increases after a settlement last week on a three-year contract with Teamsters Local 945, which represents 2,500 garbage truck drivers and helpers who work for 130 hauling companies.


Student-Loan Defaulters to Be Charged Fees
LEAD: In an attempt to collect $5.9 billion in unpaid student loans, the United States Department of Education is notifying nearly a million defaulters this week that they must pay before Oct. 1 or be billed afterward for their loans plus the collection costs.


Convictions Voided In Fires That Killed 11
LEAD: The state Supreme Court today threw out negligent homicide convictions in two fatal fires in which the owners of buildings had been found not to have installed smoke detectors.


Chase, First Chicago Report Large Deficits
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation and the First Chicago Corporation yesterday reported big second-quarter losses, which were linked to the unusually large provisions for loan losses taken to account for troubled third world loans.


A Jump on '88 Money
LEAD: With the 1988 election season slowly drawing closer, the Democratic Party is trying to get a head start on the perennial game of catch-up it plays with the Republicans when it comes to fund-raising.


Treasury Bond Prices Drop
LEAD: Treasury bond prices fell nearly a point in light trading activity yesterday as securities dealers sought levels that would attract more investor demand.


Ford to Expand Plant in Louisville
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company plans to spend more than $250 million to expand its truck assembly plant in Louisville, Ky., so that additional vehicles can be made there in the early 1990's, a Ford spokesman said.
Kentucky officials, including Gov.
Martha Layne Collins, visited a Ford vice president, Edward E.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Tough Union Stance in Free-Agent Case
LEAD: If an arbitrator finds that baseball's club owners acted in collusion against 1985 free agents, the Players Association proposes that those players be permitted to void their contracts, pursue individual damages, receive the difference between ''contract price and market price'' and be awarded punitive damages.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Dan Pasqua was named International League player of the week.
Pasqua, a Yankee outfielder who was demoted June 24 to make room on the roster for Don Mattingly's return from the disabled list, batted .500 in seven games, hit 3 homers and 3 doubles and drove in 11 runs for the Columbus Clippers. . .


South African Prices
LEAD: South Africa's wholesale prices were up moderately in May from a year ago but remained lower than the previous month's level, the Government said today.
The producer price index rose 14.6 percent in May.


Airlines Offer Service Reports
LEAD: Thirteen airlines offered today to make available monthly consumer information reports including records on delays, canceled flights and lost baggage.


Commodity Fund Gains Soviet Help
LEAD: The Soviet Union said today that it would join a United Nations plan for stabilizing world prices of raw materials, a plan that is supported by developing countries but spurned by the Reagan Administration.


Sharp Words on Immunity
LEAD: Near the end of the Iran-contra hearings yesterday, Representative Jack Brooks, Democrat of Texas, became involved in an exchange with Colonel North's lawyer, Brendan V. Sullivan Jr., about grants of immunity from prosecution.


Jamaica Station Rebuilding Is Delayed Two Years, to '93
LEAD: The renovation planned for Jamaica Station in Queens, a notorious bottleneck on the Long Island Railroad, will take two years longer than projected and run $107 million over its $213 million estimated cost, railroad officials said yesterday.


ALBANY'S DISCREET BUDGET: A TOOL FOR POLITICAL ENDS
LEAD: Once a year, with a quick vote and little or no debate, the New York State Legislature writes itself a check.


PIONEER HI-BRED INTERNAIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIONEER HI-BRED INTERNAIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
579,434,000
609,234,000
Net inc
106,373,000
105,516,000
Share earns
3.33
3.31
9mo rev
767,193,000
809,965,000
Net inc
80,511,000
106,033,000
Share earns
2.52
3.32


A Resignation At MacGregor
LEAD: MacGregor Sporting Goods Inc. said yesterday that Herbert A. Rosenfeld had resigned as president, chief operating officer and a director.


Ex-Council Candidate Indicted
LEAD: A public-relations executive who failed in 1985 to unseat City Councilwoman Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan has been indicted on charges of asking a campaign worker to lie about petition signatures, the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said yesterday.


Scouting; Happy Return
LEAD: Last week at Flushing Meadows, Queens, Richard Trapp was in familiar territory, and the 40-year-old lawyer from Orlando, Fla., cashed in on his first opportunity to win the United States Tennis Association men's 40-and-over national hardcourt singles championship.


U.S. Mulls Aid in Steel Shutdowns
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is considering helping steel companies shoulder the heavy cost of closing unneeded plants.


KNICKS' NEW COACH
LEAD: Rick Pitino during news conference yesterday at the Garden after being named head coach of the Knicks. (The New York Times/Don Hogan Charles)


Rock: Grateful Dead And Dylan in Concert
LEAD: THE Grateful Dead relied on songs, not their famous free-form jamming, for their concert Sunday with Bob Dylan at Giants Stadium in the New Jersey Meadowlands.
Performing two sets on their own, and a third as Mr.
Dylan's backup band, the Dead set a new attendance record - 71,598 tickets - at the stadium.


GTECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GTECH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Revenue
25,011,000
17,912,000
Net inc
941,000
b839,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


Pediatrician Surplus Is Seen
LEAD: The number of pediatricians is growing too fast and its members are not being paid enough for some services, including services to the growing number of poor children, according to a report in the current Journal of the American Medical Association.


Charles Ludlam Is Eulogized By Friends From the Theater
LEAD: About 1,000 people crowded the Second Avenue Theater last night to pay final tribute to Charles Ludlam, the playwright, director and actor and founder of the Ridiculous Theatrical Company, who died on May 28 at the age of 44.


Spinal Injury Research Yields a Glimmer of Hope
LEAD: SCIENTISTS building on work by generations of researchers are finally seeing signs of progress on one of medicine's most poignant challenges: the restoration of nerve function after spinal injury.


Knicks, Ending 84-Day Search, Name Pitino Coach; Candidate List Wasn't Much Shorter
LEAD: The chase for a Knick coach, which ended yesterday with the naming of Rick Pitino, was preceded by months of intrigue and guessing, thousands of miles of travel, secret discussions and late-night telephone calls.


USX Price Rise
LEAD: The USX Corporation said it would raise the price of sheet steel used in autos, appliances and office furniture by 4 percent to 6 percent.
The company's action reflects a relatively tight supply in the markets for steel products.
But industry analysts said that whether the increase sticks or not could depend on the extent to which steel buyers are building inventory that was depleted during a six-month USX shutdown that ended earlier this year.


Correction
LEAD: A headline in some copies on Wednesday with the main Washington dispatch about Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's first day of Congressional testimony characterized part of it incorrectly.
Colonel North said that he had written at least five memorandums intended for President Reagan outlining a plan to divert Iran arms profits to the


Shawn Becomes Farrar, Straus Editor
LEAD: William Shawn, former editor of The New Yorker, has become a book editor for Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, Roger W. Straus, president of the publishing company, said yesterday.


Dance: Forsythe's 'Artifact' by Frankfurt Troupe
LEAD: Imagine dancing cut off by a fire curtain that falls repeatedly with a thud, only to rise again on a completely new stage picture materializing out of blackness with cinematic fluency.


For Heroin, Turkey Is Land Bridge to West
LEAD: The agents trailed the suspect truck across Turkey as far as Switzerland.
Then they moved in.


DMI FURNITURE reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DMI FURNITURE (OTC)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,547,000
11,213,000
Net inc
b521,000
c4,327,000
Share earns
.10
-
9mo sales
29,266,000
34,879,000
Net inc
b1,187,000
c5,857,000
Share earns
.22
-


Swiss May Accept 60% of Hill Samuel
LEAD: The Union Bank of Switzerland might be willing to settle for a stake of about 60 percent in the British merchant bank Hill Samuel Group P.L.C., the bank's chief executive-designate, Robert Studer, was quoted as saying.
Mr.
Studer told the Zurich newspaper Tages-Anzeiger that it was not certain that Union Bank was seeking 100 percent of Hill Samuel, a major presence in the


Labor Unit Upholds A Policy to Examine Troopers for Drugs
LEAD: Drug testing of state troopers when there is reasonable suspicion of on-the-job drug use was upheld today by a state labor mediation board.


A Trump Presidential Bid?
LEAD: A veteran Republican Party organizer in New Hampshire said yesterday that he will begin circulating nominating petitions for the developer Donald J. Trump in that state's 1988 Republican Presidential primary.


Costa Rica Journal; In the War on Want, Is There a Military Front?
LEAD: The red clay roads, newly cut into the jungle, are still being smoothed by bulldozers.
Logging trucks and farmers with their herds of cattle will not be far behind.


Transit Authority Seeks A Full-Service Agency
LEAD: The New York Transit Authority is looking for a full-service ad agency.
The total budget is about $2 million to cover media and production costs, and the agency will probably be asked to do a little image advertising (You think that's easy?) and a lot of schedule-change advertising.


Ali Surgery Considered
LEAD: Muhammad Ali, the former heavyweight champion, may undergo brain surgery later this week in Mexico City to help alleviate the symptoms of Parkinson's syndrome.


Nathan Perlmutter, Top Executive Of Anti-Defamation League, Dies
LEAD: Nathan Perlmutter, the national director of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith since 1979, died of lung cancer Sunday afternoon at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, where he was admitted July 8.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Networks Will Carry Washington Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 9 A.M. on the ABC, CBS and NBC television networks, on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New York.


Savings Unit Begins Offering
LEAD: The Roosevelt Savings and Loan Association of St.
Louis is offering $200 million of 8 1/4 percent mortgage-backed bonds due in 1990 through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.


For the Black Professional, the Obstacles Remain
LEAD: More than two decades after civil rights victories made equal opportunity in the workplace a matter of law, many black professionals say they still face formidable obstacles to success.


A Lighthouse In Maine Falls To Progress
LEAD: The last lightkeeper at the 108-year-old Cape Neddick Light Station is done lighting its red beacon, chipping ice off its windows in winter and, with bell or horn, warning mariners away in summer fog.


Publisher To Acquire Variety
LEAD: In a move that likely surprised the entertainment industry, the Cahners Publishing Company said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Variety, the trade publication known as the bible of the industry.


A Rare Setting for Lalique
LEAD: A treasure trove of the jewelry of Rene Lalique - gathered from public and private collections - is on view in London in a gallery designed to recall the designer's elegant Parisian showrooms.


Department Store Heir Is Charged in Slayings
LEAD: The 24-year-old great-grandson of a Massachusetts department store magnate has been charged in the fatal shootings of two men.


CERTAINTEED CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CERTAINTEED CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
290,689,000
286,071,000
Net inc
b14,720,000
16,127,000
Share earns
.78
.85
6mo sales
557,462,000
541,052,000
Net inc
b29,255,000
26,669,000
Share earns
1.54
1.41


U.S. Urges $110,000 Salaries for its Top Scientists
LEAD: The Department of Health and Human Services has drafted a proposal to create a special corps of senior biomedical researchers who could be paid as much as $110,000 a year, a salary that would exceed those of Cabinet members by $10,500, an Administration official said today.


People
LEAD: * Steven E. Morvay was promoted to president of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Direct.


Pepper Has a Better Catastrophic Costs Plan
LEAD:  To the Editor:


O'Connor Bars Nonunion NBC Crew
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor, in a show of support for striking NBC workers, refused to allow a nonunion crew from WNBC-TV to attend a news conference at his residence yesterday.


U S Sprint Defends Fiber-Optic Outlay
LEAD: Executives of the U S Sprint Communications Company and its parent companies defended the concern's spending on a fiber-optic long-distance network today, but said they now expected to significantly cut operating expenses.


UNITED JERSEY BANKS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED JERSEY BANKS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
d21,100,000
18,286,000
Per share
.61
.55
6mo net inc
41,463,000
35,328,000
Per share
1.22
1.08
Results for year-ago quarter and 6 months are restated to reflect to reflect the company's December 1986 merger with commercial bancshares on a pooling of interests basis.


ORACLE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORACLE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
50,937,000
20,835,000
Net inc
7,617,000
2,586,000
Share earns
.24
.08
Shares outst
32,335,000
30,816,000
Yr rev
131,271,000
55,383,000
Net inc
15,623,000
5,896,000
Share earns
.50
.21
Shares outst
31,257,000
27,432,000


Pandering to Jesse Helms in Africa
LEAD: Anti-Government rebels in Mozambique recently kidnapped seven foreigners, including an American nurse.
Only last month the State Department held that it would be ''a serious mistake'' to associate United States policy with these hostage-takers, whose terrorist deeds also include demolishing 718 clinics and attacking 12 CA


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.Why does scratching seem to relieve the itch of insect bites?


Murder Count is Thrown Out in Betting Case
LEAD: Murder charges against a man said to be a major organized-crime figure were dismissed yesterday by a State Supreme Court justice who ruled that evidence suggesting that the defendant had prior knowledge of the crime and had been at the scene was insufficient to try him.


FIRST UNION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST UNION CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
60,200,000
b81,300,000
Per share
.54
.75
6mo net inc
138,700,000
b145,900,000
Per share
1.25
1.36
b-Includes gains of $16.5 million and $17 million for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, from discontinued operations; and an extraordinary loss of $2.6 million related to the repurchase notes for both the quarter and 6 months.


TRUMAN J. NELSON
LEAD: Truman J. Nelson, a historical novelist, civil libertarian and conservationist, died of congestive heart failure Saturday in Newburyport, Mass., where he lived.
He was 76 years old.


NEW YORK CITY TO CROSS-CHECK INCOME TAX RETURNS WITH U.S.
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service and New York City agreed yesterday for the first time to share information in order to identify people and businesses that fail to pay taxes.


No Reason for Optimism About Race Relations
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Livestock Prices Down; Pork Bellies Fall Limit
LEAD: Livestock and meat futures retreated yesterday, with some pork belly contracts losing the limit allowed for daily trading on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.


China Food Oil Imports
LEAD: A sharp rise in Chinese incomes and an improvement in diets have significantly increased China's demand for imported vegetable oils, making the country one of the world's largest importers of food oils, according to American statistics.
The Agriculture Department recently released data with estimates that China will import a record 750,000 metric tons of foreign vegetable oil in the 1987-88 marketing year, up from only 60,000 four years ago.


Delta Jet Onto Wrong Runway
LEAD: A Delta Air Lines jet carrying 151 passengers landed on the wrong runway at Logan International Airport late Sunday night as another jet was preparing to taxi across the runway, officials said today.


FIRST CHICAGO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST CHICAGO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b698,287,000
c63,616,000
Per share
-
1.08
6mo net loss
b633,321,000
c126,659,000
Per share
-
2.14
b-Includes the previously announced addition of $800 million to First Chicago's loan reserves covering loans to ''troubled country debtors.


Capital Gains Tax Changing in New York State
LEAD: An agreement last week by New York State legislators will mean that most taxpayers in the state will pay a significantly higher capital gains tax this year, while some upper-income individuals will be taxed a bit less.


Computer Memories Fund
LEAD: Computer Memories Inc., a nearly defunct computer company that plans to merge with the producer of the film ''Platoon,'' has agreed to put $15.5 million in a settlement fund to settle a lawsuit, the company said today.


Stop the Annual Insurance Raid
LEAD: New York State employers who buy their workers' compensation insurance from the State Insurance Fund can blame Governor Cuomo for new premium increases of 7 percent.
Taxpayers ought to blame him and the Legislature for playing carelessly with their money.


SOVIET DIPLOMATS BEGIN ISRAEL VISIT, FIRST IN 20 YEARS
LEAD: The first official Soviet delegation to visit Israel in 20 years slipped quietly into Tel Aviv Sunday night on a flight from Cyprus, Israeli officials confirmed today.


Japanese Bond Futures Boom in London Debut
LEAD: London trading in Japanese Government bond futures - already the world's most active bond futures contract - got off to a spectacular start yesterday.


LIBERTY NATIONAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIBERTY NATIONAL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
252,658
144,515
Per share
.14
.09
6mo net inc
401,728
255,816
Per share
.23
.15


A Day's Worth Of Questioners
LEAD: Yesterday was the first full day of questioning of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North by individual members of the select committees.
Here are the 13 who spoke.
Senator David L. Boren  D-Okla.
Chairman of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.
Said he felt betrayed by the Iran-contra operation and by what he sees as misleading statements about the initiative to Congress.


Sports People; Vitale Back in Form
LEAD: Dick Vitale, the college basketball commentator for ESPN and ABC-TV, used boxing analogies yesterday as he described his condition after suffering a broken nose and foot and facial fractures in an auto accident in Bradenton, Fla.
A Ford Bronco collided head-on with Vitale's Cadillac on Friday evening, according to the Florida Highway Patrol.


ELECTRO-CATHETER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTRO-CATHETER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,211,301
1,519,587
Net loss
155,841
1,042,886
9mo rev
5,877,830
4,453,631
Net loss
688,337
2,278,496


AFG INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AFG INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
124,757,000
98,776,000
Net inc
b24,695,000
c9,237,000
Share earns
.97
.40
Shares outst
25,428,476
23,005,646
6mo sales
232,938,000
181,807,000
Net inc
33,793,000
15,159,000
Share earns
1.33
.68
Shares outst
25,389,076
22,382,768


Seminar Attracting Music's Mixed Bag
LEAD: The eighth New-Music Seminar, which started Sunday at the Marriott Marquis Hotel, is something like a convention.
That is, the hotel is occupied by exhibition booths, audio-visual displays, panel discussions and people trying to read one another's name tags without being obvious.


Police Shoot Pit Bull Terrier After It Attacks 2 Dobermans
LEAD: The police killed a pit bull terrier with five shots after the dog attacked two Doberman pinschers in an hourlong battle in which the Dobermans' owner said the pit bull ''just went crazy.''


The Committee's Turn: Speeches to North
LEAD: The Iran-contra hearings featured several summations yesterday, some addressed by members of Congress to Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.
Here are selections from those statements.
SENATOR GEORGE J. MITCHELL, Democrat of Maine


Resource Fund Strong in '87
LEAD: MUTUAL funds that invest primarily in natural resource stocks - a traditional hedge against inflation - are gaining in popularity after a generally ho-hum year in 1986.


Advanced Micro, Intel Post Profits
LEAD: Two of the nation's largest chip makers, the Intel Corporation and Advanced Micro Devices Inc., reported improved results today as the semiconductor industry continued to rebound.


Bolivia to Protect Lands in Swap for Lower Debt
LEAD: The Bolivian Government agreed today to protect millions of acres of threatened tropical lowlands in return for a reduction of its foreign debt.


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, JULY 14, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


'Cavalry,' 2d Episode In 'Men in Battle' Series
LEAD: HOW is a war fought?
What do men in battle do? ''Soldiers: A History of Men in Battle,'' a 13-part series, examines a rich subject.
Weapons and tactics may change, but the Plains of Troy and the hedgerows of France are connected by essentials; soldiers ply a trade.
In a way, it is only a job. ''Cavalry,'' the second in the series, looks at how the job was done when men rode horses.


House Passes a Smoking Ban on Some Flights
LEAD: The House narrowly voted tonight to ban cigarette smoking on airline flights of two hours or less, then went on to pass a $26.6 billion transportation spending bill for the fiscal year 1988.


Accounts
LEAD: Westin Hotels and Resorts, Seattle, to Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, Boston, for the Plaza Hotel, New York.


Dress Code for New York Cabbies Is Step Toward Better Service
LEAD:  To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  U.S. Help in Closing Mills
The Government is thinking of helping steelmakers close some plants, finding that cheaper than bearing the pension costs if whole companies file for bankruptcy.
Page D1.
Attack on Tax Cheats
The Internal Revenue Service and New York City agreed for the first time to share information to identify tax cheats.


Ex-Cabinet Aide Admits Theft
LEAD: A onetime top aide to Margaret M. Heckler, former Secretary of Health and Human Services, pleaded guilty today to improperly pocketing $55,300 in foundation and government funds while working for the Reagan Administration.


All-Star Notebook; Randolph Won't Sit It Out
LEAD: Willie Randolph, the Yankee second baseman who was voted to a starting position for Tuesday's All-Star Game, is going against a request by the team's owner, George Steinbrenner, that he not play because he has a sore left knee.


Myriad Fashion Whims Of a St.-Tropez Summer
LEAD: The fashion fanatics who descend on this Mediterranean port each summer are dead serious about casual clothes.


Sports of the Times; Filling a Knick Cavity
LEAD: The search for Judge Crater has been longer, the hunt for Dr.
Livingstone was more dangerous, and the pursuit of the perfect martini more thirst-quenching, but the long, exhausting, frustrating 84-day quest for a head coach for the New York Knicks finally came to an end.


Deaver Trial Begins
LEAD: Michael K. Deaver outside court in Washington.
Selection of jurors began with the press barred.
Page A25. (The New York Times/Paul Hosefros)


United Air May Get Chief From Within
LEAD: The directors of the Allegis Corporation may stick close to home in choosing a president and chief executive for its United Airlines division.


First Chicago
LEAD: The First Chicago Corporation is offering $100 million of 8 5/8 percent notes due in 1992 at a price of 99.70, to yield about 8.70 percent, through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
Noncallable before maturity, the notes yield about 80-hundredths of a percentage point more than Treasury notes of similar maturity.


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, JULY 14, 1987
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-15


FAB INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAB INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Revenue
36,955,000
30,814,000
Net inc
3,060,000
2,637,000
Share earns
.84
.73
6mo rev
64,591,000
57,264,000
Net inc
5,548,000
5,072,000
Share earns
1.53
1.40


Wage Dispute Pits Tanker Crew vs. Officers
LEAD: The 17 Korean crewmen of a Liberian-registered oil tanker that arrived here Friday from Saudi Arabia say that they have not been paid in three months and will not work until they are.


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Buys Canadian Concern
LEAD: Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications has added to its Canadian empire with the acquisition of Ronalds-Reynolds &amp; Company of Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver, which is billing about $95 million.
Its addition to F.C.&amp;B. brings that worldwide operation's Canadian unit to $177 million, putting it among the top three communications groups in the country.


Post Cereal Introduces Ziploc Bag
LEAD: FOR a cold cereal manufacturer whose name is not Kellogg, the fight is uphill all the way.
And if better taste is not enough of a competitive weapon, then other consumer benefits have to be found.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  COLLECTED STORIES.
By Carson McCullers. 392 pages.
Houghton Mifflin Company.
Cloth, $18.95; paper, $10.95.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: Cubic Corp., San Diego, an electronics company, will receive a $108 million contract to build and install five electronic pilot training systems to become operational between February and August 1989.


NCR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NCR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,359,566,000
1,168,835,000
Net inc
98,627,000
78,843,000
Share earns
1.05
.80
6mo rev
2,481,098,000
2,129,609,000
Net inc
160,151,000
129,074,000
Share earns
1.69
1.30


Apple Net Up by 66% In Quarter
LEAD: Buoyed by strong acceptance of its new products, Apple Computer Inc. today reported sharply increased sales and earnings for its third quarter ended June 26.
The gains exceeded both the estimates of the company and analysts.


McLouth Buyout
LEAD: An agreement has been reached on an employee buyout of the ailing McLouth Steel Products Corporation under which workers would take a wage cut, the director of Michigan's Department of Commerce, Doug Ross, said.
The proposal was presented at a news conference attended by representatives of the United Steelworkers union and of company owner Cyrus Tang.


U.S. Companies Fight Proposal to Ban Toshiba
LEAD: American companies that would be affected by the Senate's proposed ban on the Toshiba Corporation's imports are making their way to Capitol Hill this week, seeking to convince lawmakers that a ban may do considerably more damage to American businesses than to Toshiba.


Whirlpool Net Off, Sales Up
LEAD: The Whirlpool Corporation's second-quarter earnings fell 9.5 percent, to $47.4 million, or 65 cents a share, from $52.4 million, or 71 cents a share, a year earlier, the company reported today.
Sales rose 5.7 percent, to $1.14 billion, from $1.08 billion.
Whirlpool's chairman, Jack


BOULEVARD BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOULEVARD BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,976,000
2,648,000
Per share
.30
.43
Shares outst
7,241,000
6,470,000
6mo net inc
5,141,000
5,670,000
Per share
.77
.93
Shares outst
7,242,000
6,418,000


Dow Off 3.02; Technology Stocks Up
LEAD: Despite a stunning surge in the technology sector, the stock market weakened yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average, off sharply much of the day, rallied to close only 3.02 points lower, at 2,452.97.


The Ballet: New Cast In Bolshoi 'Raymonda'
LEAD: ''RAYMONDA'' can be a ballet lover's dream.
There is the richly melodic score by Glazunov.
The ballet boasts a juicily operatic story complete with pauses for aria-style solos and duets.
And in the stagings of the ballet that stay closest to what we know of the Petipa original, those dances have a crystalline classical purity offset by the colorful national and character dancing for which '


Poor but Dumb
LEAD: Do you look blank when they say ''William Shakespeare''?
Wonder what in the world it means when people say ''Sweden'' and ''Einstein''?
Have you ever been embarrassed because everybody laughed when you said: ''Elysian Fields?
Wasn't he that movie comedian who drank like a fish?''


Patrick Wolff, 19, Is Victor In '87 Junior Championship
LEAD: Patrick Wolff, a 19-year-old international master from Belmont, Mass., has won the 1987 United States Junior Invitational Championship held at the Manhattan Chess Club.


MBS TEXTBOOK EXCHANGE reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MBS TEXTBOOK EXCHANGE (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,926,000
6,029,000
Net loss
268,000
412,000
9mo sales
23,226,000
20,458,000
Net inc
395,000
b47,000
Share earns
.09
-
b-Net loss  Corrected from the editions of Monday, July 13.


Steel Output Off 2.7%
LEAD: Steel production fell to 1.649 million tons in the week ended Saturday, a decrease of 2.7 percent from the previous week's 1.695 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute said yesterday.
The industry's production amounted to 77.1 percent of capacity in the week, compared with 79.2 percent in the previous week.


Court Extends LTV Deadline
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge denied requests yesterday to split the LTV Corporation's profitable aerospace unit from its Chapter 11 proceedings and extended for 100 days the parent company's deadline for filing a reorganization plan.


LEGISLATORS MOVE TO TAKE SPOTLIGHT AT IRAN HEARINGS
LEAD: The Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair reached out today, in full view of a national television audience, and tried to take back control of their hearings from the man who so dramatically dominated them last week.


OSHA Gets Tough, at Last
LEAD: The Occupational Safety and Health Administration flexed its muscles last week by imposing its biggest fine ever - $1.5 million - on the Chrysler Corporation.
Citing 811 violations that endangered workers at Chrysler's plant in Newark, Del., John Pendergrass, the agency's administrator, described the fine as ''the only possible response to a totally unacceptable situation.


Metro Datelines; L.I. Golfer Tees Off After Being Stabbed
LEAD: A 77-year-old Long Island man was stabbed in the chest and hand Sunday by a robber, then went out to play golf before telling the police or seeking medical attention, the police said.


Crazy Eddie Ends Licenses
LEAD: Crazy Eddie Inc. said it had ended license agreements with Benel Distributors Ltd., operators of the concession to sell recorded audio and video cassettes and records in Crazy Eddie stores.
Benel, it said, is seeking protection from creditors under Federal bankruptcy laws.


Sports People; More From Jackson
LEAD: A spokeswoman for Richard Woods, Bo Jackson's lawyer, said yesterday that the Kansas City Royals' rookie outfielder will hold a news conference in Auburn, Ala., at 12:30 this afternoon.
Jackson was expected to confirm that he would play professional football.


The Complex Interest Rules
LEAD: WHEN the Internal Revenue Service proposed new regulations governing interest deductions earlier this month, tax practitioners were shocked by their complexity, and taxpayers were left confused.
Tax professionals are still struggling to absorb the new record-keeping and procedural rules, and they wonder if the average taxpayer will ever be able to understand them, let alone keep up with the burdensome requirements.


Melville to Buy 25 Drugstores
LEAD: The Supermarkets General Corporation has agreed to sell 25 Heartland and Pharmacity drugstores in Massachusetts and New Hampshire to the Melville Corporation.
Terms were not disclosed.
But Supermarkets General, which is currently involved in a leveraged buyout plan, said that proceeds would help pay debt.


Political Marketing; On the Air: $97 Million Spent in '86
LEAD: Candidates for Congress spent more than $97.3 million in the 1986 elections to buy advertising on radio and television stations, or 24.3 percent of their total campaign spending of $400.4 million, according to a study made public today.


Waldheim Visit to Pope Troubles Catholics Also
LEAD:  To the Editor:


After Long, Costly Preliminaries, California Sex Abuse Case Opens
LEAD: The prosecutor in a child molestation case presented her opening statement today after the longest, costliest preliminary hearing in California history.


Number of Mergers Falls
LEAD: The number of mergers and acquisitions tumbled in the first six months of 1987, but the total dollar value continued to rise, according to a report by W. T. Grimm &amp; Company, a research concern.
Because of a 39 percent decline in the number of mergers - to 927, from 1,527 -there were fewer mergers taking place in the period than in any year since 1980.


Cholesterol: Debate Flares Over Wisdom In Widespread Reductions
LEAD: AS evidence continues to mount that high levels of cholesterol in the blood can increase the risk of heart attacks, a new debate is emerging over whether the average American should try to reduce cholesterol levels that have traditionally been considered ''normal.''


In Bike and Barefoot Town, Speeders Zoom at 18 M.P.H.
LEAD: It is another beautiful summer day here, the roads are clear and, as usual, traffic is limping along.
The speed limit in this tiny seaside hamlet is 15 miles an hour, the lowest in New York.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about airline crews involved in a near-collision over the Atlantic last week misstated the number of trans-Atlantic air routes between Britain and Ireland and Canada.
There are six, as shown in an accompanying map on Saturday, not five.


Players; Rookie Learns to Take a Bow
LEAD: As soon as he stepped out onto the grass of the Oakland Alameda County Coliseum, children were calling his name and adults with electronic equipment were crowding all around.
The children pleaded for Mark McGwire's autograph.
The adults wondered - for the umpteenth time in the last few days - if this sudden new professional status has begun to sink in.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tour de France


French Ship Is Attacked in Gulf, Raising Paris-Teheran Tensions
LEAD: Tensions between France and Iran heightened today when a French container ship was attacked in the Persian Gulf by what France said were two Iranian gunboats.


Officials Link a Virginia Mayor to Hate Mail
LEAD: Officials here said today that the fingerprints of Mayor James W. Holley 3d had been found on hate mail sent to community leaders, prompting members of the City Council to call for his resignation.


Barge Hearing Is Postponed
LEAD: A Brooklyn judge continued an order yesterday blocking a government plan to burn and bury garbage that has wandered on a 6,000-mile barge odyssey from its home in Islip, L.I.
The judge, Justice Wiliam Bellard, of State Supreme Court, also postponed until Thursday a hearing requested by an environmental group and the Brooklyn Borough President to explain why the city and state's plan should be stopped.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.56
6.54
6.48
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.62
5.60
5.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.52
5.48
5.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.17
8.14
7.14
30-YR.


Sundstrand Bills Disputed
LEAD: The Sundstrand Corporation purportedly overbilled the United States by more than $100 million on military contracts, the Department of Defense said today.


APPLE COMPUTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APPLE COMPUTER INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 26
1987
1986
Sales
637,064,000
448,279,000
Net inc
53,479,000
32,333,000
Share earns
.40
.25
9mo sales
1,874,644,000
1,391,112,000
Net inc
145,818,000
121,070,000
Share earns
1.11
.95


World-Class Art Perks Up a Small City
LEAD: A roomful of Rembrandts, Renoirs and van Goghs has sent ripples through this small city on the Connecticut River, from the Sweet Tooth Bakery to the Volleyball Hall of Fame.


Pharmacists Are as Ethical as Physicians
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Panel Said to Urge New Lunar Base
LEAD: A study team headed by Sally Ride, an astronaut, will recommend a moon base as the nation's next manned space goal, the magazine Aviation Week &amp; Space Technology reported today.


Issue for Thatcher: Her Overseas Role
LEAD: As Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher prepares to depart for Washington, she is drawing up a predictable list of foreign policy concerns on arms control, the Middle East, protectionism and the effect of the United States' trade and budget deficits on the world economy.


Anglo Weighs Worker Stake
LEAD: The Anglo American Corporation of South Africa, the country's biggest industrial and mining conglomerate, said today that it was considering offering a stake in the company to its predominantly black work force.


Accident Damages Remaining Atlas-Centaur
LEAD: Four workers were slightly injured and a space rocket was severely damaged today when a work platform struck the booster stage on the launching pad and ruptured a fuel tank.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Musical Steel


In a World of Concrete, Pockets of Pastoral Life
LEAD: With its 20 million inhabitants, the capital of Mexico is the most populous urban center in the world.
But scattered across this sprawling metropolis are 59 peasant villages struggling to hold on to their land and their distinctive but increasingly fragile way of life.


Legal Aid Society Files Suit To Close Shelter for Children
LEAD: Asserting that dozens of children in need of foster care were being housed in overcrowded and unpleasant conditions, the Legal Aid Society filed suit yesterday to close one of the city's shelters for young children.


Soccer Notebook; National Teams Facing 3 Major Tests
LEAD: It was far away - in St.
John, New Brunswick - and the 1-0 victory over Ecuador may have looked insignificant, but for American soccer, the victory in the under-16 World Cup Sunday was another important step in a growing national program that faces three major tests this year.


STATE STREET BOSTON reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STATE STREET BOSTON (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
20,020,000
16,181,000
Per share
.54
.45
6mo net
39,937,000
32,410,000
Per share
1.08
.90


Company News; I.B.M. Falls Short Again
LEAD: Falling short of Wall Street's optimistic projections, the International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that its profits in the second quarter had dropped 9.9 percent.


Insider Prosecutor To Join Law Firm
LEAD: Charles M. Carberry, who played an important role in the crackdown on insider trading, plans to resign as a Federal prosecutor Oct. 1 to join the law firm of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue.


SQUARE D CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SQUARE D CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
367,222,000
356,499,000
Net inc
28,174,000
24,639,000
Share earns
.97
.85
6mo sales
703,346,000
690,618,000
Net inc
51,075,000
45,681,000
Share earns
1.76
1.58


Northrop Loss At $15.4 Million
LEAD: The Northrop Corporation reported a second-quarter loss of $15.4 million today, citing a previously disclosed $124.3 million write-down that analysts said was related to the classified Stealth bomber project.


Side Issues Slow Vote on Trade Bill
LEAD: The Senate today rejected today the Department of Commerce and the Office of the United States Trade Representative, which was proposed in the omnibus trade bill.


NAKASONE ASSERTS TOSHIBA BETRAYED JAPAN WITH SALES
LEAD: Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone today accused the Toshiba Machine Company of betraying Japan by selling militarily sensitive technology to the Soviet Union.
It was his strongest comment to date on the incident.


Advances; The New Pay Phone: It Even Talks
LEAD: WHEN it comes to pay telephones, most consumers are conservative and happy with anything that works.


New Man at the Fed Needs Better Advice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Theater Producers Back End of Contract Talks
LEAD: Members of the League of Off Broadway Theaters and Producers, meeting yesterday afternoon in a special session, voted unanimous support of a decision by their negotiating committee to break off discussions with the Society of Stage Directors and Choreographers on June 29.


Alexandre P Rosenberg, 66, Art Dealer and Book Collector
LEAD: Alexandre P. Rosenberg, founding president of the Art Dealers Association of America and for many years a prominent art dealer in New York, died of a heart attack in London on Friday.
He was 66 years old.


Farm Aid 3 Concert Planned in Nebraska
LEAD: Willie Nelson has signed a contract with the University of Nebraska in Lincoln to stage his Farm Aid 3 concert here on Sept. 19.


Four Years of Overseeing the Troubled Thrifts
LEAD: After more than four years as chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, Edwin J. Gray returned last month to private business.
Rarely has Washington had such a controversial, headstrong and outspoken regulator, who within an Adminsitration given to loosening Governmental restraints on financial institutions, repeatedly pushed to impose new restrictions on the growth, accounting practices and business activities of the nation's 3,200 savings and loan associations.


Lawyer With AIDS Charges Job Discrimination
LEAD: An attorney with AIDS who has been dismissed from a law firm in New York has sued his former employer in one of the first AIDS discrimination cases to go to a public hearing.


Death in Alligator Attack Attributed to Drowning
LEAD: State game authorities said today that an autopsy showed an 11-foot alligator that attacked a swimmer had pulled him under the water and drowned him.


An Experienced Voice Praises Hart
LEAD: Richard Nixon told his old political foe Gary Hart that he understood how he felt.
Especially on one subject.


The Dance: 'Mozartnu' and 'New Dance Matinee'
LEAD: So many men and women, relatively speaking, were dancing nude or topless onstage at the Pepsico Summerfare festival's Sunday matinee that it was enough to make a fully clothed viewer feel overdressed.


Finance/New Issues; Ecolab Debenture With Sinking Fund
LEAD: Ecolab Inc. is offering $150 million of 10 3/8 percent sinking-fund debentures due in 2017 at a price of par through a group of underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


'Bonjour.' 'Bonjour.'
LEAD: Keun Sun Choi, the president the Korean electronics company Goldstar, had just made a Washington luncheon speech in English the other day describing a new cooperative agreement between members of the Electronic Industries Association of Korea and the Electronic Industries Association of the United


Hurry Up and Vote
LEAD: The Senate Commerce Committee yesterday held what is called in Congressional jargon a markup, the discussion and voting out of various bills.
These things can drag on, but in this case the senators sweated out their business in almost no time.
Literally.


Sports of The Times; Big Trophy, Small Shortstop
LEAD: In baseball's year of the big bat, the fans voted for a small glove.
Ozzie Smith, who plays shortstop for the St.
Louis Cardinals as if he were on a trampoline, was hitting eighth for the National League in last night's All-Star Game, but he was first with the fans.
And the leader in the All-Star balloting with 2,254,409 votes was awarded a huge, heavy silver trophy.


William Overton, A U.S. Judge, Dies
LEAD: Federl District Judge William R. Overton, who struck down as unconstitutional an Arkansas law that required public schools in Arkansas to teach a creationist account of the origin of life if they taught the theory of evolution, died today of cancer.
He was 47 years old.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.38
6.62
6.39
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.62
5.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.54
5.52
5.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.14
8.17
7.06
30-YR.


Renewal in Tibet
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tanya Z Nash, 89; A Carrer Dedicated to Helping the Deaf
LEAD: Tanya Zolotoroff Nash, who retired in 1968 after 35 years as the executive director of the New York Society for the Deaf, died last Friday at the Interfaith Hospital in Brooklyn.
She was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Vallone Retracts Nominee After Protest
LEAD: In a rare retreat, the New York City Council Majority leader, Peter F. Vallone temporarily withdrew his nomination yesterday of Joseph F. Lisa as chairman of the Health Committee, after protests by advocates of AIDS programs and gay rights.


George W. Holt 3d, Producer and Director
LEAD: George William Holt 3d, a theater producer and director, died yesterday in Montclair, N.J.
He was 46 years old.


Results Plus; Tour de France
LEAD: Norwegian Wins 14th Stage: Following a slight change of course caused by fear of a terrorist attack, Dag-Otto Lauritzen of Norway won the 14th stage of the Tour de France from Pau to Luz Ardiden yesterday.
Charles Mottet of France kept the yellow jersey of the overall leader.
On the final ascent, Lauritzen, of the 7-Eleven team, managed to hold off Luis Herrera of Colombia.


FIRST WACHOVIA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST WACHOVIA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b30,597,000
45,000,000
Per share
.56
.83
6mo net inc
b79,895,000
91,918,000
Per share
1.47
1.70
b-Reduced by $20 million due to a $50 million special addition to the loan-loss reserve, primarily to strengthen reserves for loans to less developed countries, and a $14.3 million gain on the sale of equity securities for both the quarter and 6 months.


Lawyer and Guardian Ask For Fees for Baby M Trial
LEAD: The court-appointed guardian for Baby M has applied to the court for $140,000 in legal fees, and the lawyer for the couple with custody of the infant girl said today that he would file an application next week seeking $500,000 in fees.


GENERAL MILLS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL MILLS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,350,300,000
1,135,800,000
Net inc
b36,100,000
c42,200,000
Share earns
.41
.47
Yr sales
5,189,300,000
4,495,900,000
Net inc
222,000,000
c183,500,000
Share earns
2.50
2.06
Shares outst
88,700,000
89,200,000


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article in Business Day last Thursday about the earnings performance of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company misstated one effect of lower tax rates on the company.
Morgan's net interest income, figured by assuming that all its interest is taxable, was reduced by the lower rates.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  NO TELEPHONE TO HEAVEN. By Michelle Cliff. 211 pages. E. P. Dutton. $17.95.


Corley P. McDarment; Pressed for Air Safety
LEAD: Corley P. McDarment, who became a hero to fellow Army Air Corps officers in 1934 when he was accused of insubordination for protesting flying conditions, died Monday of a heart attack in Rockledge, Fla.
He was 95 years old.


Debt
LEAD: Fuqua Industries is offering in the Euromarket $75 million of 6 1/2 percent convertible subordinated debentures due in 2002 at a price of 100 through underwriters led by Chemical Bank International Ltd.
The debentures are convertible into common stock of Fuqua at $41.625 a share.
Common Stock


BARRIER TO SLOW 'KILLER' BEES IS PLANNED BY US AND MEXICO
LEAD: The United States and Mexico will sign an agreement this summer to create a barrier zone that could delay by a decade the arrival in Texas of Africanized ''killer'' honeybees, an official says.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A report in the Business People column last Thursday about McLean Industries misidentified its president and chief executive.
He is Hobart G. Truesdell 2d.


Why Should Congress Be Exempt From Truth-Telling?
LEAD: It is ironic that in a culture in which objective truth is increasingly questioned and relativism thrives, the subject of the hour in politics seems to be the truthfulness of people in public life.


McFARLANE DISPUTES NORTH ON KEY POINTS OF TESTIMONY; CHAIRMEN REBUKE COLONEL
LEAD: Minutes after Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North completed six days of forceful testimony, Robert C. McFarlane returned as a witness this afternoon and directly contradicted parts of Colonel North's account, declaring that he had not authorized many of the colonel's secret activities.


KEEPING THE PEACE UNTIL FALL
LEAD: SHARING a kitchen in a summer group house is a three-month voyage of discovery.


Dumped on the Citizen's Doorstep
LEAD: Calcutta, U.S.A. - it's an apt name for New York City in the summertime, as thousands of homeless and deranged people camp out on the streets.
That sordid spectacle is made worse by the way the city has chosen to deal with the homeless.


Laxalt Cites 'the Best' of Reagan But Notes Their Differences Too
LEAD: Paul Laxalt said today that he was encouraged about his Republican Presidential campaign because he had found that ''people out there are thirsting for a candidate who will take them into the 90's with the best of the Reagan revolution intact.''


French Official Called By a Court in Teheran
LEAD: Iran's Islamic Revolution Court has summoned the French consul to provide ''some explanations'' about allegations of expionage, the Teheran radio said today.


12 Miami Police Officers Indicted In New U.S. Effort on Drug Ring
LEAD: A new Federal indictment unsealed today charges 12 Miami police officers with running a drug theft ring and some of the officers with plotting to kill trial witnesses.


Knicks Players Know Their New Coach Well
LEAD: In 1983, Rick Pitino was largely unknown outside the small fraternity of basketball coaches.
Hardly anyone knew that he was so dedicated that on his wedding night he left his bride in a hotel room while he was interviewed for an assistant coach's job at Syracuse, and then postponed his honeymoon to make a recruiting trip.


New School Graduate Unit Rebounds
LEAD: A decade ago, the graduate faculty of the New School for Social Research hit rock bottom.


The Saddest Ending For the Wildest Show
LEAD: The Texas Prison Rodeo, a half-century-old tradition billed as ''the wildest show behind bars,'' bit the dust Monday.


North vs. McFarlane: The Conflicts
LEAD: During the hearings on the Iran-contra affair, the Congressional investigating committees have heard conflicting testimony from Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and Robert C. McFarlane on several issues.
Here are excerpts from the testimony:


Advertising; New Publisher For The Nation
LEAD: After a decade as publisher of The Nation, Hamilton Fish 3d is turning over the job to Arthur L. Carter, the former investment banker who is also major owner of the venerable magazine.


IC INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IC INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,123,600,000
1,034,100,000
Net inc
b46,000,000
c35,600,000
Share earns
.41
.32
6mo sales
2,173,700,000
1,992,800,000
Net inc
74,900,000
c61,200,000
Share earns
.66
.56


Jate Lobell a 7-5 Choice
LEAD: Jate Lobell's defeat last week has transformed the Meadowlands Pace into more than a one-horse race Friday night.


Report Says New York Paid U.S. More in '86
LEAD: New York State paid the Federal Government $6.8 billion more in 1986 than it got back, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said today in his 11th annual report on the Federal budget and the state economy.


Senate Panel Clears Bill Requiring Airlines To Report on Performance
LEAD: The Senate Commerce Committee approved a bill today that would require airlines to post schedules more accurate than the ones now issued, which are rarely met.


Lag in Retail Spending Tied to Income and Debt
LEAD: Retail spending, which fuels most of the domestic economy, was virtually unchanged in June for the fourth consecutive month as debt-weary consumers continued to shun expensive purchases, the Commerce Department reported today.


KAYPRO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAYPRO CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 29
1987
1986
Sales
26,241,000
20,643,000
Net loss
b804,000
c810,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
85,086,000
55,178,000
Net inc
b1,327,000
d905,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Includes an extraordinary charge from reversal of tax loss carryforwards which increased the loss for the quarter by $322,000; and the 9-month includes a tax credit of $536,000.


Company News; Greyhound Merger
LEAD: Greyhound Lines Inc. signed final contracts to buy $80 million in assets from financially troubled Trailways Lines Inc.
Greyhound agreed in the cash transaction to buy Trailways buses, terminals and garages, and operate some Trailways routes.
Some workers will be laid off, said Fred Currey, Greyhound's president and chairman.


When You May Vote For More Than One
LEAD: To the Editor:


Business People; Surprise Wall Street Resignation
LEAD: One of Wall Street's rags-to-riches stories took an unexpected turn yesterday with the resignation of Lewis S. Ranieri, a vice chairman at Salomon Brothers who helped propel the firm to the top of the mortgage-backed securities market.


38 Arrested in Protest at Staten Island Site of Navy Port
LEAD: Police officers removing anti-nuclear demonstrators who tried to block construction.
They were protesting the building of a proposed port for the battleshipIowa and other Navy vessels.
Demonstrators say the Iowa carries nuclear weapons.
The Navy refuses to comment on the armament of ships. (NYT/Chester Higgins


Administration Faults Aspin's Gulf Disclosure
LEAD: A leading Congressman drew criticism from the Reagan Administration today when he disclosed details of plans for United States escorts of Kuwaiti oil tankers after a briefing by Cabinet members.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
July 10
July 3
July 11
1987
1987
1986
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.1
6.7
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.8
2.7
Gasoline stocks
229.2
231.0
225.7
Distillate stocks
107.2
104.3
106.9
Crude imports, daily
5.3
4.6
4.1
Product imports, daily
2.4
2.0
1.7
Crude stocks
322.9
324.2
320.6
Crude production, daily
8.3
8.4
8.7
Refinery utilization (%)
85.2
86.9
83.9


Finance/New Issues; Bank of Boston
LEAD: The Bank of Boston Corporation yesterday began a public offering of $150 million of 9 1/2 percent subordinated capital notes due in 1997 at a price of par through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
Noncallable, the notes yield about 1.14 percentage points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Bankers Fight Loophole
LEAD: The American Bankers Association today supported a bill to close a loophole that allows the creation of limited-service, or ''non-bank,'' banks.
These competitors of banks avoid regulation as banks by making loans or taking deposits but not both.


WHITE HOUSE EASES STAND ON BUDGET
LEAD: The director of the Office of Management and Budget said today that the Administration could accept a plan to restore an automatic spending cut mechanism to the budget-balancing law and relax the law's deficit ceilings.


Oil Contract Is Highest Since Early Last Year
LEAD: Crude oil futures closed yesterday at their highest levels since January 1986 as tensions in the Middle East lifted oil prices.
The August contract at the New York Mercantile Exchange settled up 18 cents, at $21.58 a barrel.


Election Official Indicted in Theft Of Board Funds
LEAD: The chief of enforcement for the New York State Board of Elections has been indicted on criminal charges of stealing at least $1,425 from an account established to pay informers in election fraud investigations.


'A.F.I. Comedy Special,' With Dick Van Dyke
LEAD: ''The A.F.I.
Comedy Special'' presents 4 writers, 22 actors and maybe one and a half workable ideas.
Actually, that may be a respectable number.
As Dick Van Dyke, the host of the program, points out, some 3,000 ideas for series are submitted to a network each year; perhaps 3 of the 3,000 make it through a television season.


Finance/New Issues; Commercial Paper Rates Drop Again
LEAD: Interest rates at Citicorp's regular auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper declined for the fourth consecutive week.
The banking company sold $50 million of 91-day paper at an average rate of 6.5545 percent, down from 6.725 percent last week.


Radio Host Suspended For Insult to Lawmaker
LEAD: A radio talk show host has been suspended for calling Representative John Lewis, Democrat of Georgia, a ''moron'' on the air.


Reporter's Notebook: Panama Boils
LEAD: As anti-Government protests in Panama enter their sixth week, demonstrators are finding that they confront not only uniformed soldiers and the riot police, but also paramilitary squads of armed civilians.


Company News; Early July Sales Of Autos Off 12.4%
LEAD: Domestic car sales totaled 165,909 in early July, a drop of 12.4 percent from the comparable period last year, the eight domestic manufacturers reported today.


12 From Center Held In Inquiry Into Drugs And Patient Abuse
LEAD: Twelve employees at the state-run Bronx Developmental Center were arrested yesterday on charges ranging from selling drugs to co-workers to endangering the welfare of mentally retarded patients, the state police said.





Company News; Rainier Bancorp
LEAD: The Rainier Bancorporation, based in Seattle, said its stockholders had approved the company's merger with the Los Angeles-based Security Pacific Corporation.
The agreement provides for the exchange of 1.3 shares of Security Pacific common for each of the 22.3 million currently outstanding shares of Rainier.


ALTERNATIVE FUELS BACKED IN CAPITAL
LEAD: The growing use of methanol and other fuels as substitutes for gasoline received strong backing from the Reagan Administration today.


For the Poor, Trade Schools May Be Last Hope
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ex-Chief of Intelsat Admits Fraud Guilt
LEAD: A former top official of Intelsat pleaded guilty today, along with two brokers, to charges that they participated in a scheme to obtain $4.8 million in connection with rigging construction and financing contracts for the satellite consortium's new headquarters.


Furman Selz Sale To Xerox Is Set
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation, in a move to increase its presence in financial services, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Furman Selz Holding Corporation, the New York research, brokerage and investment banking firm, for $110 million.


U.S. Finds It Made Little Progress in U.N. Voting
LEAD: The United States has made little progress winning votes at the United Nations, despite assertions by Vernon A. Walters, the chief American representative, and other diplomats that the American position is improving, according to a report by the United States Mission.


Having Fun With Bracelets And Big Bags
LEAD:  1. Wild Jewelry


Notes From North Describe Meeting on Contra Support
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North told a meeting of mid-level Government officials last August that he was giving money to contra leaders and running an air resupply operation that used C-123 aircraft, according to handwritten notes he took at the time.


Mail Handlers Reach Tentative 3-Year Pact
LEAD: The International Union of Mail Handlers today announced a tentative three-year contract agreement with the United States Postal Service.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article on Sunday about tank warfare attributed a comment incorrectly to Dr.
Joshua M. Epstein of the Brookings Institution.
He did not say that the Army periodically raises fears about the capabilities of Soviet tanks simply to gain more money from Congress.
Through the omission of a phrase, another quotation from Mr.


F.A.A. to Investigate Training Of Delta Pilots After Mistakes
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration plans to conduct a special inquiry into the pilot training procedures of Delta Air Lines following a recent series of pilot mistakes, an agency official said yesterday.


PAKISTANI SEIZED BY U.S. IN A PLOT ON A-ARMS ALLOY
LEAD: A Pakistani businessman has been arrested in Philadelphia on charges that he tried to export material to Pakistan that could be used in making nuclear weapons.


WINE TALK
LEAD: SLATE-COVERED hillsides, some at 60-degree angles, soar upward from the Mosel River in West Germany.
Almost miraculously, wine growers climb them to tend riesling grapes that yield enchanting whites.
Sadly, many importers and distributors trying to sell those and other premium German wines in the United


A Carpet And Some Nuts
LEAD: Under questioning by Representative Jim Courter, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North gave this testimony yesterday about an attempt to give him a carpet.


Business Technology; A Chip to Speed Computers
LEAD: THE dynamic random access memory, or dynamic RAM, has long been the center of attention in the semiconductor industry.
It is the industry's largest-selling chip, the one in which the Japanese have made their strongest inroads, and the one that is perennially the focus of semiconductor trade tensions.


About Real Estate; Warehouse Stores Adjust to New York
LEAD: In a warehouse club, there is no carpeting under foot, there are no enticing product displays, and credit cards are not accepted.


Panel's Case: Bullets and the Rule of Law
LEAD: Members of the Iran-contra committees continued their statements yesterday as Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North ended his testimony.
Here are selections from those statements.


Reputed Figure in Mob Testifies at Murder Trial
LEAD: A reputed Mafia figure, in a highly unusual move, took the witness stand at his murder trial yesterday to deny that he and two associates killed one New York City police detective and wounded another on a Queens street 18 months ago.


KAISERTECH LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAISERTECH LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
584,200,000
554,200,000
Net loss
389,100,000
30,600,000
6mo sales
1,121,500,000
1,084,900,000
Net loss
b420,200,000
c14,100,000
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $30 million.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''A Japanese company has not only damaged national defense, but has also committed a crime of betrayal against the Japanese people because of its actions.''


About New York; Vital Street Life: It's the Fine Art Of Schmoozing
LEAD: ''This is an amiable day!'' said William H. Whyte, urban anthropologist, walking down the Avenue of the Americas during the lunch hour yesterday on one of his schmooze patrols.


Company News; Women's Bank Is Recapitalized
LEAD: The First Women's Bank, a 12-year-old institution with a rocky financial history, said yesterday that contributions from 70 prominent New York entrepreneurs have raised its capitalization to more than $35 million, from less than $4 million.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MAHINES CORP (IBM)(N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MAHINES CORP (IBM)(N)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,798,000,000
12,268,000,000
Net inc
1,178,000,000
1,305,000,000
Share earns
1.95
2.12
6mo rev
23,479,000,000
22,395,000,000
Net inc
1,963,000,000
2,322,000,000
Share earns
3.25
3.77
Shares outst
604,000,000
615,000,000


Company News; Holmes a Court Seeks 15% of Texaco
LEAD: Robert Holmes a Court yesterday asked for Federal clearance to increase his stake in Texaco Inc. to 15 percent.


Apple Opposes A Toshiba Ban
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. said today that it would suffer financially and competitively in the home computer market if proposed legislation banning imports of Toshiba Corporation products and those of its subsidiaries were adopted by Congress.


National League Wins Improbable Game, 2-0, in 13
LEAD: When the shadows had finally fallen across the field and the sun had disappeared quietly behind the walls of the Oakland Coliseum, only one notion seemed to fit the moment: The hitters would make this an All-Star Game to remember.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: REMEMBER when sneakers were, well, just that -sneakers (or tennies in the Middle West)?
White (sometimes red or navy) canvas tops with thin, smooth rubber soles and white laces.
The shoes your mother always said were no good for your feet.
The shoes you wore for nearly every activity: walking, running, tennis, volleyball, softball, sailing.


Clinic in Ohio Starts Egg Donor Plan
LEAD: A major medical center here is beginning a program to establish a pool of egg donors for couples unable to have children.


DAVID L. DIMMOCK
LEAD: David L. Dimmock, former president of Bradley, Dimmock &amp; Hungerford, a New York advertising agency, died of cancer last Wednesday at the Norwalk, Conn., Hospital.
He was 57 years old and lived in Fairfield, Conn.


A Living Record Of Bolshoi's Past
LEAD: The Bolshoi Ballet dances with a boldness and conviction that has had audiences cheering during its current summer season at the Metropolitan Opera House.
But it is also living history, for among the dancers' coaches is Marina Semyonova, the first Soviet prima ballerina.


Secret Deaver Jury Selection Is Appealed by News Groups
LEAD: The perjury trial of Michael K. Deaver turned into a debate today over the First Amendment as news organizations appealed the judge's decision to conduct jury selection in secret.


Swedes Suspect Submarine
LEAD: Swedish Navy men have thrown hand grenades at what appeared to be an alien submarine in the sensitive Tore Bay military area, military authorities said today.
On July 1, the navy fired depth charges at a submarine in Tore Bay and searched for it several days.


Company News; Western Company Sets Write-Down
LEAD: The Western Company of North America said that it expected to take a $90 million writedown in the value of its on-shore petroleum services equipment during the second quarter.
The company, a struggling independent oilfield services concern, said that the one-time reduction totaled about $60 million.


Concert: Chamber Music, With Emerson Quartet
LEAD: THE cancellations that have beset this summer's Mostly Mozart festival affected Monday evening's chamber program at Avery Fisher Hall, but the resultant shifts led to some lovely performances.
The hall was sold out, including a large number of stage seats, but the length of the program (over two and a half hours, not counting the preconcert recital) meant a fair degree of attrition.


Dollar Edges Higher;Gold Prices Also Rise
LEAD: The dollar rose against all major currencies in orderly trading yesterday.
Most dealers squared off their positions ahead of the Government's release today of merchandise trade figures for May.


Company News; Indiana Steel Plant
LEAD: The Nucor Corporation, a North Carolina steel company, will build a $250 million steel mill that will employ 600 people in Montgomery County, Lieut.
Gov.
John M. Mutz said.
Company officials have said that they hope to begin operations in the second quarter of 1989 at the new plant, which would convert scrap metal to sheet metal through thin-slab casting.


FLORIDA PROGRESS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA PROGRESS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
466,900,000
486,100,000
Net inc
44,900,000
41,200,000
Share earns
.90
.85
Yr rev
1,854,300,000
1,800,800,000
Net inc
180,600,000
165,900,000
Share earns
3.64
3.50


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article yesterday about the renovation of the Jamaica Station of the Long Island Rail Road misstated both the original and the latest estimates of the project's completion date.
The original estimate was 1997; the new projection is 1999.


HARRY J. FEENEY
LEAD: Harry J. Feeney, director of press information for CBS from 1969 until his retirement early last year, died Saturday at his home in Forest Hills, Queens, after heart surgery.
He was 69 years old.


On Bastille Day, Sniping On Political Barricades
LEAD: As France marked Bastille Day today with a show of military might along the Champs-Elysees, there were subtle reminders of the fierce political struggle between President Francois Mitterrand, the Socialist head of state, and Jacques Chirac, the conservative Prime Minister.


FEDERAL EXPRESS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL EXPRESS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
869,700,000
715,700,000
Net inc
b38,597,000
c38,958,000
Share earns
.74
.76
Yr rev
3,178,308,000
2,573,229,000
Net loss
b65,571,000
d131,839,000
Share earns
-
2.64


Poison Candy Brings 40-Year Prison Term
LEAD: A prominent anthropologist was sentenced yesterday to 40 years in prison for sending valentine boxes of poisoned chocolates to a Federal judge and to a professor.


Scouting; Bo Jackson's Pace
LEAD: Bo Jackson seems certain, if he plays regularly, to break the major league record for strikeouts in a season.
The Kansas City Royals outfielder has been fanning about 40 percent of his times at bat and could wind up with 221 strikeouts, smashing the record of 189 set by Bobby Bonds of the San Francisco Giants in 1970.


We Need an Election
LEAD: One thing the Iran-contra hearings have demonstrated is that this country needs a Presidential election.


Company News; Lockheed to Sell Shipbuilding Unit
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation said today that it would sell its shipbuilding unit as the first step of a restructuring plan.


GEORGIA-PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEORGIA-PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,095,000,000
1,929,000,000
Net inc
b148,000,000
86,000,000
Share earns
1.35
.80
6mo sales
3,950,000,000
3,533,000,000
Net inc
b228,000,000
116,000,000
Share earns
2.06
1.05


I.R.S. Gives Account Back to 9-Year-Old
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service seized a 9-year-old girl's $70.76 savings account Monday to pay her grandfather's back taxes, but her money will be returned, a bank official said today.


House Passes Ban on Smoking on Flights of 2 Hours or Less
LEAD: The House narrowly voted Monday night to ban cigarette smoking on airline flights of two hours or less, then went on to pass a $26.8 billion transportation spending bill for the fiscal year 1988.


North, Minus His Slides, Makes Cause for Contras
LEAD: The issue that has simmered just beneath the surface throughout the Iran-contra hearings -aid to the contras - broke into full public view today in a dispute over a slide show that was to be given by Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.
Congress has been split almost evenly on the contra subject for years, and today the fight was resolved with a compromise.


MARINE MIDLAND BANKS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARINE MIDLAND BANKS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b294,600,000
c33,100,000
Per share
-
1.66
6mo net loss
259,254,000
c71,353,000
Per share
-
3.55
b-After the previously announced addition to its loan loss reserve of $400 million.


Bridge Pier Seen as Key To Collapse
LEAD: Four months after a bridge on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway collapsed, investigators are focusing on what they call a potentially fatal omission made by Thruway Authority officials during the last major reconstruction of the bridge.


Notes and Bonds Up Slightly
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices rose modestly yesterday as traders were encouraged by a drop in short-term rates and hints that the Federal Reserve was backing away from the modest tightening of policy it arranged in April and May.


Colonel North's Last Stand
LEAD: The North hearings came to an end not with a whimper but a bang.
The attorney Brendan Sullivan interrupted Chairman Daniel Inouye's closing statement to make a last effort to divert attention from Colonel North's actual deeds to something more savory - in this case, the colonel's new-found public support.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  8,600 Food Products


NORTHROP CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHROP CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,419,900,000
1,395,700,000
Net loss
15,400,000
b23,100,000
Share earns
-
.49
6mo sales
2,827,000,000
2,686,900,000
Net inc
25,200,000
62,400,000
Share earns
.54
1.34


North Wars
LEAD: For six days, Oliver North won all of America's attention and some of its admiration for his bold and facile testimony about the Iran-contra scandal.
He induced people to argue: Is he a scapegoat?
A zealot?
A hero?
Meanwhile, the point of the scandal receded.
Yesterday, in a few moments of simplicity and clarity, Representative Lee


Family to Stay On After Variety Sale
LEAD: Syd Silverman was busy yesterday putting Weekly Variety to bed at its printer in Valley Stream, L.I.
He has been editor since 1973 and will continue to be under the agreement to sell the concern to Cahners Publishing Company, a unit of Reed International of London.
The value of the deal was not disclosed.


Tax Exemption for Nonprofit Hospitals Assailed
LEAD: A key member of a Congressional tax-writing committee said today that the Federal tax exemption for nonprofit hospitals was probably unwarranted because they generally did not provide substantial amounts of charitable care.


Bargains in Rome? Luxury Items Might Be Best Buys
LEAD: SOME visitors to Rome arrive anticipating the glories of the Sistine Chapel, the Colosseum and the Villa Borghese.
Others contemplate the worldly delights of Fendi bags, Tanino Crisci boots and Pratesi linens.


Job Rise Seen At Ford Plant
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company, confirming that it would spend $260 million to expand light-truck production at its Louisville, Ky., assembly plant, said today that the expansion could create 500 new jobs.


CORRECTION
LEAD: The caption of an Associated Press picture yesterday about the opening of a child-molestation trial in Los Angeles misidentified the man with Peggy McMartin Buckey, a defendant.
He was not her son, Raymond; he was unidentified.


Korean Olympics Still Being Disputed
LEAD: In an effort to ease the dispute between North and South Korea over the 1988 Summer Olympic Games in Seoul, the International Olympic Committee proposed today that North Korea be given two additional events, for a total of four.


Market Place; Oil Stocks Retain Appeal
LEAD: AFTER enjoying a bull market for nearly a year, oil stocks still draw favorable recommendations on Wall Street.
Spurred initially by rising crude oil prices, the run-up has reflected corporate restructurings and, more recently, heightened tensions in the Middle East.


Boxing Notebook; Spink's Problem: Waiting for Tyson
LEAD: Michael Spinks is in a bind of sorts.


At Welfare Hotel, Tenants Group Gives Fragile Hope
LEAD: In a place that conspires against hope, Thomas Reuter is trying to restore just a bit of it.
The place is the Holland Hotel, by most measures one of the bleakest welfare hotels in New York City.
And the fragile hope resides in the tenants' association begun by Mr.
Reuter five months ago.


Jackson Accepts Raiders Pact
LEAD: Bo Jackson said today that he had agreed to a contract with the Los Angeles Raiders that would enable him to fulfill his dream of playing both professional football and baseball.


Company News; New Disposable Contact Lenses
LEAD: Disposable contact lenses will be test-marketed in Florida this week, a health-care company said.
The soft lenses, which will not require cleaning or sterilizing, were approved as disposable products yesterday by the Food and Drug Administration, said Hank Green, the president of Vistakon Inc., a Jacksonville, Fla., subsidiary of Johnson &amp; Johnson.


FARMLAND FADING UNDER CITY SPRAWL
LEAD: City sprawl, highways and other nonagricultural uses are claiming American farmland at an annual rate that could involve acreage equal to the entire State of Missouri by the year 2030, according to a report by the Department of Agriculture.


DIAMOND-BATHURST INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAMOND-BATHURST INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
133,408,000
149,564,000
Net inc
532,000
6,587,000
Share earns
.07
.86
6mo sales
251,140,000
275,646,000
Net inc
913,000
8,275,000
Share earns
.12
1.08


Outdoors; Tips on Choosing Proper Fly
LEAD: A fly fisherman inevitably reaches the stage in which he must decide how much effort he should devote to study of the aquatic insects upon which trout feed.


Advertising; Business Month and Inc. Are Joined in Circulation
LEAD: With yesterday's announcement that the Goldhirsh Publishing Group was about to offer advertisers ''America's Top Management Network,'' it became apparent what Bernard Goldhirsh had in mind when he acquired the flagging Dun's Business Month from Dun &amp; Bradstreet last November.


Ban on Animal Sacrifice
LEAD: Animal sacrifice for religious purposes is against state law, the Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth said Monday, putting an Afro-Cuban church on notice that its religious practices could be restricted.
He issued the advisory opinion, which does not carry the weight of law, after a church of the Santeria faith was established in the city of Hialeah and the City Council requested a decision.


Sports People; LeMond Has Surgery
LEAD: Gred LeMond has undergone an ap-pendectomy and will probably miss the cycling world championships in Austria in September.
Ron Stanko, a spokesman for LeMond, who last summer became the first American to win the Tour de France, said LeMond was admitted to University Medical Center in Sacramento, Calif., on Sunday.


More Boesky Holdings Seen
LEAD: Firms controlled by Ivan F. Boesky held stock index futures contracts with a face value of hundreds of millions of dollars last November when the Securities and Exchange Commission charged him with insider trading, staff members of the Senate Agriculture Committee disclosed today.


Sports People; Mets Call Up Schulze
LEAD: The Mets have called up Don Schultze, a right-hander pitcher, from their Tidewater farm club and have sent Jeff Innis, another right-hander, to Tidewater.Schulze, 24 years old, had a 9-1 record and a 3.07 earned run average for Tidewater.
Innis was 0-1 with the Mets with a 3.31 earned run average in 10 games.


Appeal Hearing Could Upset Selection for World Tourney
LEAD: A hearing before the American Contract Bridge League's board of directors tomorrow in Baltimore could overturn the result of the selection process for the 1987 United States world championship team.
The board will hear an appeal by Malcolm Brachman and his teammates on the semifinal playoff in Memphis in


Sports People; Views on Olympics
LEAD: Greg Foster says he would be reluctant to participate in the Seoul Olympics unless he is convinced that conditions would be safe for the athletes.


Firebombed Home for Foster Children Is Renovated
LEAD: Highchairs lining a wall of the kitchen at the home yesterday in the Flushing section of Queens.
A security guard, right, stood on the stoop as a police car waited by the curb.
Renovation work on the home, which was firebombed and badly damaged in April, is almost completed. (NYT/William E Sauro)


Clinton Decides He Won't Seek '88 Nomination
LEAD: Gov.
Bill Clinton announced today that he would not run for the 1988 Democratic Presidential nomination, ending weeks of speculation.


THE POP LIFE
LEAD:  Exit the Police


Advertising; People
LEAD: Christine Miller was named executive vice president/managing director at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos/New York.
Casey Jones was promoted to vice president/management supervisor.


MacFarlane Testifies: Praise for North and Covert Operations
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Robert C. McFarlane's second appearance before the Iran-contra committees, as recorded by The New York Times.


Scouting; Dean of 'Tryout' Is Infielder, 61
LEAD: The Empire State Baseball League was formed to give young ballplayers passed over by major-league organizations one last chance to prove they can play professionally.
Last Friday, a 61-year-old second baseman, who also happens to be the dean of the Hofstra University Law School, decided it was time to give it one more try, too.


SARA HENDERSON HAY
LEAD: Sara Henderson Hay, author of six books of poetry, died July 7 at her home in Pittsburgh.
She was 80 years old.


U.S. Seizes Ship in Pay Fight
LEAD: A Liberian-registered oil tanker whose crew of Koreans went on strike because they had not been paid was seized today by Federal marshals, pending payment of the seamen.


Rescuer Drowns in Hudson
LEAD: A 31-year-old man drowned in the Hudson River off lower Manhattan yesterday afternoon while trying to save a woman who had jumped or fallen into the river near Jane Street, the police said.
The unidentified woman was pulled from the river by two other men and was taken to St.
Vincent's Hospital where she was listed in critical condition.


You Walk, the Clubs Ride
LEAD: Fifteen years ago, William A. Gettig received what he thought was the perfect Christmas gift for the avid golfer - a remote- controlled cart to carry his bag as he strolled along the course.
Unfortunately, it didn't work.
By 1982, the Gettig Engineering and Manufacturing Company of Spring Mills, Pa., had come up with its own, electronically controlled version, the poetically named Shedda (''shadow'' in


Ex-Top Aide to Hart Breaks His Silence, Cites 'Classic Error'
LEAD: Gary Hart was a victim of his own decision to test fate and a press corps obsessed with candidates' personal lives, his former campaign manager said today.


Directors Accept Pact as Producers Yield on Rollbacks
LEAD: The Directors Guild of America reached a tentative agreement with movie and television producers today, halting the first strike in the union's history only five minutes before the picket lines went up.


Summer Kitchens: A Share in Survival
LEAD: IT happened on Fire Island several summers ago, in a house Rochelle Rachelson was sharing with several other people.


Pentagon Held Little Improved In Arms-Buying
LEAD: More than a year after a Presidential panel recommended sweeping changes in the way the Defense Department does business, members of the blue-ribbon commission and many executives in the military contracting industry say that improvements have been slow in coming.


GREECE'S PREMIER TURNS TO MOSCOW
LEAD: Shortly after Washington's latest dispute with Athens erupted last month, the Greek authorities announced that Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou had exchanged letters with the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Health Dept. Urges Salaries Of $110,000 for Top Scientists
LEAD: The Department of Health and Human Services has drafted a proposal to create a special corps of senior biomedical researchers who could be paid as much as $110,000 a year, a salary that would exceed those of Cabinet members by $10,500, an Administration official said Monday.


A Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article by Jeri Laber and Lois Whitman published on Monday misstated the chronological sequence of two events in Turkey.
The lifting of martial law in Istanbul was followed by reports in the press and in Parliament of police torture.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: I HEARD one of my favorite anecdotes about food - no doubt apocryphal - many years ago when I came to this country.
The story was set around the turn of the century, when the producers of canned tuna and the producers of canned salmon were supposed to have been engaged in a great merchandising battle.





Next Act: Poindexter's Predicament
LEAD: Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter faces a quandary on Wednesday when he finally begins his testimony and faces questions about what he told President Reagan of efforts to funnel money, arms and other support to the Nicaraguan rebels.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: WHEN Peter Matthews first spotted the big gray goose, it was wandering along the shore near Atlantic Beach, L.I.
Mr.
Matthews looked around, waited a while, but no one came to claim it.
So Mr.
Matthews, who is a potter, scooped up the goose and carried it home.


Pacific Telesis President
LEAD: The Pacific Telesis Group today named Sam L. Ginn president and chief operating officer.
He has been vice chairman of Pacific Telesis Group and president and chief executive of the Pactel Corporation, a subsidiary.
Pacific Telesis said that Mr.
Ginn, who is 50 years old, was being named president in anticipation of the retirement next year of its chairman, president and chief executive, Donald E.


May Business Starts Fell
LEAD: Business starts fell 6.1 percent in May from last year as the nation's economy slowed and large corporations cut costs, the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation said yesterday.
During May, 23,538 new businesses formed, compared with 25,079 a year ago, the business information company said.
As the nation's economic expansion entered its fifth year, ''entrepreneurial activity is subsiding compared with the very high levels in recent years,'' said Joseph W.


Where Homosexuals Found a Haven, There's No Haven From AIDS
LEAD: In the once-bustling Castro district here, empty storefronts are beginning to appear and ''for sale'' signs are adorning many of of the beautifully restored Victorian homes.


CHEMICAL NEW YORK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEMICAL NEW YORK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
1,100,000,000
b98,000,000
Per share
-
1.85
6mo net loss
1,000,000,000
b201,000,000
Per share
-
3.78
b-Net income  Figures for the latest quarter and 6-month reflect the results of operations of Texas Commerce Bancshares Inc.


Don't Roll Over, Beethoven: A Classical Fight
LEAD: For many classical music lovers, the announcement in 1974 that radio station WNCN-FM in New York was shifting its format to rock-and-roll was devastating.


Advertising; International Economy Magazine Debut Is Set
LEAD: David M. Smick, 33, and Richard H. Medley, 35, partners in Smick &amp; Medley &amp; Associates, Washington-based economic consultants, are now additionally co-publishers of The International Economy magazine, which will be published six times a year, It will be what they consider to be a much needed ''written forum for the international policy debate.


Notre Dame Gets Smith's Library
LEAD: The personal library of Red Smith, the late Pulitzer Prize-winning sports columnist, has been given to the University of Notre Dame by his widow, Phyllis Smith of New Canaan, Conn., university officials said.


BARNETT BANKS OF FLORIDA INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARNETT BANKS OF FLORIDA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
43,461,000
40,559,000
Per share
.79
.75
Shares outst
55,178,000
53,153,000
6mo net inc
88,063,000
79,432,000
Per share
1.61
1.47
Shares outst
54,695,000
52,980,000


20 Years After Rift, Greetings to Israelis In a Russian Accent
LEAD: Every morning, the radio service of the Israeli Army invites a different personality to the microphone to open the day at 8 by pronouncing ''Boker tov, Israel'' - ''Good morning, Israel.''


Church in Philippines Urges Land for Poor
LEAD: The Roman Catholic bishops of the Philippines are prepared to ask landowners to turn over lands voluntarily for distribution to the poor, without waiting for a possible law mandating a redistribution.


Finance/Business; Home Loan Banks
LEAD: A $2.5 billion financing by the Federal Home Loan Banks offers a $1.165 billion issue of 6.9 percent bonds due July 25, 1988; a $825 million issue of 7.8 percent bond due July 25, 1990, and $510 million of 8.375 percent bonds due July 27, 1992.
The three bond issues are priced at par and offered through various securities dealers.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Larry Murphy, a defenseman who led the Washington Capitals in scoring with 81 points last season, signed a multiyear contract with the club. . . .
The Buffalo Bills obtained Clint Sampson, a wide receiver, from Denver for an undisclosed draft pick.
They also sent Charles Romes, a cornerback, to Kansas City for an undisclosed draft choice.


Company News; Gillette Stock Up On Jacobs Rumors
LEAD: The Gillette Company's shares jumped $2.50 yesterday, to $43.875 -a new 52-week high on the New York Stock Exchange.
Nearly three million shares changed hands, making it the second-most-active issue.
Traders speculated that Irwin L. Jacobs, the Minneapolis investor, was among the big buyers.
They estimated that Mr.


Advertising; Top Offcial Seen Returning to JWT
LEAD: BURTON J. MANNING, former United States chairman of the J. Walter Thompson Company, will be returning as president and chief executive of the agency's worldwide operation, a person close to the company said yesterday.


A Cast of Legislators
LEAD: Members of the Iran-contra committees who had not been able to question Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North had their chance yesterday.
Here are some who spoke.
Representative Les Aspin, D-Wis.
His work as chairman of the Armed Services Committee has caused him to be absent during much of the hearings.


Questions for the Admiral
LEAD: Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter will be questioned on a host of documents and testimony by others, including Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.
These are among the questions he is most likely to be asked:


Winfield Hesitates, Is Lost
LEAD: Dave Winfield of the Yankees rounded third base in the bottom of the ninth inning of the 58th and perhaps strangest All-Star Game.
Across the infield, a possible double play was disintegrating.


Networks Start System Of Rotation Tomorrow
LEAD: The three major television networks said yesterday that they had agreed to rotate their daily live coverage of the Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair.


Pop: Madonna Benefit For AIDS at the Garden
LEAD: MADONNA works hard to entertain her audiences. Her sold-out concert


Finance/New Issues; Bond Offering By Mississippi
LEAD: A $56.7 million competitive bond issue by Mississippi is being offered through a group of underwriters led by the Chase Manhattan Capital Markets Corporation.


Court Puts Off Move to Speed Arrests' Review
LEAD: An appeals court decided yesterday to delay a lower-court order requiring judges to review arrests in New York City within 24 hours after the arrests are made.


The Carrot and Stick in Foreign-Trade Relations
LEAD: To win the economic battles of the future, America must address both sides of the trade equation - our failure to maintain a competitive economic environment at home and the removal of protectionism abroad.


At an Illinois Country Store, Nostalgia Sells Best
LEAD: Joe Glisson's general store is a living piece of history, where folks stop by for soda fountain treats, penny candy or just a slice of Americana.


MELLON BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MELLON BANK (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b566,000,000
bd55,000,000
Per share
-
1.87
6mo net loss
c626,000,000
cd155,000,000
Per share
-
4.00
b-Includes a previously announced estimated loss of $500 million, as well as losses relating to


OWENS-CORNING FIBERGLAS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OWENS-CORNING FIBERGLAS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
687,958,000
925,329,000
Net inc
b19,428,000
34,881,000
Share earns
.46
1.16
6mo sales
1,423,508,000
1,791,452,000
Net inc
c127,500,000
57,800,000
Share earns
3.07
1.93
Shares outst
41,482,508
29,890,354


Food Is A Main Theme at Park Concerts
LEAD: SOME say it is becoming a lost rite of summer: lolling in the shade of an oak on a Sunday afternoon, dapper men in jackets and hats, women in summer finery and wicker hampers crammed with a tasty outdoor repast.


The Russians Aren't Trying to Be Just Like Us
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sizing Up a Shakeup
LEAD: The Administration generally supports the reorganization of the World Bank that its president, Barber B. Conable, is orchestrating, according to a senior official, but is ''concerned'' that it is not tough enough.


THE LAWYERS IN ALBANY: LAWMAKERS WITH 2 HATS
LEAD: Some of the most influential New York State legislators and their top aides play an extraordinary dual role here, conducting the public's business while they work as members of law firms that represent clients affected by legislation or state regulation.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, JULY 15, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-15  Robert McFarlane testified before the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair that he had not authorized many of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's secret activities, contadicting parts of Colonel North's account.
Page A1  The committee chairmen rebuked Colonel North for having taken part in what they said was a policy based upon lies.


NASA Says Ruptured Stage Of Rocket May Be Repairable
LEAD: A rocket stage that was accidentally struck by a work platform may be salvageable because damage was limited to a ruptured hydrogen tank, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said today.


Business Digest: WEDNESDAY, JULY 15, 1987
LEAD: International Prime Minister Nakasone strongly criticized Toshiba Machine, accusing the company of betraying Japan by selling sensitive technology to the Russians.
At the same time, the Japanese trade minister left for Washington to ease American anger over the incident, which Washington says has damaged U.S.


LUKENS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LUKENS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
127,554,000
105,930,000
Net inc
6,123,000
b6,809,000
Share earns
1.10
1.38
6mo sales
238,192,000
198,814,000
Net inc
9,036,000
b7,265,000
Share earns
1.63
1.48


Lawyer Assails Investigators as Defense Opens in Sex Abuse Case
LEAD: A defense lawyer told jurors in the McMartin Preschool case today that they must find the bad guys in a saga that provoked mass fears of child molestation.


Scouting; Dialing a Winner
LEAD: The Al Paul Lefton advertising agency, which won a Telly Award last year for its New York Offtrack Betting television advertisement that showed a customer transported magically onto the back of the horse on which she was betting, will be stressing special effects again this week in the shooting of another OTB ad.


Film: Tavianis' 'Babylon' Depicts Early Hollywood
LEAD: THE rosy style of Paolo and Vittorio Taviani, with its radiant physicality and its intoxicating sense of magic, has most often been used to create cinematic folk tales (''The Night of the Shooting Stars,'' ''Chaos,'' ''Padre Padrone'') about Italian peasantry.
It is considerably less at home in the Hollywood of 1916, the backdrop against which the Tavianis' ''Good Morning, Babylon'' unfolds.


Reagan Vows to Speak Out After the Hearings Are Over
LEAD: President Reagan continued today to avoid questions about the Iran-contra hearings, but he briefly allowed his growing frustrations over the testimony on Capitol Hill to slip out.


Canada Hunts a Second Freighter And Jails 2 Men in Sikhs' Landing
LEAD: A second freighter was identified today as having been involved with the illegal landing of 174 Sikhs on the Nova Scotia coast, and two men were sentenced to prison terms for organizing the Sikhs' voyage.


Shultz Meets Helms and Dole On Mozambique Policy Rift
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz conferred today with two Senate Republicans who are critics of the Administration's policy on Mozambique, but both sides refused to give ground, officials said.


Downpour Provides a Cool, if Soaking, Respite
LEAD: Pedestrians taking cover under a theater marquee yesterday as a thunderstorm pelted the pavement and dropped the temperature.
New York city will get a reprieve from the rain today as sunny skies return. (NYT/Ruby Washington)


Economic Scene; The Shift From Forecasting
LEAD: AMONG executive search firms, Handy Associates is a leader in recruiting professional economists for financial institutions and big corporations.
But call Peter Vosburgh, the proprietor, and the first thing he says is that Handy isn't taking applications from economists seeking jobs.


Col. North Bolstering Fund Effort
LEAD: Conservative organizations, seeking to reverse a sharp, months-long slump in contributions, are sending out millions of solicitation letters to capitalize on the outpouring of public support for Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.
Several Republican strategists said they could not remember a sudden mailing effort on the scale of the avalanche of solicitations precipitated by Colonel North's appearances before the House and Senate committees investigating the


Company News; Mellon Has Big Loss; 2 Resign
LEAD: The Mellon Bank Corporation turned in unexpectedly disappointing second-quarter results yesterday, and it disclosed that two top officers had resigned, apparently as part of a cost-cutting effort.


INSIDE
LEAD: Directors in Accord  Film and television directors tentatively agreed to a new contract when producers gave up demands for rollbacks in royalties.
Page C19.


Supplements to Pensions Won't Break New York
LEAD: To the Editor:


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Rural Electric Cooperative yesterday tentatively priced $279 million of grantor trust certificates in five parts, for possible offering today through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Brothers.
The certificates, which are priced at par, are backed by promissory notes of the Soyland Power Cooperative,


Sports People; Hearing on Trade
LEAD: The National Basketball Association will hold a hearing in an attempt to resolve a dispute over a trade between the Portland Trail Blazers and the Cleveland Cavaliers.
Portland traded Jim Paxson, a guard, to the Cavaliers for Keith Lee, a forward, on June 22 but later attempted to call off the deal, saying Lee had not passed a medical check by the Blazers' team doctor because of a knee problem.


The Russians Aren't Trying to Be Just Like Us; Can He Succeed?
LEAD: To the Editor:


North Is Dismissed by Iran Panel With Criticism for Policy of 'Lies'
LEAD: The chairmen of the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair dismissed Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North from the witness stand this afternoon with stinging rebukes for having taken part in what they said was a policy based upon lies.


Ruth Karen Hagai, 65, A Business Consultant
LEAD: Ruth Karen Hagai, a business consultant, journalist and author who was known professionally as Ruth Karen, died of cancer Saturday at her Manhattan home.
She was 65 years old.


Bombs Kill 72 and Wound 250 in Pakistani City
LEAD: Two car bombs killed at least 72 people and wounded more than 250 here today, the police and witnesses said.


North's Final Day on Stand: U.S. Neutrality and Iran, Iraq and the Israelis
LEAD: As the Iran-contra committees' hearings continued yesterday, the members of Congress heard final testimony from Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.
Here are excerpts from the testimony, as recorded by The New York Times.


Artists' Sketches Slyly Satirize the Rich
LEAD: Some of the works are slapstick, and some are subtle, but all of them are sly.
The reason is, they are sketches and drawings by artists who are satirizing their own patrons - the rich.


Ali Is Examined By Mexican Doctor
LEAD: A Mexican doctor who has pioneered a new transplant surgery for Parkinson's Disease patients said today that he had examined Muhammad Ali, who suffers from Parkinson's Syndrome, a milder form of the disease, and that the former heavyweight champion was considering undergoing the treatment.


Philharmonic: Central Park Concert
LEAD: WELL away from retentive asphalt, scorchers like Monday have a way of yielding to the pleasantest of dusks.
With the least cooperation from the breeze (and Monday's was a flawless specimen of continuous but gentle), the weather becomes the kind you would have if the weather were yours to dispose - and this at an hour when a stroll up


Soviet Pilgrims in Jerusalem
LEAD: When officially atheist Moscow sends diplomats to examine ''church properties'' in the holy city of Jerusalem, suspicions fall on a more secular motive.
For the first time in 20 years, Soviet officials are ''visiting'' Israel, and for the first time since 1972, the Israel radio's broadcasts to the Soviet


HONEYWELL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HONEYWELL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,575,000,000
1,326,400,000
Net inc
54,300,000
b36,100,000
Share earns
1.21
.80
6mo sales
3,057,500,000
2,477,200,000
Net inc
98,000,000
b62,300,000
Share earns
2.17
1.37


Company News; Loss Is Wider For Kaisertech
LEAD: Kaisertech Ltd., the holding company for the Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation, said today that it lost $389.1 million in the second quarter, compared with a loss of $30.6 million a year ago.


HBO Buying Rights To Paramount Films
LEAD: Home Box Office has signed an exclusive agreement for the pay-television rights to Paramount Pictures films released after mid-1988.
The deal, which includes 85 films, is expected to last at least five years.


Taiwan Ends 4 Decades of Martial Law
LEAD: The Nationalist Government ended 38 years of martial law today and called the move ''a new milestone'' for democracy on this island still technically at war with the Chinese mainland.


Sports People; Smith Rejoins Royals
LEAD: Lonnie Smith, who became a free agent last winter when he rejected a proposed cut from his $900,000-a-year contract, has rejoined the Kansas City Royals.
No other team acquired Smith after he was unable to reach an agreement with the Royals, and he signed a contract with Kansas City's Class AAA farm team at Omaha.


Music: Two Concertos In Mostly Mozart Festival
LEAD: TUESDAY evening's Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra program at Avery Fisher Hall - repeated last night -offered two concertos with two different and very talented soloists and a first-ever-at-this-festival performance of, of all super-familiar scores, Beethoven's ''Pastoral'' Symphony.


U.S. Cancels Show in Beijing Over China's Demand to Cut It
LEAD: The United States today canceled a planned exhibition of American portraits in China because the Chinese insisted that paintings of Golda Meir and Gen.
Douglas MacArthur be removed from the show.


BARD, C R INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARD, C R INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
160,378,000
135,506,000
Net inc
15,172,000
12,654,000
Share earns
.52
.42
6mo sales
311,445,000
263,890,000
Net inc
30,100,000
24,644,000
Share earns
1.03
.82


ITT and United Technologies Profits Up Sharply
LEAD: Two prominent conglomerates yesterday reported sharply higher profits in the most recent quarter.
The ITT Corporation's net income soared 65 percent, while the United Technologies Corporation's net earnings more than doubled from last year, when the company took a large charge against earnings.


BRIEFING: Casey's Memoirs
LEAD: Staff members of the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra panel are considering filing a subpoena for a manuscript of memoirs left behind by William J. Casey, the Director of Central Inteligence who died last spring.


TESTIMONY GRATIFIES PRESIDENT; ADMIRAL ON STAND
LEAD: Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter testified today that he personally had authorized the use of profits from the Iran arms sales to help the Nicaraguan rebels and had withheld the information from President Reagan to protect him from political embarrassment.


Cris Carter Ineligible
LEAD: Cris Carter, whose 168 career receptions are tops in Ohio State history, was declared ineligible for his senior season yesterday for accepting money and signing a contract with an agent.
The Ohio State athletic director, Rick Bay, speaking at a news conference, said Carter admitted that on May 1, 1986, he had signed a representation agreement and a $5,000 promissory note with Lloyd Bloom and Norby Walters, agents of World Entertainment and Sports, Inc.


Arms to Iran, Profits to the Contras: What the President Has Said
LEAD:  Nov. 13, 1986 ''The charge has been made that the United States has shipped weapons to Iran as ransom payment for the release of American hostages in Lebanon, that the United States undercut its allies and secretly violated American policy against trafficking with terrorists.
Those charges are utterly false.


JOHN CRONIN
LEAD: John Cronin, an interior designer, died of cardiac arrest Monday at his home in North Salem, N.Y.
He was 54 years old.


A Message for Democrats
LEAD: When the seven Democratic candidates sat down together on a stage in Houston recently, it was not only the first Presidential debate of the season, it was also a stark lesson in how the political landscape is being changed by the Iran-contra scandal.


BOISE CASCADE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOISE CASCADE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
939,550,000
940,290,000
Net inc
35,230,000
31,330,000
Share earns
1.16
1.07
6mo rev
1,859,480,000
1,853,370,000
Net inc
75,380,000
56,330,000
Share earns
2.47
1.90


EX-PROSECUTOR, JAILED AS THIEF, WINS EARLY RELEASE
LEAD: A former Federal prosecutor who stole cocaine and heroin from the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan won an early release from prison yesterday after serving 16 months.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  AN INCOMPLETE EDUCATION.
By Judy Jones and William Wilson.
Illustrated. 656 pages.
Ballantine. $24.95.


COMPLAINTS ON FLIGHTS INCREASING
LEAD: The Transportation Department says it received nearly as many complaints about shoddy airline service last month as it did in the first six months of 1986.


SLOTNICK STATEMENT IS DISALLOWED
LEAD: A public statement by Representative Mario Biaggi's lawyer cannot be introduced into evidence at Mr.
Biaggi's bribery trial, a Federal judge in Brooklyn ruled yesterday.


Rock: Skinny Puppy
LEAD: START with the machine-driven, industrial-grade, metallic stomp of bands like Einsturzende Neubaten.
Add crack-voiced chants and cackles by way of the Residents and Captain Beefheart.
Deliver the resulting clangor from a junk-sculpture stage set, with gestures and contortions out of Jerzy Grotowski's Polish Laboratory Theater and Iggy Pop concerts, plus the stage blood and baby dolls from Alice Cooper's arena-rock shows.


MOTOROLA INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOTOROLA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,639,000,000
1,499,000,000
Net inc
80,000,000
55,000,000
Share earns
.62
.43
6mo sales
3,185,000,000
2,838,000,000
Net inc
136,000,000
100,000,000
Share earns
1.06
.80


Coke Is Up; Charge for 'Ishtar' Set
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Company reported an 18.1 percent rise in second-quarter earnings yesterday, although its entertainment unit posted a deficit because of a $25 million charge related to the comedy film ''Ishtar.''


Aspin and Republicans in House In War of Words About the Gulf
LEAD: Representative Les Aspin, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, vigorously and angrily objected today to assertions by the Reagan Administration, and by his colleagues in the House, that he had disclosed classified details of plans to provide military escorts to ships in the Persian Gulf.


Gandhi Ousts 3 Rebels From Governing Party
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi ousted three prominent rebels from the governing Congress Party today.
They included a cousin who was once a powerful aide.


ANDOVER TOGS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANDOVER TOGS INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
13,122,000
14,497,000
Net inc
b27,000
625,000
Share earns
.01
.25
Shares outst
3,300,000
2,500,000
6mo sales
25,213,000
24,852,000
Net inc
b315,000
1,068,000
Share earns
.10
.43


VIPONT PHARMACEUTICAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIPONT PHARMACEUTICAL (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,053,003
3,294,634
Net inc
766,595
110,832
Share earns
.14
.02
9mo rev
16,080,969
9,220,853
Net inc
1,771,417
300,270
Share earns
.33
.06


Man Kills Himself After Slaying Wife
LEAD: A 44-year-old Brooklyn man, the father of seven children, killed his estranged wife in an argument in the hallway of his apartment building yesterday morning and then killed himself, the police said.


Bomb Report Delays Cruise
LEAD: Minutes after the ocean liner Nordic Princess embarked on a seven-day cruise to Bermuda yesterday, a man called the 911 emergency number and said a bomb on the ship was set to go off in 10 minutes.
The the ocean liner returned to the Passenger Ship Terminal.
A police spokesman, Officer Peter O'Donnell, said no explosive devices were found in a four-hour search.


FIRST COMMERCE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST COMMERCE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,489,000
c2,160,000
Per share
.35
.13
6mo net inc
b9,640,000
c6,238,000
Per share
.84
.45
b-Includes securities gains of $26,000 for the quarter and $937,000 for the 6 months.


On a Clear Day You Can See to the End of Manhattan, and Beyond
LEAD: Visitors to the Empire State Building enjoying the view yesterday as well as the clear skies and less humid temperatures.
Today should be just as pleasing for outdoor activities and tourist attractions as mild temperatures and clear skies are again expected. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


Volcano Group Loses Appeal
LEAD: The State Supreme Court has ruled that geothermal development of Kilauea Volcano does not interfere with worshipers of Hawaii's legendary volcano goddess, Pele.
The decision came Tuesday in an appeal brought by the Pele worshipers, who opposed a Board of Land and Natural Resources decision three years ago designating 9,000 acres of the Kilauea Middle East Rift area on the island of Hawaii as a geothermal resource.


FIRST MARYLAND BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST MARYLAND BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
10,465,000
8,907,000
Per share
.74
.64
Shares outst
14,145,871
13,936,763
6mo net inc
22,099,000
16,667,000
Per share
1.57
1.24
Shares outst
14,113,791
13,437,936


Chairman of Plenum Seeks Unlikely Target
LEAD: An unexpected acquisition offer by the Plenum Publishing Corporation to buy Arthur D. Little Inc., the consulting firm, for about $128 million would unite two companies that appear to be quite different and that may be on a crash course culturally.


Dow Up 2.39 After Seesaw Session
LEAD: A stock market made nervous by disturbing news about the trade situation and oil prices had a seesaw session yesterday before closing mixed.
While the Dow Jones industrial average managed to hit another record, broader market indexes retreated and more stocks fell than gained on the New York Stock


Suspect in Drug Case Is Slain by an Officer
LEAD: An undercover Westchester County narcotics detective shot and killed a suspected drug dealer who pointed a revolver - which later turned out to be a fake - at the detective during a drug transaction yesterday, the Yonkers police said.


GLATFELTER, P H COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GLATFELTER, P H COMPANY (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
102,026,000
73,235,000
Net inc
14,203,000
10,803,000
Share earns
.57
.43
6mo sales
175,519,000
143,582,000
Net inc
26,450,000
21,100,000
Share earns
1.07
.84


Hong Kong Bank Seeks Marine's Remaining 49%
LEAD: The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, one of the world's largest banking organizations, offered yesterday to pay $677 million for the 49 percent of Marine Midland Banks Inc. that it does not already own.


The Albany Scorecard
LEAD: After a legislative year marked by uncommon bickering, Governor Cuomo and the New York Legislature deserve credit for tangible achievements on taxes, ethics, transit, state prisons and milk - even as they leave behind much disappointment over pensions, courts, campaign finance, city jails and racist crime.


Yields Are Mixed
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were mixed for the week ended yesterday, with little change from a week ago.


ALLIED BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIED BANCSHARES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
116,230,521
b10,224,643
Per share
-
.25
6mo net loss
136,697,656
b24,695,468
Per share
-
.60
b-Net income  The company said its non-performing asset total was $605.73 million on June 30, or 9.84 percent of loans and related assets, an increase from the $346.18 million reported a year earlier.


Saratoga Names City Opera To a Visiting Residency
LEAD: The New York City Opera has been named a resident company at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center, the center and the company have announced.
The City Opera will join the New York City Ballet and the Philadelphia Orchestra in regular annual appearances at the upstate New York arts facility, a joint statement said yesterday.


COMMERCE BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCE BANCSHARES (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Net inc
10,058,000
9,543,000
Per share
.97
.91
6mo net inc
19,404,000
19,264,000
Per share
1.88
1.84


AMR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,830,000,000
1,520,000,000
Net inc
92,200,000
138,000,000
Share earns
1.51
2.23
6mo rev
3,340,000,000
2,970,000,000
Net inc
112,100,000
151,800,000
Share earns
1.88
2.48


Advertising; Ted Bates And B.&amp;S. Combine
LEAD: THE long-expected merger of Ted Bates Worldwide and Backer &amp; Spielvogel, both subsidiaries of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company of London, was announced yesterday.
Carl Spielvogel, the 58-year-old chairman and chief executive of the smaller company, will carry the same titles at Backer Spielvogel Bates


DAUPHIN DEPOSIT reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAUPHIN DEPOSIT (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
8,600,000
7,500,000
Per share
.84
.75
6mo net inc
16,700,000
15,100,000
Per share
1.65
1.49
The company said the year-ago second quarter and 6-month results were restated to reflect the adoption of Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement on pension accounting.


PEOPLES BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES BANCORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,735,000
3,011,000
Per share
1.24
.79
6mo net inc
10,932,000
3,116,000
Per share
2.87
.82
The company said the improvement in earnings is due to a 54-percent decrease in the provision for loan losses and a 3.6-percent decrease in non-interest expenses, and earnings were also favorably affected by the higher interest rate environment, resulting in an 8.3-percent increase in net interest income compared to the first quarter of this year.


TELEDYNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELEDYNE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
781,300,000
833,900,000
Net inc
58,000,000
58,300,000
Share earns
4.95
4.98
6mo sales
1,602,900,000
1,639,800,000
Net inc
b128,900,000
b122,100,000
Share earns
11.01
10.43


REFUGEE FREIGHTER FOUND IN FLORIDA
LEAD: A second freighter sought in connection with the illegal landing of 174 Sikhs on the coast of Nova Scotia was located today in Miami with no passengers aboard.


Released Panamanians Tell of Abusive Treatment
LEAD: Anti-Government protesters said today that their movement may have temporarily been set back by abusive treatment in jail of demonstrators whom the Government held over the weekend.


AMID THE SHADOWS, SOME FINE BASEBALL
LEAD: Now that the 58th All-Star Game is a memory, the lingering thought seems to be that it deserves to be played either in daytime or at night.
Not both.
But it would be incorrect to assume the contest was boring.


EVANS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EVANS INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,828,000
23,371,000
Net loss
2,744,000
1,460,000


RYAN FAMILY STEAK HOUSE INC reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RYAN FAMILY STEAK HOUSE INC (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1987
1986
Revenue
39,603,000
25,481,000
Net inc
4,465,000
2,669,000
Share earns
.09
.05
Shares outst
52,668,000
49,650,000
6mo rev
72,367,000
46,710,000
Net inc
8,179,000
4,975,000
Share earns
.16
.10
Shares outst
52,641,000
49,590,000


First Republic Has Big Loss
LEAD: The First Republicbank Corporation said today that it had increased reserves for potential losses from loans to developing countries by $325 million in the second quarter, producing a loss of $313.2 million for the period.


F.A.A. Opens Inquiry Into Delta's Pilot Training
LEAD: Citing pilot error as a factor in a recent string of near accidents involving Delta Air Lines, the Federal Aviation Administration announced yesterday that it had begun a special investigation of the airline, with initial emphasis on pilot training and procedures.


SOFTWARE INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOFTWARE INTERNATIONAL (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,432
11,250
Net inc
1,692
938
Share earns
.26
.15
Shares outst
6,576
6,177
Yr rev
63,616
36,263
Net inc
4,932
6,042
Share earns
.78
.44
Shares outst
6,340
6,042


ZZZZ Best Halts All Operations
LEAD: The ZZZZ Best Company, whose 21-year-old founder and former chairman, Barry Minkow, has been accused of fraud and linked to a scheme to launder money from drug deals, has ceased all operations.
Herb Wolas, the lawyer who was appointed trustee for ZZZZ Best after the carpet-cleaning company filed for protection from its creditors last week, said the company did not want to incur further liabilities ''until we are sure we can make payments.


Quasars Very Close Together Reported at Edge of Universe
LEAD: From data collected at three observatories, astronomers have concluded that a pair of quasars on the outer fringes of the observable universe may be circling one another or in a collision.


Trade Data Send Dollar Tumbling
LEAD: The dollar yesterday registered its biggest one-day decline since Paul A. Volcker resigned as chairman of the Federal Reserve on June 2, as currency traders reacted negatively to news from the Commerce Department that the nation's foreign trade deficit had widened in May.


SOUTHTRUST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHTRUST CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
14,632,000
13,057,000
Per share
.59
.55
Yr net inc
28,916,000
25,764,000
Per share
1.17
1.10


An Ancient Idea To Let In the Light
LEAD: ''WE'VE been using shoji screens in Japan for 1,000 years instead of doors, to let light in,'' said Masami Kodama, a partner in Miya Shoji, a company that has sold shoji screens in this country for 40 years. ''Sometimes people use them to hide things,'' he said, ''such as a bed or clothes.''


Will the First Vacation End the Affair?
LEAD: ON their first vacation together, David and Ellen Jacoby discovered which one of them packs lots of clothes; (he does, she does not).
Who likes breakfast; (he does, she does not).
Who dawdles in museums; (he does, she does not).
Who sends lots of postcards; (he does, she does not).
Who worries that the airline will lose the luggage; (they both do).


DEST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEST CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,630,000
4,283,000
Net inc
b372,000
c283,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Includes an extraordinary tax credit of $138,000.
c-Net loss


Cushman in Deal With Christie's
LEAD: A major American commercial real estate company has teamed up with the fine art auctioneers from Christie's to put shopping malls, hotels and skyscrapers on the block for public bidding.
Cushman &amp; Wakefield Inc. said it plans to hold its first auction in November, featuring properties with a minimum market value of $5 million.


Arctic to Arena
LEAD: Last year, shortly after he graduated from Lehigh University with a degree in economics, Clarence Walton decided to forget football.
He had been a 240-pound starter at nose guard for three years and had acquired a sense that football was a never-ending, time-consuming phenomenon.


For Babies Who Travel First Class
LEAD: WHEN an infant or a toddler goes traveling, a lightweight portable chair, bed or crib can provide a snug place for sitting and viewing the world, or just for dreaming.


A Deportation Delay Backed
LEAD: The Senate Judiciary Committee today approved legislation to temporarily suspend the deportation of Salvadoran and Nicaraguan refugees from the United States until conditions in their home countries improved.
The committee voted 9 to 2 to approve legislation sponsored by Senator Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona, that would give 400,000 to 500,000 Salvadorans ''extended voluntary departure'' status.


Cablevision to Add Adams-Russell
LEAD: The Cablevision Systems Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Adams-Russell Company, a publicly held cable concern based in Waltham, Mass., for $474 million, or $43.075 a share.


Grand Jury to Hear Minister About Wife's Attack in Dallas
LEAD: A Methodist minister will be called before a grand jury here to answer questions about discrepancies in his account of the night his wife was attacked.


Dr. John H. Northrop, Nobel Laureate, Dies
LEAD: Dr.
John H. Northrop, a 1946 Nobel laureate, died May 27 at his home in Wickenberg, Ariz.
He was 95 years old.


FIFTH THIRD BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIFTH THIRD BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
15,067,000
12,538,000
Per share
1.18
1.06
Shares outst
12,865,000
11,835,000
6mo net
28,750,000
24,709,000
Per share
2.24
2.09
Shares outst
12,862,000
11,824,000


US HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*US HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
153,438,000
137,046,000
Net inc
9,632,000
9,225,000
Share earns
.19
.18
6mo rev
300,711,000
261,720,000
Net inc
18,374,000
17,774,000
Share earns
.37
.35


Former Bevill Head Guilty
LEAD: The former president of the brokerage firm Bevill, Bresler &amp; Schulman was found guilty today by a jury in Federal Court here of conspiracy and mail fraud charges in connection with the 1985 collapse of the firm.
Authorities contend that the collapse cost investors more than $100 million.


Inventories: The Bulge Grows
LEAD: Business inventories soared in May by the largest amount in three years, lifted by a backlog of unsold cars and a slump in furniture and appliance sales, the Commerce Department said today.


HILTON HOTELS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HILTON HOTELS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
224,021,000
194,322,000
Net inc
35,207,000
30,505,000
Share earns
1.40
1.22
6mo rev
425,196,000
356,746,000
Net inc
59,219,000
47,938,000
Share earns
2.36
1.92


The Iran-Contra Affair : General Secord Fights For the Last Word
LEAD: Perhaps taking a cue from Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's assertive testimony before the Iran-contra committees, another figure in the affair has gone on the offensive against the panels.


SMITHSONIAN PUSHES ITS PLAN TO MOVE THE INDIAN MUSEUM
LEAD: The Smithsonian Institution, in letters to members of Congress, has spelled out the first details of its proposal for a home in Washington for the Museum of the American Indian, whose possible move from New York City is being challenged in court by state and city officials.


DECEPTIVE CALM BEFORE BRITISH OPEN
LEAD: There was no wind today under gray skies here as 153 golfers had their final practice round for the 116th British Open on the links of Muirfield.
But not one of them believed that the still conditions would hold through the next four days.


LITTLE, ARTHUR D INC reports earnings for Qtr to July 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LITTLE, ARTHUR D INC (OTC)
Qtr to July 3
1987
1986
Revenue
69,297,000
63,782,000
Net inc
1,776,000
1,612,000
Share earns
.69
.63
6mo net inc
b3,699,000
c2,329,000
Share earns
1.44
.91
b-Includes a gain of $423,000, or 17 cents a share, from the sale of an investment associated with the company's venture activities in the United Kingdom and the proceeds from the settlement of a fixed-price contract.


INTERNATIONAL PAPER CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL PAPER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,910,000,000
1,230,000,000
Net inc
b90,000,000
76,000,000
Share earns
.80
.73
Shares outst
104,700,000
96,200,000
6mo sales
3,740,000,000
2,370,000,000
Net inc
180,000,000
101,000,000
Share earns
1.62
.94
Shares outst
104,900,000
96,000,000


Hopes of Immigration Act Died in a Texas Boxcar
LEAD:  To the Editor:


3 Suspended for Brawls
LEAD: Brett Butler of the Cleveland Indians and Willie Wilson and Danny Jackson of the Kansas City Royals were each suspended for five games yesterday by the American League president, Bobby Brown, for their roles in two brawls last week.


Paper Makers' Income Is Up
LEAD: Two paper and forest products companies reported higher second-quarter earnings yesterday, citing continued high exports resulting from the declining dollar.
The International Paper Company reported an 18.4 percent increase in earnings, while the Boise Cascade Corporation said its net income rose 12.5 percent.


Immune System and Infertility
LEAD: Problems in the immune system may be to blame for many cases of infertility in women, researchers at Mount Sinai Medical Center here said today.
They said many women prone to fertility problems had a significantly higher incidence of abnormal blood factors called autoimmune antibodies.


Mortgage-Backed Market in Britain
LEAD: The market for mortage-backed securities in the British capital market continues to expand, with $:500 million of new issues (more than $800 million worth) in the last four months, including a new $:100 million note offering by a subsidiary of Salomon Brothers.


WELFARE HOTEL CHILDREN: TOMORROW'S POOR
LEAD: In the cavernous ballroom of the Prince George Hotel, four boys were shooting pool, talking as tough as any New York pool sharks.
One wore just his shorts, and another's face was smeared with sweat.
With the boys as old as 12, they might have seemed wise about the streets - except that two of them were sucking their thumbs.


New York City Seeking Bids for a Reduced Sale
LEAD: New York City said yesterday that it would sell $600 million of revenue anticipation notes due June 30, 1988, in competitive bidding today.


CHI-CHI INC reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHI-CHI INC (OTC)
Year to April 30
1987
1986
Sales
289,970,935
269,268,824
Net loss
4,728,173
b9,055,103
Share earns
-
.34
b-Net income.


LEARONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEARONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
37,706,000
28,635,000
Net inc
2,014,000
1,726,000
Share earns
.27
.23


Smuggler Ties Contras To U.S. Drug Network
LEAD: A convicted drug smuggler from Miami told a Senate subcommittee today that he had directed a network of pilots who flew weapons from two airports in southern Florida to contra forces in Central America and returned with loads of cocaine and marijuana.


MICROPOLIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROPOLIS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
70,920,000
55,253,000
Net inc
6,794,000
4,432,000
Share earns
.60
.42
6mo sales
132,717,000
105,930,000
Net inc
13,012,000
8,182,000
Share earns
1.15
.82


CAPE COD BANK &amp; TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPE COD BANK &amp; TRUST (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,246,664
1,930,959
Per share
.94
.89
Shares outst
2,409,442
2,160,241
6mo net inc
4,544,506
3,713,723
Per share
1.89
1.72
Shares outst
2,408,890
2,160,121


The Dance: A New Cast in Bolshoi's 'Raymonda'
LEAD: LIKE all dance companies, the Bolshoi Ballet is not immune to injuries.
Unfortunately, Natalya Bessmertnova, the senior ballerina on the company's current tour, has become the season's main casualty.
After appearing in ''The Golden Age'' and the ''Spartacus'' excerpt of the ''Highlights'' program, she apparently pulled her


RANDOLPH OUT FOR ONE MONTH
LEAD: The Yankees, who played without Don Mattingly and Rickey Henderson for most of June, will play without Willie Randolph for the second half of July and the first half of August.
Randolph, who played in the All-Star Game despite having torn knee cartilage, will undergo arthroscopic surgery on his left knee tomorrow.


A $75 Million Sale By Northern Trust
LEAD: The Northern Trust Corporation yesterday offered $75 million of 9 1/8 percent notes due in 1994 at 99.65, to yield 9.193 percent.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company heads the underwriters.


AMRE INC reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMRE INC (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Revenue
24,275,000
11,703,000
Net inc
1,396,000
180,000
Share earns
.16
.02
Yr rev
77,955,000
40,328,000
Net inc
3,400,000
1,053,000
Share earns
.43
.14


The Witness File
LEAD:  Name Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter  Age  50  Position  National security adviser to the President from December 1985 until he resigned on Nov. 25, 1986, on the day the diversion of Iran arms sales proceeds to the contras was disclosed.


DATACARD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATACARD CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Revenue
54,551,000
29,152,000
Net inc
1,063,000
b178,000
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss after a loss from discontinued operations of $689,000.


Lacking Parts, Armed Forces Cannibalize Costly Warplanes
LEAD: Despite the vast military spending by the Reagan Administration over the last six years, the armed forces today are so short of spare parts that they must cannibalize some airplanes to keep others flying.


TECHNITROL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TECHNITROL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,589,000
9,717,000
Net inc
1,277,000
677,000
Share earns
.63
.33
6mo sales
20,795,000
19,918,000
Net inc
1,523,000
1,557,000
Share earns
1.25
.77


Pakistan Links Afghan Agents to Bombings
LEAD: President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq on Wednesday linked opponents of Pakistan's support for Afghan insurgents to bombings that killed at least 72 people here Tuesday, although he acknowledged that no group had come forward to claim responsibility.


At Least 19 Killed in Alps Flood
LEAD: A woman being lifted to a helicopter from a campsite in Le Grand-Bornand, France.
Officials said at least 19 people died and 28 were missing after a flash flood swept through the crowded campground.
Page A3. (AP)


GOODMARK FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOODMARK FOODS (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
28,841,000
22,511,000
Net inc
1,298,000
721,000
Share earns
.29
.16
Yr sales
103,384,000
87,717,000
Net inc
3,223,000
4,209,000
Share earns
.72
1.06


Ride Wanted: Purple Cow Going West
LEAD: They start from the dairy country of Vermont and they look like cows, more or less, except for being purple and plywood, and for standing by the sides of roads all over America, trying to hitch rides from passing motorists.


Nixon, Dixon and Hart
LEAD: Richard Nixon and Gary Hart have always been poles apart.
Indeed, Mr.
Hart managed George McGovern's 1972 campaign against Mr.
Nixon and said revulsion with the Nixon Administration motivated his 1974 run for the Senate.
Now a friend of Mr.
Nixon has released correspondence that reveals an aspect of fraternity between the two men.


Air Force Withholds MX Payments From Thiokol
LEAD: The Air Force, disclosing a new problem with production of the giant MX nuclear missile, said it began withholding contract payments from Morton Thiokol Inc. today because of ''unsatisfactory workmanship practices'' on the weapon's first-stage booster.


AERO SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AERO SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,920,940
7,204,525
Net inc
46,909
215,360
Share earns
.01
.03


N.B.A. Talks Stalled
LEAD: The National Basketball Association and its players union met yesterday for the first time since June 9.
The meeting was described by both sides yesterday as ''nonproductive on the major issues.''


COMPUTER RESEARCH CO reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER RESEARCH CO
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,454,316
2,306,270
Net inc
87,990
91,977
Share earns
.02
.02
9mo rev
7,319,565
6,801,291
Net inc
387,828
266,716
Share earns
.10
.07
Share earnings reflect a 2.5-for-1 stock split paid last in June.


GENETICS INSTITUTE reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENETICS INSTITUTE (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,367,000
4,878,000
Net loss
2,573,000
1,038,000
6mo rev
9,638,000
9,295,000
Net loss
3,881,000
1,975,000


A Banking Bill Worse Than No Bill
LEAD: House and Senate staff members, along with an army of lobbyists, have been manuevering overtime to draft the most important banking bill in years.
The product now emerging falls far short of what is necessary to meet a looming crisis in the thrift industry.
The White House has indicated its unhappiness with the likely bill, and rightly so.


PLAN AIMS TO DOUBLE UNION SQ.
LEAD: At a time when expansion of urban parks is rare, city and community leaders have agreed on a bold plan to double the size of Union Square Park by closing a street and eliminating parking areas.


Senate Votes to Repeal Special Oil-Profits Tax
LEAD: The Senate voted early today to repeal the so-called windfall profits tax that oil companies have been fighting for seven years.


ARISTECH CHEMICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARISTECH CHEMICAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
228,500,000
191,800,000
Net inc
16,100,000
10,700,000
Share earns
.62
.41
6mo sales
437,200,000
387,700,000
Net inc
29,600,000
18,100,000
Share earns
1.15
.70


DEPOSIT GUARANTY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEPOSIT GUARANTY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,521,000
8,388,000
Per share
.31
1.03
6mo net inc
b11,361,000
17,130,000
Per share
1.40
2.11
b-After trading account losses of $1,900,000.
The company said earnings for the latest quarter were reduced by an $8.1 million addition to the reserve for possible loan losses to cover foreign credit exposure in Latin America.


Two Cuban Diplomats Are Told to Leave U.S.
LEAD: Two Cuban diplomats were told today by the State Department to leave the United States within 10 days, in response to what the department called an ''intolerable'' campaign against American diplomats in Havana.


A Dress Code For Cabdrivers Wins Approval
LEAD: The New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission yesterday unanimously approved a dress code for cabdrivers.


WILLIAMETTE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILLIAMETTE INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
352,350,000
309,180,000
Net inc
27,774,000
19,336,000
Share earns
1.10
.76
6mo sales
675,330,000
581,955,000
Net inc
50,721,000
26,903,000
Share earns
2.00
1.06


IT NEEDS A TEAM
LEAD: New Jersey has selected a 246-acre plot a mile and a half south of the Meadowlands Sports Complex as the site of a proposed 45,000-seat baseball stadium if the state attracts a major league team, officials said today.


CASH GRANTS ARE ORDERED TO HOMELESS
LEAD: A judge in New York State Supreme Court ruled yesterday that single homeless men and women in city shelters were entitled to Medicaid and cash welfare grants.


Johnson and His Glass House: Reflections
LEAD: ''ALL architects want to live beyond their death,'' said Philip Johnson, sitting in the living area of his Glass House in New Canaan, Conn., reflecting on why he has given it to the National Trust for Historic Preservation. ''There's room for 12 houses on the land - I'd rather preserve it than have a ticky tacky subdivision built.


ADA M. SHEARON
LEAD: Ada M. Shearon, a children's book editor, died of cancer Friday at North Shore Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
She was 73 years old.


RAINER BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAINER BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b18,346,000
c18,759,000
Per share
-
.87
6mo loss
1,088,000
c35,421,000
Per share
-
1.64
b-Includes a $58 million provision for loan loss reserves for possible losses in loans to developing countries.


NCNB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NCNB CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
54,471,000
49,657,000
Share earns
.68
.63
6mo Net inc
108,361,000
102,820,000
Share earns
1.36
1.32


Discreet Charms Of the Old Farmhouse
LEAD: A DRIVE through the flat potato fields of eastern Long Island or along the meandering country roads of New England confirms the popularity of the farmhouse, old or new.
Newly built versions come complete with porches, silos and turrets.
Older houses, reshingled or brightly painted, sit pristine on manicured lawns at the ends of gravel driveways.


KENTUCKY UTILITIES CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENTUCKY UTILITIES CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
130,098,000
124,213,000
Net inc
17,013,000
12,722,000
Share earns
.39
.27
Share earnings are adjusted for a 2-for-1 stock split in May.


Texaco Rumor Lifts 2 Stocks
LEAD: Shares of Texaco Inc. and the Pennzoil Company advanced sharply on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday on the report that officials from both companies were meeting in closed session at the United States Bankruptcy Court in White Plains.
Wall Street was guessing that the two companies might be close to announcing a settlement of their protracted dispute.


Metro Matters; Westway II: A Delay Costing $90,000 a Day
LEAD: Six months is to the history of a West Side highway what a stop sign is to a motorist's crosstown commute: a momentary distraction in an otherwise hopeless pursuit.


BRIEFING: Beeping Madness
LEAD: Senate Republicans recently replaced their electronic paging devices with a newer model because the old ones often didn't have enough range; they have even been blamed for causing some senators to miss roll-calls.
But although the new devices are more reliable, a number of senators now complain that because the buttons on them are so tiny, they are difficult to operate, especially to turn off.


PERFECTDATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PERFECTDATA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Sales
943,000
1,144,000
Net loss
331,000
266,000
Yr sales
4,111,000
5,516,000
Net loss
946,000
4,533,000
The company said it will carry forward about $4,024,000 in tax credits against future earnings.


Rock: Live Skull Plays In Seminar Showcase
LEAD: LIVE SKULL'S wall of guitars made a powerful, pulsating clamor Monday night at CBGB, where the group was playing at a Homestead Records showcase for the New-Music Seminar.
That much was familiar; the core of the group - Mark C. and Tom Paine on guitars and Marnie Greenholz on bass guitar - has been making gloriously musical guitar noise, sculpted from ringing overtones and the sizzle of harmonic interference patterns, since Live


Saving Bork From Both Friends and Enemies
LEAD: The nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the United States Supreme Court has drawn predictable reactions from both extremes of the political spectrum.
One can fairly say that the confirmation is as much endangered by one extreme as the other.


BRAJDAS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRAJDAS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,546,906
8,545,295
Net inc
b500,992
b294,647
Share earns
.17
.12
Shares outst
2,932,276
2,556,893
b-Includes tax credits of $178,300 for the latest quarter and $111,200 for the year-earlier period.


Winfield Brings Thrill in Twilight Zone
LEAD: The man was taking bites out of a Popsicle.
At the end of his hard day's night, Dave Winfield was not nibbling at the edges.
At a time when most of his business colleagues were enjoying their long-awaited three-day summer vacation, Winfield achieved a certain distinction.


London Office Development
LEAD: Olympia &amp; York, the Canadian real estate and resources group, is expected to announce Friday that it will join the Canary Wharf Development Consortium, a group planning to build one of the world's largest office developments in London.


Music: 'Hexameron,' by 6 Composers, at Rutgers
LEAD: ''Hexameron,'' a set of variations for six pianos by as many composers, which hammers away mercilessly at a theme from ''I Puritani,'' is among those 19th-century novelty items heard from time to time at gala events.
It concluded the concert Monday evening celebrating the inauguration of the Piano Institute at the Rutgers Summerfest here.


BANK OF NEW YORK CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF NEW YORK CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b34,900,000
c37,800,000
Per share
-
1.21
6mo net inc
12,400,000
78,900,000
Per share
.29
2.52
b-Reflects a special addition of $135 million to the company's allowance for loan losses in recogntion of recent developments with respect to the international debt environment; and includes a pre-tax gain of $49 million from the sale of RMJ holdings.


Flooding in France Kills At Least 19
LEAD: At least 19 people were killed when a flash flood swept through an alpine campground crowded with vacationers, many of them enjoying a long Bastille Day weekend, officials said today.
In addition, twenty-eight people were listed as missing.


SOCIETY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOCIETY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
21,517,000
21,001,000
Per share
.89
.84
6mo net
44,146,000
41,273,000
Per share
1.82
1.65


CAR BOMBS IN LEBANON KILL 12 AND WOUND 55
LEAD: Two car bombs killed 12 people and wounded 55 today in Tripoli and Baalbek, two Moslem cities patrolled by Syrians, the police reported.


TESTIMONY GRATIFIES PRESIDENT; THE VIEW FROM THE WHITE HOUSE: WHITE HOUSE HAPPY
LEAD: White House officials today described a mood of wary relief that Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter had supported President Reagan's assertion that he had no knowledge of the plan to divert the profits of the Iran arms sales to the Nicaraguan insurgents.


Poindexter Testimony: A Decrease in Drama
LEAD: IT grows difficult on television.


CB&amp;T BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CB&amp;T BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
5,430,000
5,002,000
Per share
.27
.26
6mo net inc
10,653,000
9,684,000
Per share
.54
.50
The company said the latest periods include the results of First Camden Bancorp acquired in January and First Community Bancshares Inc.


Kylian's Dance Images That Flow Like Daydreams
LEAD: JIRI KYLIAN'S choreography proceeds by sweeps and surges.
That was certainly apparent in the ballets by him that the Netherlands Dance Theater brought to the Metropolitan Opera House last month.


Catch as Catch Can This Year in Majors
LEAD: When will baseball use designated hitters for catchers, and other statistical developments in the first half of the season:


A.D.R.'s in London
LEAD: Official trading in American depository receipts will begin in London Aug. 3.
The London Stock Exchange has cleared the new market with British tax authorities, and its automated quotation system will be used.


A Hermit in Boston Loses Bed and Bower
LEAD: Bill Britt, a hermit, has lost his makeshift home on public land.
The authorities removed his belongings Monday after a court order protecting his lean-to expired.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.35
6.40
6.54
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.56
5.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.54
5.83
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.23
8.14
7.11
30-YR.


Boesky Use Of Futures Is Cited
LEAD: Large positions in stock index futures accumulated by Ivan F. Boesky before the announcement in November of his $100 million insider-trading settlement appear to have been used by Mr.
Boesky to offset, or hedge against, possible losses on a giant stock portfolio he controlled, according to officials of the Commodities Futures Trading


Leslie H. Arps Dies; A Founding Member Of Major Law Firm
LEAD: Leslie H. Arps, a founding member of a leading corporate law firm who assisted three New York State investigative commissions, died of cancer of the pancreas yesterday at New Milford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.


CENTRAL BANK FOR SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL BANK FOR SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,329,000
485,000
Per share
.33
-
6mo net inc
2,624,000
1,199,000
Per share
.66
-
The bank converted to stock form in July 1986.


REV. RALPH DENGLER
LEAD: The Rev.
Ralph Dengler, a Jesuit who was chairman of the department of communications at Fordham University, died of a heart attack Saturday at his residence on the university's Rose Hill campus in the Bronx.
He was 56 years old.


Deniable Plausibility?
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about obstacles faced by black professionals omitted a passage about minority recruitment efforts by McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consulting concern.
McKinsey recently engaged James


Safety of Bus Doors Is Faulted in Report
LEAD: Door safety systems on New York City buses failed at an ''unacceptable'' rate, according to a report released yesterday by the State Public Transportation Safety Board.


2 Factory Buildings Destroyed by Blaze
LEAD: A fire destroyed two warehouse-factory buildings and damaged a third yesterday in the city's downtown area about eight blocks south of the entrance to the Holland Tunnel, the authorities said.


Old Building to Get Shiny New Top
LEAD: Workers on the roof of the old Police Headquarters at 240 Centre Street.
Renovation of the building, which is being converted into cooperative residences, will include replacement of the copper roof and dome, which was stolen by vandals.
It is expected to take more than a ton of copper, one millimeter thick, to cover the upper portion of the central dome.


BRIEFING: Meese's Holdings
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, already under investigation for actions he may have taken on behalf of the Wedtech Corporation, may soon have some explaining to do for another potential conflict of interest.


Concert: Washington Square Festival
LEAD: RAIN could not prevent the Washington Square Music Festival from beginning its 30th season Tuesday evening.
Even though the proceedings were moved indoors from Washington Square Park to the Loeb Student Center at New York University, a crowd of no fewer than 100 attended the concert, which began with a self-effacingly reluctant Parks Commissioner, Henry J.


Food and Agriculture Agency Has Been Catalyst for Third World
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Tube Rupture Releases Radioactivity in Virginia
LEAD: One of thousands of stainless steel tubes carrying superheated water to a nuclear power plant steam generator ruptured today and a tiny amount of radioactivity escaped into the atmosphere, officials said.


NORWEST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORWEST CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b157,800,000
c29,100,000
Per share
-
.87
6mo loss
127,100,000
c56,200,000
Share earns
-
1.67
b-After an additional allowance for loan losses of $204 million related to international loan exposures.


FIRST AMERICAN BANK &amp; TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMERICAN BANK &amp; TRUST (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
13,200,000
b2,600,000
Per share
-
.25
b-Net income.
The company said the latest quarter loss reflects a ''substantially increased'' provision for loan losses; they did not specify the amount.


A Confession: Tearing Up a 'Politically Embarrassing' Finding by Reagan
LEAD: The Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair heard from one of the most important witnesses, Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter.
Here are excerpts from his testimony, as recorded by The New York Times.


Reagan Supported, but Still Vulnerable
LEAD: Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter's assertion today that he had never told President Reagan about the diversion of Iranian arms profits to the rebels in Nicaragua gave the White House what it sought: evidence to corroborate Mr.
Reagan's own declarations.


Q &amp; A
LEAD: Q. The marble tops on two outdoor tables are pitted and dull, and I want to restore them.
Can I use a polish or a buffing compound?


ST PAUL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ST PAUL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,518,000
b4,125,000
6mo net inc
8,604,000
10,012,000
b-For the latest quarter includes a one-time pre-tax writedown of $869,000 related to the company's investment in the FSLIC secondary reserve, an action required by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board's decision to eliminate the FSLIC secondary reserve as of December 31, 1986; the year-ago quarter includes an after-tax charge of $723,000 from prepayments of Federal Home Loan Bank advances.


STRYKER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STRYKER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
36,850,000
32,154,000
Net inc
3,040,000
2,458,000
Share earns
.20
.16
6mo sales
74,000,000
64,482,000
Net inc
6,540,000
5,248,000
Share earns
.42
.34


HUFFY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUFFY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
99,509,000
86,446,000
Net inc
3,885,000
2,142,000
Share earns
.71
.40
6mo sales
181,377,000
161,602,000
Net inc
6,022,000
3,485,000
Share earns
1.10
.65


Income Up at Time Inc. And 2 Other Publishers
LEAD: Time Inc. said yesterday that its second-quarter net income rose 25.8 percent, citing cost-cutting at its magazine division and revenue gains in its cable operation.


North Korea Given Final Olympic Offer
LEAD: The International Olympic Committee offered North Korea one more concession in what it said was its final proposal in trying to solve the problem of North Korea's demand to be co-host of the 1988 Summer Games.


McClatchy Studies Ownership Shift
LEAD: McClatchy Newspapers, publishers of The Sacramento Bee and eight other dailies in California, Washington and Alaska, said that the corporation may convert to a publicly owned company by the end of this year.
The company has been privately owned by the McClatchy family for 130 years.


Manila Is Winner In United Nations
LEAD: Manila, last year's champion grass runner, began his campaign toward a possible Horse of the Year title with an easy 2 1/2-length victory tonight over Racing Star in the $150,000 United Nations Handicap at Atlantic City Race Course.


Amid the Shadows, Some Fine Baseball
LEAD: Now that the 58th All-Star Game is a memory, the lingering thought seems to be that it deserves to be played either in daytime or at night.
Not both.
But it would be incorrect to assume the contest was boring.


Brooklyn Memories
LEAD: To The Home Section:


HUNT, J B TRANSPORTATION SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUNT, J B TRANSPORTATION SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
67,661,000
49,335,000
Net inc
b6,075,000
c6,686,000
Share earns
.26
.28
6mo rev
131,416,000
92,801,000
Net inc
b12,053,000
c11,526,000
Share earns
.51
.49


Greenspan Hearings Set
LEAD: The Senate Banking Committee said today that the hearings on the nomination of Alan Greenspan as next chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, as well as those for David Ruder as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, would be held next week.
Mr.
Greenspan is to appear before the committee on Tuesday and Mr.


DERBY SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DERBY SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,132,000
1,330,000
Per share
.51
.60
6mo net inc
2,323,000
2,332,000
Per share
1.05
1.05


Rock: Steve Earle, at the Cat Club
LEAD: AFTER 13 years as a Nashville songwriter, Steve Earle has found his own audience -one that's large and growing.
He returned to New York for a show at the Cat Club late Tuesday night, a New-Music Seminar showcase.


EXCEL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXCEL BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,586,099
2,384,108
Per share
.36
-
6mo net
5,924,488
3,904,638
Per share
.83
-
The company went public last September.


Del Monte USA Names Successor to Its Leader
LEAD: Del Monte USA said yesterday that Fernando R. Gumucio, its president, had been named chairman and chief executive officer.
Succeeding Mr.
Gumucio as president is A. Ewan Macdonald, who has been senior vice president of marketing for the San Francisco-based fruit and vegetable processor.


Poindexter Thanked By Released Hostage
LEAD: A former hostage, David Jacobsen, left the audience during a break in the Iran-contra hearings today to shake hands with Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter and to thank him and Lieut Col.
Oliver L. North ''for getting me out and keeping me alive.''


Congress Cool to Japanese
LEAD: Japan's trade minister got a frosty reception on Capitol Hill today as he sought to repair political damage caused by the Toshiba Machine Company's illegal sale of sensitive technology to the Soviet Union.


Ersatz Refugees
LEAD:  To the Editor:


JUDGE GIVES LINDENAUER 2-YEAR PRISON SENTENCE
LEAD: Geoffrey G. Lindenauer, whose arrest for corrupt activities began the unraveling of New York City's worst municipal scandal in decades, was sentenced yesterday to two years in Federal prison and five years on probation for his crimes.


Israeli Inflation Up 1%
LEAD: Israeli inflation rose 1 percent in June, resulting in a 19.5 percent increase in the cost of living for 12 months, the Central Bureau of Statistics said today.
The June inflation rate was largely caused by price increases in public transportation, home maintenance and housing.
The figure was up from six-tenths of 1 percent in May, but down from a 1.6 percent inflation rise for June 1986.


COCA-COLA CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COCA-COLA CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,435,169,000
2,244,960,000
Net inc
266,370,000
225,499,000
Share earns
.70
.58
6mo rev
4,331,291,000
3,979,788,000
Net inc
451,818,000
386,690,000
Share earns
1.19
1.00


2 Sides of Busing Push for New Seattle Plan
LEAD: A widespread system of busing to achieve racial balance in schools that was instituted in Seattle 10 years ago has come under re-examination, and it may be cut back.


Networks Will Carry Washington Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live today beginning at 9 A.M. on the NBC television network, on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New York.


CANANDAIGUA WINE CO reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANANDAIGUA WINE CO (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
57,203,743
54,982,542
Net loss
2,775,970
b2,394,025
Share earns
-
.50
9mo sales
131,256,672
117,714,234
Net inc
742,545
6,000,714
Share earns
.15
1.25


More Clubs Admitting Women
LEAD: When Suzanne O'Hatnick was invited to join the Rotary Club in Baltimore last week, it came as a surprise.


Space Agency Names a Panel To Examine Rocket Accident
LEAD: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration today named a five-member board to investigate a launching pad accident that damaged a hydrogen tank on an Atlas-Centaur rocket.


A Jerusalem Diary
LEAD: Discovered quickly that there is no such thing as a dull dinner party in Jerusalem.
All you have to do if things get quiet is say one word: Sharon.


Advertising; Manning Already Back At Work at Thompson
LEAD: Burton J. Manning was already at work at the J. Walter Thompson Company yesterday, before the WPP Group could make an official announcement of his return and appointment as chief executive of the worldwide agency.


BISHOP JOSEPH G. VATH
LEAD: Bishop Joseph G. Vath, the leader of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Birmingham, died of a heart attack Tuesday night at University Hospital.
He was 69 years old.


A Busy Season for Burglars
LEAD: Summer might be the doldrums for many businesses, but it is a busy season for burglars because of all the homes left empty by vacationers.


Honeywell Net Up 50.4%
LEAD: Honeywell Inc. said that its second-quarter net income jumped 50.4 percent, largely reflecting a cost-cutting program initiated last year in which 4.4 percent of the company's work force was trimmed.
The Minneapolis-based military contractor and maker of environmental systems reported earnings of $54.3 million, or $1.21 a share, up from $36.1 million, or 80 cents a share, a year ago.


SEACOAST BANKING CORP OF FLA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEACOAST BANKING CORP OF FLA (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,047,000
890,000
Per share
.45
.38
Yr net inc
2,009,000
1,703,000
Per share
.86
.73


Long-Blooming Salvias For Lasting Enjoyment
LEAD: THE plants in a perennial garden are somewhat like friends.
Just as there are people who remain close even though we see them only once a year, there are perennials that have a very brief season of bloom: they speak their hello, as it were, and then call it quits until next year.


California Labor Panel a Target of Farm Union
LEAD: Twelve years after it was created amid strikes, boycotts and violence in the lettuce fields and table grape vineyards of California, the state's Agricultural Labor Relations Board has itself become the target of a boycott.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: HERE are some new products that should be of interest to homeowners and handymen.
All-Purpose Vise


Prices Fall on Trade Report
LEAD: Treasury bond prices fell more than a point yesterday, with all the decline coming early in the day in response to a larger-than-expected trade deficit in May.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Edmonton Oilers' star, Wayne Gretzky, the National Hockey League's most valuable player in each of the last eight seasons, has decided to play for Team Canada in the Canada Cup tournament, which begins next month. . . .
Dick Schofield, the shortstop who has played in every California Angels' game this season, has a minor separation of his left shoulder and will be sidelined for one to three weeks.


COMERICA INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMERICA INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,170,000
13,698,000
Per share
.10
1.21
6mo net inc
22,198,000
26,757,000
Per share
1.88
2.33
b-After a $36 million, or $2.03 per share, addition to the loan loss reserve.


DUN &amp; BRADSTREET CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DUN &amp; BRADSTREET CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
811,452,000
766,605,000
Net inc
102,451,000
89,196,000
Share earns
.67
.58
6mo rev
1,639,929,000
1,518,399,000
Net inc
201,451,000
174,138,000
Share earns
1.32
1.14


Poles Open a Mass Grave and an Old Wound
LEAD: Polish foresters have found a mass grave that local people believe contains the remains of hundreds of relatives killed by Soviet troops at the end of World War II.


CUOMO URGES STUDY OF PLAN FOR FULL-TIME LEGISLATURE
LEAD: Governor Cuomo today called for a study of the advisability of making New York's part-time Legislature a full-time body.


Becor Bid Raised
LEAD: Bear, Stearns &amp; Company said that it had increased its offer to acquire Becor Western Inc. to $16.60 a share in cash and notes, or an estimated total of $276 million.
The board of Becor, a Milwaukee-based aerospace and mining concern, is scheduled to meet Thursday to consider the four separate offers that it has received.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Household Finance Corp. is issuing $100 million of 8 1/2 percent noncallable Eurobonds due in 1990 at 101 1/4 through Union Bank of Switzerland.


AMERICAN LIST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN LIST CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,731,052
1,383,691
Net inc
549,889
447,691
Share earns
.20
.16


CONSOLIDATED RAIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED RAIL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
819,000,000
811,000,000
Net inc
72,000,000
c145,000,000
Share earns
1.04
2.21
6mo rev
1,607,000,000
1,586,000,000
Net inc
b158,000,000
c205,000,000
Share earns
2.30
3.10


SUMMARY OF ACTIONS IN NEW YORK LEGISLATURE'S 1987 SESSION
LEAD: The 1987 session of the New York State Legislature - its 210th - ended at 5:51 A.M. on July 11, with some of the most important bills not passed until the final 24 hours.


REPCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REPCO INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 26
1987
1986
Sales
5,210,000
4,203,000
Net inc
b39,000
c8,000
Share earns
.03
.01
6mo sales
9,915,000
8,590,000
Net inc
b54,000
c124,000
Share earns
.04
.10
b-Includes tax credits of $6,000 and $11,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


REEBOK INTERNATIONAL LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REEBOK INTERNATIONAL LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
358,791,000
215,566,000
Net inc
42,644,000
32,767,000
Share earns
.77
.62
6mo sales
640,558,000
390,091,000
Net inc
81,279,000
57,754,000
Share earns
1.49
1.15


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, JULY 16, 1987
LEAD:  International


Restoration Artisans Pool Their Skills
LEAD: A century ago, legions of craftsmen built the stately Victorian homes that still line the hills of this city.
Twenty years ago, flower children descended on the structures, many of them long neglected, and recast them in multiple hues of fluorescent paint.
Today the great houses have come back into their own, and meticulous restoration artisans are at work on them.


Korea Opposition Chief Demands Premier's Ouster
LEAD: Kim Young Sam, an opposition leader, demanded today that President Chun Doo Hwan replace the Prime Minister he appointed this week and warned that a fair election is unlikely.


Rock: The Bad Brains
LEAD: THE Bad Brains, who performed late Monday night at Club 1018, aren't just the best (and possibly only) Rastafarian hard-core-rock band.
With power, noise, wild frenzy and pinpoint accuracy, they're a rock band whose visceral impact is absolutely state-of-the-art.
Formed in Washington, D.C., and based since 1979 in New York, the Bad Brains have built a considerable following among hard-core fans, dozens of whom slam-danced and dived into the crowd


No Pension Penalty
LEAD:  To the Editor:


HUBBELL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUBBELL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
147,511,000
141,785,000
Net inc
16,229,000
14,043,000
Share earns
.62
.55
6mo sales
288,314,000
280,628,000
Net inc
30,636,000
26,461,000
Share earns
1.17
1.04


Judge Rules Against 'Tilted Arc' Sculptor in Suit
LEAD: A Federal judge ruled against Richard Serra Tuesday in a portion of a suit in which the artist contends that his reputation and career have been harmed by efforts to remove his sculpture ''Tilted Arc'' from a plaza in downtown Manhattan.


IP TIMBERLANDS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IP TIMBERLANDS LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
41,000,000
46,000,000
Net inc
22,000,00
23,000,000
Share earns
.56
.51
6mo rev
79,000,000
90,000,000
Shares outst
45,900,000
45,300,000
Net inc
41,000,000
47,000,000
Share earns
1.12
1.08
Shares outst
45,600,000
45,300,000


Back Surgery for Orr
LEAD: Louis Orr, the Knicks' forward, will undergo back surgery today to repair a herniated disk.
The procedure will be performed by Dr.
Mark Snyder at Christ Hospital in Cincinnati, where Orr grew up and still lives.
Orr has been troubled by back pain throughout his career.
Last season, it forced him to miss seven games.


Ballard to Play in Italy
LEAD: Greg Ballard is leaving the National Basketball Association after 10 seasons to play with the Pesaro team in Italy, he announced through the Golden State Warriors' office yesterday. ''I feel that this is a very good opportunity for my family and particularly for our children, who will have an opportunity to become bilingual and to experience an Italian life style,'' he said.


Old West Goes to Tokyo
LEAD: A company in Montana is transplanting some of the flavor of the Old West to Japan by helping to build an authentic log building in the heart of Tokyo.


FIRST COMMERCIAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST COMMERCIAL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
331,332
162,802
Per share
.16
.08
6mo net inc
362,013
266,122
Per share
.18
.15


UNITED TECHNOLOGIES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED TECHNOLOGIES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,285,187,000
3,959,376,000
Net inc
156,001,000
b64,928,000
Share earns
1.19
.44
Shares outst
131,210,000
119,063,000
6mo sales
8,222,526,000
7,419,203,000
Net inc
254,203,000
192,523,000
Share earns
1.94
1.37
Shares outst
130,998,000
120,954,000


White House Remains Part of Clinton's Plan
LEAD: Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas said today that he hoped to run for President some day, although he has ruled himself out of the 1988 Democratic race.


Delta Loyalists Alarmed And Bruised by Mishaps
LEAD: The elderly woman from Mississippi telephoned Delta Air Lines's headquarters here this week, and, in a frail but polite voice, explained how she had flown no other airline but Delta for the last 33 years.


INSIDE
LEAD:  U.S. Questions Pakistan
The United States wants Pakistan to explain an apparent effort to illegally acquire American materials for making nuclear weapons.
Page A3.
Ruling on Deaver Jury
Overruling the trial judge, a Federal appeals court said jury selection in the perjury trial of Michael K.


Oil Above $22 a Barrel; Gulf Raid Rumors Cited
LEAD: Oil futures advanced above the $22-a-barrel level for the first time in 18 months yesterday.
Prices were buoyed by strong demand for gasoline and market anxiety over rumors of an attack by Iraqi warplanes on an Iranian oilfield in the Persian Gulf.


Jury Selection Ordered Open In Deaver Case
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today ordered the judge in the perjury trial of Michael K. Deaver to conduct the jury selection in public.


Yank Job for Chambliss
LEAD: Chris Chambliss, who will be forever remembered for his 1976 playoff home run against Kansas City that won a pennant, returned to the Yankees yesterday in a nonplaying position.
Chambliss will work primarily with minor league hitters and be involved in player development and evaluation of major league hitters as a scout.


Fed Lets 6 Banks Offer New Security
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board today approved applications from six of the nation's largest bank holding companies to underwrite and deal in securities backed by consumer debt, such as credit card and automobile loans.


New York Ambulances Are Fewer, And Are Slower Answering Calls
LEAD: Plagued by a deteriorating and aging fleet of ambulances, New York City's Emergency Medical Services is under severe strain and on a few nights this summer has been able to use barely half the vehicles its guidelines call for, officials at the agency said yesterday.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: Tour de France Golz Wins 15th Stage: Rolf Golz of West Germany won the 15th stage yesterday, outsprinting Roland Le Clerc of France and Martin Earley of Ireland, but Charles Mottet of France kept the overall lead.
Golz was timed in 3 hours 57 minutes 59 seconds for the 102-mile race from Luz Ardiden to Blagnac.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JULY 16, 1987
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL  A3-15


USAir-Piedmont Link
LEAD: The Department of Transportation refused a request to speed up its antitrust review of USAir Group Inc.'s planned acquisition of Piedmont Aviation Inc.
The department said it had decided that a full hearing on the bid, which would create the nation's seventh-largest airline, was necessary. ''As we stated in our instituting order, USAir's acquisition of Piedmont presents substantial competitive issues requiring careful examination,'' the department said.


Generation Struggle Divides Protestants In Northern Ireland
LEAD: The marching season is under way, with its annual parades intended to show the historic unity of the Protestant majority in this province of Britain.


Text of Key Amendment
LEAD: Here are the text of the legislation known as the Boland amendment, and excerpts from testimony by Robert C. McFarlane, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and Rear Adm.
John M Poindexter on its meaning  The Amendments


CADE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CADE INDUSTRIES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,197,000
15,056,000
Net inc
392,900
343,900
Share earns
.02
.02
6mo sales
26,520,000
31,064,000
Net inc
550,000
b3,487,000
Share earns
.03
.21
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $2,856,000.


White Knights: The Dark Side
LEAD: IN corporate takeover contests, many besieged companies have turned to a buyer friendly to management rather than end up in the arms of the first bidder.
The role of this so-called white knight, however, is becoming more and more suspect since the acquired company often is put through the wringer in any event.


Hall of Fame Adds a Window
LEAD: The window that a 3-year-old Pete Rose broke with the first line drive of his life is going to be broken forever - but not at the old Rose home in Cincinnati.


TELEFLEX INCORPORATED reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELEFLEX INCORPORATED (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
66,567,000
54,104,000
Net inc
5,285,000
4,581,000
Share earns
.48
.42
6mo rev
132,358,000
103,016,000
Net inc
9,945,000
8,359,000
Share earns
.90
.77


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  53d Street Hoopla


AIDS POSING DILEMMA IN RIGHT-TO-DIE STRUGGLE
LEAD: For two years, Thomas Wirth watched one of his closest friends wither away and die of AIDS.
Mr.
Wirth vowed he would never allow himself to suffer the same way.


2 IN '88 CAMPAIGN FAULTED ON FUNDS
LEAD: The Rev.
Pat Robertson and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson were the only major Presidential hopefuls who did not file campaign finance reports today, prompting criticism from rival campaigns that they were hiding their finances.


AMERICAN TELEVISION &amp; COMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN TELEVISION &amp; COMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
177,008,000
158,180,000
Net inc
11,900,000
12,552,000
Share earns
.11
.14
Shares outst
109,560,000
89,435,000
6mo rev
346,986,000
313,409,000
Net inc
23,299,000
28,626,000
Share earns
.21
.32
Shares outst
109,526,000
89,435,000


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS (PUERTO RICO) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS (PUERTO RICO)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,849,055
2,745,643
Share earns
.57
-
6mo net inc
6,091,532
4,742,961
Share earns
1.13
-
b-After a charge of $503,000 for the writeoff of the secondary reserve.


The Highlights
LEAD: John M. Poindexter took responsibility for authorizing the diversion of profits from the Iran arms sales to Nicaraguan rebels, and said he withheld the information from President Reagan.


Trivia Question
LEAD: Who were the last two Americans to win heavyweight gold medals at the Olympics?
They are George Foreman in 1968 at Mexico City and Henry Tillman in 1984 at Los Angeles.
Foreman, the former world heavyweight champion on the comeback trail, has been offered a Sept. 5 fight with Tillman, according to Tillman's promoter, Dan Duva, and the match has been submitted for approval and purchase to the ABC-TV network.


Game in Adirondacks Saw Contract Made With Skill
LEAD: Most of those who headed out of New York City in the past week were no doubt thinking about sport, sun and socializing.
But for some, a little rubber bridge was a satisfactory way to spend a warm evening or a wet day.


BRANCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRANCH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
7,789,000
7,092,000
Per share
.98
.91
6mo net inc
15,573,000
13,449,000
Per share
1.97
1.73


Trade Gap Widens as Imports Mount, Led by Oil
LEAD: The nation's trade deficit widened to $14.4 billion in May as imports climbed to the highest level on record, the Commerce Department reported today.


Taiwan-Boeing
LEAD: The Taiwanese Government, engaged in a campaign to spend $2.28 billion on American products, said it would negotiate the purchase of six Boeing Company 747-400 aircraft for $1 billion.
The Government also said it planned to buy more aircraft later for $700 million.


SOUTHINGTON SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHINGTON SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
622,000
500,000
Per share
.23
-
6mo net inc
1,300,000
1,000,000
Per share
.73
-
The bank went public July 1986.


EQUIMARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EQUIMARK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,196,000
c2,899,000
Per share
.07
.06
Shares outst
36,149,000
34,872,000
6mo net
6,095,000
cd723,000
Per share
.13
-
Shares outst
35,505,000
30,734,000


5 Actors, 22 Roles, In One Play
LEAD: Although they change jackets or gowns, a cap or a shawl to play 22 roles, the five actors in ''Hard Times,'' the adaptation of the Dickens novel, remain clearly recognizable.
But there is no mistaking their personae.


IRVING J. RIFKIN
LEAD: Irving J. Rifkin, a chemist and former owner of chemical laboratories in Brooklyn, died Tuesday at the Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn.
He was 83 years old and had resided in North Miami, Fla.


VANGUARD SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VANGUARD SAVINGS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,219,000
701,000
Per share
.31
.18
6mo net inc
2,379,000
1,570,000
Per share
.61
.40


CANRAD INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANRAD INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,242,100
9,865,300
Net inc
474,700
483,300
Share earns
.40
.41
6mo sales
20,345,800
19,091,000
Net inc
601,100
892,700
Share earns
.51
.75
The latest second quarter and 6-month include the effects of the acquisition of certain assets and the business of the Measurement Systems division of Page-Wilson Corp., effective March 29.


Iraqi Jets Hit at Bases Of Iranian Speedboats
LEAD: Iraqi jets hit tiny islands and offshore oil platforms used as bases for Iran's Revolutionary Guard speedboat fleet for the third straight day today as tensions mounted in the Persian Gulf.


Advertising; CBS Magazine Network Alters Rate Structure
LEAD: The CBS Magazine Network, which tries to induce advertisers to use a number of the company's magazines in order to win a discount, yesterday announced that with the October issues it is changing its rates and rate base and introducing an expanded volume discount.


NEC Head Speaks Out
LEAD: American companies should become more competitive in world markets instead of merely urging Japan to reduce its huge trade surplus single-handed, the president of a major Japanese electronics company said today. ''I hope the United States will do more than give unpalatable advice to other countries, that instead it will do more to improve its own competitiveness,'' said the NEC Corporation's president, Tadahiro Sekimoto.


'Nerds II' in First Place In Week's Ticket Sales
LEAD: ''Revenge of the Nerds II,'' a comedy sequel about a bunch of misfits who go to Fort Lauderdale for a spring break from college, earned $7.9 million in its debut weekend to take first place for the week at the box office.


Lawsuits Triple in Federal Courts
LEAD: The number of lawsuits filed in Federal courts has nearly tripled since 1970, according to a recent report.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Although I was convinced that we could properly do it and that the President would approve it if asked, I made a very deliberate decision not to ask the President so that I could insulate him from the decision and provide some future deniability for the President if it ever leaked out.''


CONTINENTAL ILLINOIS CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINENTAL ILLINOIS CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b476,900,000
c40,500,000
Per share
-
.15
6mo net loss
b433,800,000
cd79,800,000
Per share
-
.29
b-Includes a provision of $510.1 million for loan loss reserves to less developed countries for both the quarter and 6 months.


East German Plans Bonn Trip
LEAD: Erich Honecker will become the first East German leader to visit West Germany when he goes there in September, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's office said today.


HIPOTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HIPOTRONICS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,504,853
4,107,611
Net inc
459,428
353,648
Share earns
.33
.25
6mo sales
8,853,642
8,247,400
Net inc
895,099
685,757
Share earns
.64
.48


Witness Is Principal Target Of Grand Jury Investigation
LEAD: Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter's lawyer said today that his client had been named the ''primary target'' of a Federal grand jury investigating the Iran-contra affair and that there was an ''imminent threat of prosecution.''


TIME INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIME INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,042,000,000
945,000,000
Net inc
b78,000,000
62,000,000
Share earns
1.30
.98
6mo rev
1,981,000,000
1,819,000,000
Net inc
124,000,000
112,000,000
Share earns
2.06
1.76


U.S. Pressing Pakistan on Export Plot
LEAD: The United States is urgently seeking an explanation from Pakistan of an apparent effort by a Pakistani businessman to illegally acquire American materials for making nuclear weapons, the State Department announced today.


NEWPORT PHARMACEUTICALS INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWPORT PHARMACEUTICALS INTERNATIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,953,000
1,966,000
Net loss
801,000
443,000
Yr rev
10,311,000
8,841,000
Net loss
1,591,000
820,000


Pension Deal Is Called Illegal
LEAD: The head of the Federal agency that guarantees pension plans asserted today that an agreement between the bankrupt LTV Corporation and its unions to enhance pension benefits for 100,000 workers was illegal and threatened the pension protection program for the entire nation.


Hialeah Rebuffed On Racing Dates
LEAD: A Florida appellate court today upheld the award of the lucrative middle-winter racing dates to Gulfstream Park, a change that Hialeah Park officials have said could mean the financial ruin of their track.


DICEON ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DICEON ELECTRONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
30,138,000
22,121,000
Net inc
2,607,000
b2,029,000
Share earns
.42
.35
Shares outst
6,819,199
5,746,088
9mo sales
78,702,000
63,402,000
Net inc
6,624,000
b5,210,000
Share earns
1.09
.91
Shares outst
6,403,773
5,742,252


Output Barely Rose in June; Backlog of Unsold Cars Cited
LEAD: Production at the nation's factories, mines and utilities edged up slightly in June as strength in non-manufacturing areas helped offset a big drop in auto production, the Government reported today.


Pan Am Unions
LEAD: The joint labor council of Pan American World Airways said that it had retained Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. to advise the group, which represents most of the major unions at the carrier, on alternatives for restructuring the airline.
The council also said that it had directed Drexel to seek investors willing to put large amounts of capital into the company, which has an aging fleet and sold off most of its Pacific routes last year to raise cash.


Dakar Journal; For 60 Afrikaners, a Long Trek Into the Future
LEAD: A balance of West African ritual and Senegalese hospitality provided the backdrop for a symbolic act here in the last few days: the acceptance of a white African tribe as a full-fledged part of Africa.


Teacher's Union Shows It Likes Republicans, Too
LEAD: The National Education Association, which historically has aligned itself with the Democratic Party, has quietly begun an outreach program among Republican members in an effort to increase the organization's political leverage.


J. Rives Childs Is Dead; Authority on Casanova
LEAD: J. Rives Childs, a former American diplomat, author and an authority on Casanova, died of a cardiac-pulmonary infection yesterday at the Windsor Nursing Home in Richmond, where he had lived for the last four years.
He was 94 years old.


Athletics Release Cey
LEAD: Ron Cey, the 39-year-old third baseman with 316 home runs and 1,139 runs batted in during his major league career, was released yesterday by the Oakland Athletics.
Cey, used mostly as a designated hitter by the Athletics, had a .221 average, 4 home runs and 11 runs batted in in 104 times at bat this season, his first in the American League.


Extra Special
LEAD: The National League's 2-0 victory in 13 innings Tuesday night in Oakland, Calif., extended its unbroken string of extra-inning All-Star Game victories to eight.
The American League held the lead at some point in six of the losses, but in the 24 extra innings comprising the streak has been outscored by the National League, 10-1, with its lone run unearned in 1961.


Ex-Wellcome Chief Joins Drug Concern
LEAD: William M. Sullivan, a former chief executive at Burroughs Wellcome, a leading pharmaceutical company, is taking similar duties at Exovir, a tiny pharmaceutical enterprise in the development stage.


Washing Fragile Textiles By Hand
LEAD: IN this age of the dry cleaner, there is still a place for hand washing at home.
Many items, like fine lingerie and heirloom handkerchiefs, require that special handling.
But hand washing is more than just applying elbow grease in a sudsy basin of water.
Experts describe it as a gentle art.


AMR Net Off; '86 Gain Cited
LEAD: The AMR Corporation, parent of American Airlines, said yesterday that it earned $92.2 million, or $1.51 a share, in the second quarter, off 33.2 percent from $138 million, or $2.23 a share, a year ago.


MICOM SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICOM SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
49,028,000
46,212,000
Net inc
2,896,000
1,491,000
Year-earlier results are restated for May 10 acquisition of International Software Database Corp., which was accounted for as a pooling of interests.


MCGRAW HILL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCGRAW HILL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
425,867,000
378,026,000
Net inc
40,007,000
37,214,000
Share earns
.79
.73
6mo rev
797,409,000
711,212,000
Net inc
62,467,000
64,902,000
Share earns
1.23
1.28


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allegheny Beverage Corp., Cheverly, Md., announced the completion of the sale of its laundry services unit for $72.5 million.
Allegheny refused to identify the buyer.


Diction in Providence
LEAD: To The Home Section:


At Least 42 Are Killed by Typhoon in Korea
LEAD: At least 42 people were killed and 66 others were missing today after a typhoon smashed across the southern coast, demolishing settlements with 80 mile-an-hour winds, emergency officials said.


FIRST FINANCIAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FINANCIAL BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,736,000
2,390,000
Per share
1.62
1.04
6mo net inc
6,292,000
4,599,000
Per share
2.73
1.99
b-Includes a non-recurring after-tax securities investment gain of $1.3 million and is after a $500,000 reduction in total operating costs.


Eliot Ness to Vanna White
LEAD: President Reagan takes great glee in describing how decisively he will veto tax increases or spending bills.
And he frequently reaches for a reference from pop culture to convey his determination.


The President As Avid Reader
LEAD: During Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter's testimony, the former national security adviser was asked about access to the President and Mr.
Reagan's reading habits.


SCHENECTADY CHILD-SUFFOCATION CASE GOES TO JURY
LEAD: After six weeks of testimony in the Schenectady County Court, seven men and five women were asked today to decide whether Mary Beth Tinning fatally suffocated her 3 1/2-month-old daughter, Tami Lynne.


Tempted to Tell Reagan
LEAD: During the hearings yesterday, Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter was extensively questioned on how much he told President Reagan about exactly how the contras were being financed.


Women in Power Are No Better Than Men
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Where Clothes Make the Man
LEAD: What should the well-dressed witness wear to a Congressional investigation?


NBC Strikes Out in the All-Star Game
LEAD: Corporate images, to the extent they exist and may be defined, are an unscientific mix of Madison Avenue hype and real-world achievement.
The result is a human-like personality that outsiders often ascribe to a company and the mostly anonymous people who work for it.


ITT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ITT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,000,000,000
4,400,000,000
Net inc
b264,000,000
c160,000,000
Share earns
1.73
1.05
6mo rev
9,500,000,000
8,400,000,000
Net inc
b427,000,000
c266,000,000
Share earns
2.80
1.75


New Supercollider Deadline
LEAD: The Energy Department today gave states more time to submit proposals for construction of the $4.4 billion ''supercollider,'' a powerful atom smasher.
Proposals to house the major scientific installation are now due Sept. 2 instead of Aug. 3.
At least 20 states are believed certain to submit proposals.


VALLEY NATIONAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VALLEY NATIONAL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
7,698,951
7,103,000
Per share
.91
.84
6mo net inc
15,309,360
14,211,019
Per share
1.81
1.68


MORRIS BRAM
LEAD: Morris Bram, president and chairman of the board of the American Israel Numismatic Association, died of a heart attack Tuesday at his home in Tamarac, Fla.
He was 78 years old.


BANK OF DELAWARE reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF DELAWARE (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,139,837
3,417,369
Per share
.55
.47
6mo net inc
7,947,670
6,737,264
Per share
1.07
.92
Share earnings reflect a 100-percent stock dividend to be paid in August.


PIP Printing Gets Kane Bid
LEAD: Postal Instant Press, a franchiser of 1,100 instant printing centers, said it had received an unsolicited $77.3 million buyout bid from the Kane-Miller Corporation and plans to consider the proposal within the next two weeks.
The bid comes after PIP adopted an anti-takeover measure last December and its founder and chairman, Bill L


AMERITECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERITECH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,365,000,000
2,353,900,000
Net inc
275,800,000
284,500,000
Share earns
1.96
1.96
Shares outst
140,972,000
145,088,000
6mo rev
4,665,500,000
4,641,700,000
Net inc
564,800,000
569,200,000
Share earns
3.99
3.91
Shares outst
141,578,000
145,406,000


COOPER TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COOPER TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
164,340,957
143,681,694
Net inc
7,348,479
5,677,398
Share earns
.72
.56
6mo sales
312,494,063
266,841,125
Net inc
13,717,806
9,095,364
Share earns
1.35
.90


PARKER DRILLING COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARKER DRILLING COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
27,328,000
49,864,000
Net loss
17,634,000
15,359,000
9mo rev
88,335,000
164,795,000
Net loss
58,414,000
45,355,000
The company said a big part of its losses results from its policy of taking full depreciation on its rigs, whether working or not.


METS SETTING OUT TO OVERCOME THE ODDS
LEAD: Act Two opens tonight in Shea Stadium, with Dwight Gooden pitching against Bill Gullickson of the Cincinnati Reds and with just 75 games left for the Mets to head off the great collapse of 1987.


Correction
LEAD: An obituary of David L. Dimmock yesterday misidentified the founder of the advertising agency of Bradley, Dimmock &amp; Hungerford.
The founder was Sam Bradley.


Midland Bank Bars Bid for Subsidiary
LEAD: Midland Bank, Britain's third biggest, said it had received and rejected an unsolicited offer from Morgan Stanley &amp; Company to buy its stock-trading subsidiary, Greenwell Montagu Securities. ''Midland has assured its staff of its commitment to a major continuing interest in the equities market which lies behind the decision,'' a bank spokesman said.


Contrary Justice
LEAD:  To the Editor:


DPL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DPL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
214,313,000
208,728,000
Net inc
25,638,000
23,583,000
Share earns
.61
.57
6mo rev
503,316,000
533,154,000
Net inc
74,019,000
69,346,000
Share earns
1.78
1.69


US TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*US TRUST (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,414,000
7,043,000
Share earns
.73
.71
6mo net inc
b16,283,000
15,219,000
Share earns
1.61
1.54
b-Includes net income of $2.9 million from a change in accounting for certain commissions and fees, which was offset by a $2.8 million charge related to a revised estimate of future revenue from a sublease on an office building.


Continental Illinois Deficit
LEAD: The Continental Illinois Corporation, parent of the Continental Illinois Bank and Trust Company, said yesterday that it lost $476.9 million in the second quarter, almost entirely because of a $510.1 million provision for loan losses.
The unusually large provision is to account for Continental's problem loans in the developing world.


Parents and Freedom
LEAD: To The Home Section I read the article ''Family Ties: Dream House for 2, With the Family Nearby''  [ July 2 ] , by Suzanne Slesin with great amusement.


PFIZER INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PFIZER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,227,100,000
1,117,900,000
Net inc
175,800,000
156,100,000
Share earns
1.03
.92
6mo sales
2,346,700,000
2,150,000,000
Net inc
367,800,000
325,000,000
Share earns
2.16
1.92


'Ou Est ''Mona Lisa?,'' ' Or, Lost in the Louvre
LEAD: The Louvre, for centuries the palace of French kings, is at the moment a royal mess.


Howe Starts Comeback
LEAD: ''I think the question has been answered if I can still pitch,'' said Steve Howe after throwing three hitless innings in his first appearance since being banned from baseball for drug abuse.
After picking up the Oklahoma City 89ers' 5-4 victory over the Iowa Cubs Tuesday in American Association action, the left-hander said, ''I'm going to win wherever I'm at.


SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
250,056,000
141,530,000
Net inc
37,177,000
16,409,000
Share earns
.74
.34
Yr sales
958,065,000
459,836,000
Net inc
139,741,000
34,536,000
Share earns
2.81
.72


Pfizer Profits Up 12.6%
LEAD: Pfizer Inc. said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose 12.6 percent, to $175.8 million, or $1.03 a share, from $156.1 million, or 92 cents a share, a year ago.
Sales totaled $1.23 billion, up 9.8 percent from $1.12 billion.
Sales gains were recorded in all business segments, with the weakness of the dollar contributing to overseas growth, the pharmaceuticals company said.


PARK COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARK COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
38,777,000
35,514,000
Net inc
5,092,000
4,438,000
Share earns
.37
.32
6mo rev
70,882,000
65,062,000
Net inc
7,120,000
6,316,000
Share earns
.52
.46


HOSPITAL CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOSPITAL CORP OF AMERICA (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,294,798,000
1,250,902,000
Net inc
61,336,000
68,873,000
Share earns
.74
.82
Shares outst
82,552,000
83,976,000
6mo rev
2,592,203,000
2,501,304,000
Net inc
141,477,000
162,937,000
Share earns
1.72
1.92


'I Wouldn't Lie To the President'
LEAD: In the hearings yesterday, Admiral Poindexter was asked what he would have told the President if asked about the Iran-contra affair.


Bo Jackson's 'Hobby'
LEAD: To anyone who has ever stood on the sideline at a National Football League game, the noise of the collisions sounds more like an automobile crash than that of a ''hobby.'' But in explaining his decision to join the Los Angeles Raiders as a running back after his last baseball game as a Kansas City Royals outfielder this year, Bo Jackson described pro football as a ''hobby.


COAST RV INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COAST RV INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
34,827,000
33,718,000
Net inc
1,355,000
870,000
Share earns
.30
.21
6mo sales
55,412,000
52,336,000
Net inc
1,378,000
144,000
Share earns
.32
.04
Shares outst
4,846,000
3,187,801


KING WORLD PRODUCTIONS reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KING WORLD PRODUCTIONS (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
37,610,000
23,130,000
Net inc
4,328,000
2,183,000
Share earns
.14
.07
9mo rev
175,359,000
99,090,000
Net inc
21,921,000
11,994,000
Share earns
.71
.39


Bush Won't Debate Sept. 2
LEAD: Vice President Bush will not take part in a debate among Republican Presidential hopefuls that is scheduled to be televised Sept. 2 on the Public Broadcasting System program ''Firing Line,'' according to Warren Steibel, the producer of the program.
Mr.
Bush's campaign office said Tuesday that the Vice President would not appear because he would not have formally announced his candidacy by then, Mr.


Calendar: Golf, Stars And Terra Cotta
LEAD:  Miniature Golf: Sacred and Mundane  Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); 212-753-1722.


Robert Francis, a Poet Hailed by Frost, Dies
LEAD: Robert Churchill Francis, once described by Robert Frost as ''the best neglected poet,'' died Monday in Cooley Dickenson Hospital in Northampton.
He was 85 years old.
Mr.
Francis had lived simply in a two-room home here for more than 40 years.
In 1984 he received the Academy of American Poets Followship Award for distinguished achievement.


3 OF PRINCIPALS IN DISTRICT LOSE THEIR POSITIONS
LEAD: Three principals in the troubled Community School District 6 in upper Manhattan were dismissed yesterday by New York City's central Board of Education, which found that the process by which the principals were hired a year ago was based on political rather than educational considerations, officials said.


Contract Won By McDonnell
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that it plans to launch two satellites for a British broadcaster beginning in 1989 in what would be the first commercial use of its Delta rocket.


ALLSTAR INNS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLSTAR INNS (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,270,000
-
Net inc
1,227,000
-
Share earns
.11
-
The company went public in April.


Amid Gold Boom, Skittishness
LEAD: It is hard to find an executive in the gold mining business in North America who does not believe that life right now is too good to be true.
But whether that view means it is time to expand or time to bail out depends on whether the executive thinks the current gold boom will bring on the next bust.


Administration Moves to Block Congressional Deficit-Cutting Plan
LEAD: The Reagan Administration moved this week to stop Congress from achieving most of a $7.2 billion deficit-reducing proposal for the 1988 budget.


3 OF 25 DIE IN ARIZONA DESERT TREK AFTER CROSSING THE BORDER FOR JOBS
LEAD: Three men died in a group of 25 trying to walk across 50 miles of searing desert, the authorities said today.


Soviet Opening a New Jewish Route to Israel
LEAD: The Soviet Union is opening an East European pathway for Jewish emigration Thursday by sending out at least four emigrants on a flight to Bucharest, Rumania, and ticketing them through to Israel, friends of the four said today.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Sunday about young drinkers on the Upper East Side in New York City included an incorrect description from the State Liquor Authority for the status of the Zulu Lounge.
The bar has not been cited for serving liquor to minors.


CROSSLAND SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROSSLAND SAVINGS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b20,599,000
c20,233,000
Share earns
1.23
1.21
6mo net inc
b56,383,000
c43,362,000
Share earns
3.49
2.73
b-Includes tax credits of $11,570,000 for the quarter and $30,363,000 for the six months.


BURLINGTON INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURLINGTON INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
873,744,000
688,095,000
Net inc
b17,883,000
14,015,000
Share earns
.63
.50
9mo sales
2,369,993,000
2,051,237,000
Net inc
47,249,000
c42,370,000
Share earns
1.71
1.50


BANK OF GRANITE reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF GRANITE
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,128,449
949,724
Per share
.75
.63
6mo net inc
2,203,852
1,861,650
Per share
1.47
1.24


Upswing Seen In Components
LEAD: A MAJOR rebound could be in store for distributors of electronic components, according to analysts who follow this highly fragmented industry.


Poindexter, a Professorial Air and Detachment
LEAD: Once it was a President who said ''the buck stops here.''


JOB TRAINING BILL ADVANCES IN HOUSE
LEAD: The House Education and Labor Committee approved its version of a new work and education program for welfare recipients today after two days of minor dispute between Democrats and Republicans.


Jim Hawthorne, 63, an Actor And Tenor, Is Dead of Cancer
LEAD: Jim Hawthorne, a theater and television actor, died Monday of lung cancer in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 63 years old.


Boxcar Survivor Freed
LEAD: The only survivor of a bungled smuggling attempt in which 18 illegal aliens died has been released, according to Border Patrol agents.
The survivor, Miguel Tostado Rodriguez, 21, had been held as a material witness by Border Patrol agents in El Paso.
Agents found Mr.
Tostado and the bodies of the 18 aliens, all from central Mexico, in a boxcar on July 2 in Sierra Blanca, 90 miles east of El


Fox TV Scores a 2d Place in Ratings
LEAD: The Fox Broadcasting Company's ''Werewolf'' cut into ratings of the three major commercial networks Saturday in the fledgling network's first week as part of the Nielsen ratings.


WARD SAYS BLACKS HOLD HIM TO HIGHER MARK
LEAD: Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward, speaking to a group of black journalists, complained yesterday that blacks who are faulting his performance never criticized his white predecessors in the same way and were failing to give him credit for his achievements.


The Presidency: Reagan and His 'Golden Oldies'
LEAD: President Reagan has described his current package of economic proposals as ''golden oldies,'' a collection of Ronald Reagan's Greatest Hits.


FIRST FLORIDA BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FLORIDA BANKS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
11,883,000
b11,368,000
Per share
.74
.72
6mo net inc
23,045,000
22,756,000
Per share
1.44
1.44
b-Includes securities gains of $726,000.


Leaks as 'an Art Form'
LEAD: During a discussion of the mechanics of shipping arms to Iran, Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter set forth his views on the problem of leaks of sensitive information.


Olympic Hall Inductees
LEAD: Two men and two women were inducted into the United States Olympic Hall of Fame in Durham, N.C., yesterday.
The men were the former heavyweight boxing champion Floyd Patterson, the 1952 Olympic middleweight gold medalist, and Dr.
Leroy T. Walker, The Athletics Congress president, who coached the 1976 United States track and field team.


Poland Says Bodies in Mass Grave Are Germans
LEAD: The Polish Government's chief spokesman said today that an examination of remains in a mass grave in northeastern Poland had yielded evidence that the bodies were of German soldiers.


Women's Movement, Its Ideals Accepted, Faces Subtler Issues
LEAD: As the 21st meeting of the National Organization for Women starts in Philadelphia today, NOW and other feminist organizations seem to be at an ebb, torn internally over difficult new issues and struggling to hold on to gains already made.


McClatchy Maps Future Of Family's Newspapers
LEAD: The McClatchy Newspapers, publishers of The Sacramento Bee and eight other daily papers in California, Washington and Alaska, have been owned and operated by the same family for four generations.
But, prompted by the recent sales of other privately owned newspapers in Detroit, Des Moines and Louisville,


U.S. FEARS SOVIET IMPERILS A SUMMIT BY STAND ON ARMS
LEAD: Administration officials, frustrated and disappointed by recent Soviet attitudes toward arms control talks, say prospects for a fall meeting between President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, are fading.


Hart to Talk at a Calmer Time
LEAD: Gary Hart said today that he would discuss the collapse of his Presidential campaign ''when tempers have cooled and people are a little more objective about it.''


Claudio Arrau, Pianist
LEAD: The pianist Claudio Arrau is to be the soloist in a performance of Beethoven's Concerto in E flat with the Waterloo Festival Orchestra tomorrow evening at 8:30 at Waterloo Village in Stanhope, N.J.
Gerard Schwarz conducts the program, which also includes Ibert's ''Escales'' and Piston's Fourth Symphony.


Music: A New Violetta in City Opera's 'Traviata'
LEAD: THE New York City Opera's production of ''La Traviata,'' which began its run Wednesday evening at the New York State Theater, brought to the stage an outstanding young soprano in the role of Violetta.
Marilyn Mims, making her City Opera debut, sang in a strong, fresh, flexible, pleasing voice, and her performance drew long rounds of well-deserved applause.


Santa Fe Sale
LEAD: The Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation said it had agreed to sell its Robert McKee Construction business to the Jacobs Engineering Group Inc.
The company did not disclose the price, but it said the unit had $274 million in revenue in 1986.
The move was seen as Santa Fe's first step in its corporate reorganization, which was announced June 30 when the Interstate Commerce Commission refused to reconsider its rejection of the planned merger of Santa Fe's two railroads.


THE EVENING HOURS
LEAD: NEW YORK woke briefly but energetically from its July social torpor this week, mostly to celebrate the French national holiday Bastille Day, which fell on Tuesday.


CAPACITY USE IN JUNE UP SLIGHTLY
LEAD: The nation's factories, mines and utilities operated at 79.7 percent of capacity in June, up modestly from the operating rate last year, the Government reported today.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.50
6.38
6.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.56
5.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.57
5.82
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.21
8.23
7.10
30-YR.


Richardson Plays But Team Forfeits
LEAD: The Jersey Jammers forfeited their United States Basketball League game against the Staten Island Stallions tonight for using Micheal Ray Richardson, who was under suspension for fighting.


Rested Bakkers Plot Moves From Yacht
LEAD: Far from the PTL television ministry in South Carolina, Jim and Tammy Bakker have spent the last few days here plotting their next moves from a different perspective: the deck of a yacht owned by their lawyer, Melvin Belli.


TOUGHER AIRPORT SECURITY ORDERED
LEAD: Transportation Secretary Elizabeth Hanford Dole ordered the Federal Aviation Administration today to get tougher with airlines if lax security is found at airport passenger checkpoints, imposing fines when necessary.


Judge Backs LTV Accord
LEAD: Despite the objections of the Federal pension insurance agency, a Federal judge ruled last night that the LTV Corporation could enhance the pension benefits of about 100,000 workers.
Judge Burton R. Lifland of


The Message and the Medium of Oliver North; Such Bias!
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Muirfield Offers No Defense
LEAD: Without the natural protection of strong winds off the Firth of Forth, Muirfield was defenseless today.
Rodger Davis of Australia came within a shot of the British Open 18-hole record as he took a three-shot lead in the first round of the 116th Open.


Mattingly Blasts 8th in Six Games
LEAD: When his batting average was so low that the first figure had actually been reduced to a zero, the suggestion was made in the Yankee clubhouse that a picture of the scoreboard be taken when Don Mattingly stepped into a batter's box because the sight may never happen again.


Comes a Knock: The Developers Want Your Yard
LEAD: Up and down these suburban streets the friendly developers go, knocking on doors.
They want to buy three or four nice homes in a row, tear them down and squeeze in a condominium.
It's very profitable.


MARIJUANA TRAFFIC ON RISE
LEAD: Near-record prices for marijuana in the United States have led to a sudden upsurge in shipments of marijuana from Colombia through Mexico, according to Mexican Government officials.


Pitino Names an Assistant
LEAD: Rick Pitino made his first decision as the Knicks' coach yesterday when he named Stu Jackson, an assistant of his at Providence College, an assistant coach.


RUSSELL P. WESTERHOFF
LEAD: Russell P. Westerhoff, a former president and chairman of Ford, Bacon &amp; Davis, an engineering, construction and management consulting firm, died of cancer Sunday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 82 years old and lived in Ridgewood.


SHEARSON EDGES UP 1.7% IN QUARTER
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Brothers Holding Inc., in its first quarterly earnings since going public earlier this year, reported a 1.7 percent increase in net income compared with a year earlier.


EX-MAYOR INDICTED IN SYRACUSE BRIBES
LEAD: Lee Alexander, a Democrat who ruled Syracuse as Mayor for 16 years while earning a national reputation as a spokesman for the nation's cities, was indicted today on charges that he masterminded a scheme that brought him $1.5 million in kickbacks from city contractors.


Racing Notebook; Manila May Get Next Test on the Dirt
LEAD: How good is Manila?


BROADWAY
LEAD:  After Jackie Mason, Mort Sahl


Candidates Combat Summer Doldrums
LEAD: The seven candidates seeking their parties' nominations in primary elections next Tuesday in the Fourth Congressional District are fighting summer more than each other.


Fund Transfer by Conservative Is Challenged
LEAD: Carl R. (Spitz) Channell, the conservative fund-raiser who pleaded guilty in April to illegally soliciting contributions for the Nicaraguan rebels, last year transferred more than $40,000 from one of his political action committees to another.


WASHINGTON TALK: The Environment; Of Trees and Laws and Bad Raps
LEAD: As F. Henry Habicht 2d sees it, the Reagan Administration's enforcement of the environmental laws, like Rodney Dangerfield, doesn't get enough respect.


Charles Stewart Dies; An Ex-Bank Executive
LEAD: Charles J. Stewart, the first chairman of Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, died Tuesday of cardiac failure at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 89 years old and also lived in Bronxville, N.Y.


Moynihan Tells City to Move Quickly to Keep Indian Museum
LEAD: Wilmot H. Kidd, chairwoman of the trustees of the Museum of the American Indian, flanked by Dr.
Roland Force, executive director, and Edward N. Costikyan, counsel, at a hearing held yesterday by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan in Manhattan.
Mr.
Moynihan warned that unless a location was found soon, New York might lose a priceless resource.


Mexico Challenging U.S. on Drugs
LEAD: The Mexican Government is seeking a restructuring and broadening of agreements and programs it maintains with the United States to combat drug trafficking, according to Mexican and American officials here and in Washington.


POP AND JAZZ GUIDE
LEAD: ''The Swinging Years of Benny Goodman,'' Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street (758-2272).
Benny Goodman's influence on jazz clarinetists is evident from the number of them who, over the past 50 years, have drawn intentionally or unintentionally on Goodman's style and sound.
Last fall, at a concert of Goodman's music by the American Jazz Orchestra, Walt Levinsky showed unusual perception and skill, both as an interpreter of Goodman's clarinet roles and as a conductor of arrangements by Fletcher Henderson, Eddie Sauter, Jimmy Mundy and Mel Powell - arrangements that highlighted the


U.S. Grand Jury Indicts Nofziger In Wedtech Case
LEAD: Lyn Nofziger, the former senior political adviser to President Reagan, was indicted today on conflict-of-interest charges related to his lobbying on behalf of the Wedtech Corporation, a Government official and others close to the investigation said.


DEATH TOLL IN CAMPSITE FLOOD IN FRANCE COULD SURPASS 35
LEAD: Rescue workers today put the death toll at 30 in a flash flood that devastated a vacation compsite here Tuesday.


INDIA'S MILD NEW PRESIDENT: Ramaswamy Venkataraman
LEAD: Ramaswamy Venkataraman, who emerged today with an overwhelming victory in India's presidential elections, is a veteran of India's independence movement and a skillful negotiator who won his country's biggest loan from the International Monetary Fund.


Xerox Bases Campaign On Documents Theme
LEAD: Xerox will break its first corporate ad campaign in a couple of years on Saturday, during the coverage of the British Open golf tournament on the ABC-TV network.
Then the print phase will start on Tuesday in The Wall Street Journal.
The advertising will introduce the new theme line, ''We document the world.


Dream Tax
LEAD: Who says state lotteries are harmless fun?
There's evidence to the contrary in a sobering new study by Charles Clotfelder and Phillip Cook, analysts working with the nonprofit National Bureau of Economic Research in Cambridge, Mass.
Lotteries are a boom industry, they report.
Betting has quadrupled since 1975, reaching $88 per person, or more than $20 billion nationwide.


Merck Net Is Up 35.7%
LEAD: Merck &amp; Company said today that second-quarter net income rose 35.7 percent, exceeding analysts' expectations.
The company earned $235.1 million, or $1.72 a share, up from $173.2 million, or $1.23 a share, a year ago.
Sales rose 23.8 percent, to $1.25 billion, from $1.01 billion.


Art: 'Generations of Geometry,' an Abstract Show
LEAD: ''GENERATIONS of Geometry,'' an exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art's branch at the Equitable Center, covers over 50 years and several phases of American geometric abstraction, up to and including works from 1987 by artists who have only recently started to exhibit.
Organized by Cheryl Epstein, M.


New York Plans to End Concrete Pact
LEAD: Mayor Koch said yesterday that the city plans to end its year-old contract with a private concrete company and seek a new supplier to start producing reduced-cost concrete to break a monopoly in Manhattan.


Despite Pledge, Texas Governor Agrees to Tax Rise
LEAD: Gov.
Bill Clements, who promised in his campaign that he would not raise taxes, has endorsed a compromise $38.3 billion state budget that includes new taxes.


Film: Togetherness in 'Rita, Sue and Bob Too'
LEAD: ''UNCEREMONIOUS'' does not begin to do justice to the manner in which Bob, Sue and Rita inaugurate their romance. ''Romance'' isn't exactly right, either.
Sue and Rita have been baby-sitting at Bob's when his wife, Michelle, suggests he drive them home.
Bob is more than accommodating.
He takes these two teen-age girls to a deserted spot, begins leering at them and is more than a little amazed when they leer right back.


Networks Now Rotate Coverage of Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 9 A.M. on the CBS television network under the new network rotation plan.
The hearings will also be televised on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New


Earthworks
LEAD: Bill Bruford, a percussionist, is to lead his band Earthworks tonight and tomorrow at the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street at Mercer Street (228-6300).
Shows are at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; tickets are $12.50.


In Union Square Park, Potluck al Fresco
LEAD: In the shade of the leafy green trees that tower over Union Square Park, 25 New Yorkers sat down to a potluck supper, as if that were perfectly normal in a place occupied until recently by drug dealers and others who tend not to bake casseroles.


Four Vivien Leigh Films In '3 Beauties' Festival
LEAD: Four Vivien Leigh films will be shown this weekend as part of the seven-week retrospective featuring the work of Miss Leigh, Jean Harlow and Marilyn Monroe.
The festival, called ''Three Beauties,'' is running at the Regency Theater, Broadway and 67th Street, At today's 8 P.M. screening of the 1945 film ''Caesar and Cleopatra,'' the director Anthony Harvey, who was an actor in the film, will appear.


Walters Hopeful on Hostages
LEAD: Vernon A. Walters, the United States representative at the United Nations, said today that he was optimistic that his recent discussions with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria would result in some movement affecting the fate of hostages held in Lebanon.


A.T.&amp;T.'s PROFITS RISE BY 41.2%
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that second-quarter profits jumped 41.2 percent, helped by gains in its long-distance telephone business and early success in controlling costs.


Salvador's Rebels Push Hard in Capital
LEAD: In an openly declared effort to disrupt the Government, leftist rebels and their supporters have carried out increasingly violent street demonstrations and brought a halt to public transportation here over the last four days.


City as Sculpture Garden: Seeing the New and Daring
LEAD: THE outdoor sculpture season has begun to reflect the state of sculpture in general.
The amount of outdoor sculpture continues to increase: there are currently four large shows.
But as the cost of living and working in Manhattan continues to rise, more outdoor sculpture is being made and exhibited elsewhere: this season there is a significant shift toward other boroughs, particularly Queens.


Solomonic Quartet
LEAD: The Solomonic Quartet - Ahmed Abdullah on trumpet, Chico Freeman on saxophone, Wilber Morris on bass and Charles Moffett on drums - is to perform tonight through Sunday at Carlos 1, 432 Avenue of the Americas, at Ninth Street (982-3260).
Sets begin at 9 and 11 P.M., plus a 12:30 A.M. set tonight and tomorrow; there is a $10 cover with a $7 minimum at tables and a one-drink minimum at the bar.


North's Lies: 'Well Done'
LEAD: During Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter's testimony, he was asked about his reaction to an appearance by his National Security Council staff subordinate, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, before the House Intelligence Committee.


Computer Bid Shift by Japan
LEAD: In a move to defuse tensions over supercomputer trade, Japan's Government announced today that it was changing its bidding procedures for supercomputers.


PHILIP MORRIS NET RISES 26.3%
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies yesterday reported a 26.3 percent increase in second-quarter earnings and announced a $1 billion stock buyback.


The Issue Is Policy
LEAD: A cartoon in Le Monde shows Rear Adm.
John Poindexter on the tube saying earnestly, ''And I hid everything from the President.'' President Reagan, watching with delight, says, ''Oh thank you, that's really nice of you.''


JEFFREY S. CHILDS
LEAD: Jeffrey S. Childs, a former Manhattan antiques dealer and art collector, died Sunday at the New York University Medical Center of complications caused by AIDS.
He lived in Manhattan and was 41 years old.


Shero to Coach In Netherlands
LEAD: Rather than continue to offer dispassionate observations from a far removed radio booth, Fred Shero will return to the excitement and pressures of hockey up close, when he goes back to the bench this coming season.
After a seven-year absence, Shero is resuming the profession that gained him fame and a good deal of notoriety.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tour de France  Surprise Winner: Regis Clere of France won the 16th stage of the Tour de France yesterday by more than 14 minutes, but Charles Mottet of Systeme U retained the leader's yellow jersey.
Clere rode 118 miles of the 135-mile route from Blagnac to Millau, France, alone.
Raul Alcala of Mexico placed second, 14 minutes 13 seconds back, with Jean-Francois Bernard of France, Stephen Roche of Ireland, Andy Hampsten of the United States and Pedro Delgado of Spain following.


The Great Compromise 200 Years Later
LEAD: A fife and drum corps marching past Independence Hall in Philadelphia in a celebration marking the bicentennial of the Constitution compromise that established the Congress in its present form. (AP) Page A36.


AUCTIONS
LEAD: THE British state papers of the secret Treaty of Dover - the 1670 agreement between Charles II and Louis XIV that led to war between England and the Netherlands and might have ended British parliamentary rule and the Church of England - will be auctioned Thursday at Sotheby's in London.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JULY 17, 1987
LEAD:  International


F.C.C. Freezes Channel Allocations
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission announced today a freeze in allocations of television channels in 30 major metropolitan areas until it could study whether to update its 46-year-old technical standards for television.


The Message and the Medium of Oliver North; Rhetoric Can't Hide It
LEAD:  To the Editor:


NICARAGUAN REBELS SAY THEY WON BIGGEST VICTORY OVER SANDINISTAS
LEAD: The Nicaraguan rebels today claimed their biggest victory in the six-year war against the Sandinista Government.


The Message and the Medium of Oliver North; Reminded of a Song
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Soybeans Take Losses On Forecasts of Rain
LEAD: Soybean futures prices retreated again yesterday as prospects increased for rainy weather in the Middle West.


Indians Win After Dismissing Corrales
LEAD: Cory Snyder did his part today to make sure that Doc Edwards, the new manager of the Cleveland Indians, got off to a good start.
Snyder's sixth home run in eight games and 20th of the season, a three-run shot in the first inning, helped to provide a 4-3 victory over the Chicago White Sox.


CHILDREN WITH AIDS
LEAD: The most pathetic victims of AIDS are the children, most marked at birth with a disease that both kills and stigmatizes.


KOHLBERG, KRAVIS BIDS FOR JIM WALTER
LEAD: The Jim Walter Corporation, one of the nation's leading builders of low-cost houses, said yesterday that it had received a surprise takeover bid for $50 a share, or $2.03 billion in cash.


Losey's 'Don Giovanni'
LEAD: Joseph Losey's film ''Don Giovanni'' is to be shown tomorrow at 5 P.M. at the Pepsico Summerfare festival on the campus of the State University College at Purchase.
Tickets are $5.
Information and directions: (914) 253-5949.


Opera: Sellars's 'Giovanni'
LEAD: YOU remember Mozart's ''Don Giovanni.'' That's the opera in which the Don Juan of the slums interrupts his singing of the Champagne Aria to take a heroin hit in the arm from his pimp and connection, Leporello.
Donna Anna also requires a quick needle during her ''Non mi dir'' before she can launch into the coloratura section of that aria.


Quartet in the Garden
LEAD: A quartet of musicians - Paul Zukovsky, a violinist; Chris Bosco, a clarinetist; Joshua Gordon, a cellist, and Candace Bawcombe, a pianist -is to perform works by Satie and Messiaen tonight and tomorrow evening at 7:30 in the Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art (11 West 53d Street).


Higher Bid Seen On Marine Midland
LEAD: Marine Midland Banks Inc.'s stock soared to a record high yesterday, as Wall Street indicated that it thought a higher bid for the bank was in order.
On Wednesday, the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation offered $677 million to buy the 48 percent of Marine that it does not already own.
Marine Midland's stock rose $18 a share yesterday, to $77.75, on the New York Stock Exchange, far exceeding Hongkong's cash bid of $70 a share, which had represented a 38.8 percent premium over


North Lawyers Act to Appeal Supoena by Iran Grand Jury
LEAD: Lawyers for Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North moved today to appeal a Federal judge's order that he comply with a grand jury subpoena obtained by the independent counsel investigating the Iran-Contra affair.


Times Raises Dividend
LEAD: The New York Times Company said yesterday that it was increasing the quarterly dividend on its class A and class B common stock by 22 percent, to 11 cents a share, from 9 cents a share, effective with the Sept. 26 payment to shareholders of record on Sept. 8.


The Windmills of Eastern Long Island
LEAD: Don Quixote tilted at them, van Gogh vividly captured them on canvas, and eastern Long Islanders are restoring and preserving them - windmills.


Raider Arrested
LEAD: Jerry Robinson, a linebacker for the Los Angeles Raiders since 1985 and a former all-pro with the Philadelphia Eagles, was arrested for an investigation of driving under the influence of drugs early yesterday after a brief high-speed chase by sheriff's deputies, a police spokesman in Los Angeles said.


FINAL ROCKET PLAN IS CHOSEN BY NASA
LEAD: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration said today that it had chosen its final design for the space shuttle's new rockets and will heat O ring seals rather than use new materials to prevent leaks in cold weather.


C.I.A. Taped Poindexter
LEAD: Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter was secretly tape-recorded by the C.I.A. last year when he called William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, during a visit to Central America, according to testimony today in the Iran-contra hearings.


B.F. Goodrich Lifts Profit 61%
LEAD: The B. F. Goodrich Company reported a 61 percent increase in its second-quarter earnings, bolstered by gains in its core chemical, aerospace and defense units.
Net income totaled $38.3 million, or $1.54 a share, up from $23.8 million, or $1.02 a share, a year before.


Klezmer in the Park
LEAD: The Andy Statman Klezmer Orchestra, led by Mr.
Statman on clarinet, is to play a free concert Sunday at 3 P.M. at the Central Park Band Shell, in the middle of the park at 72d Street.
It is part of New York City's Summerstage series (860-1335).


Placing a Winner
LEAD:  Angel Cordero Jr., who is currently riding at Belmont Park, needed only seven victories at the beginning of the card today to reach 6,000 for his career.
Cordero, fourth on the career list of winning jockeys, would be only the fourth rider in history to reach the 6,000-victory plateau.
The top 10 winning riders, according to The Daily Racing Form, through last Sunday's races, except for Cordero, whose figure is current, are:
$
Jockey
Winners
Bill Shoemaker
8,678
Laffit Pincay Jr.


At the Summer Nationals, Belated End to a Contest
LEAD: Players arriving here this afternoon for the summer national championships of the American Contract Bridge League found that post-mortems to one championship had been completed while other battles were in progress.


Russians in Israel Play to an American Audience
LEAD: The Soviet Union's diplomatic overtures to Israel are being viewed by American officials and outside analysts as part of an effort to lessen opposition in the United States, especially among Jews, to improved relations between Washington and Moscow.


The Most Tragic Victims of AIDS: Thousands of Youngsters
LEAD: In a sunny corner of a day-care center, the teachers gathered the children together, made sure everyone had a lap to sit on and told them that Carlos had died.
The boys and girls looked at pictures of their 2-year-old classmate, talked of how they would miss him and asked whether the same thing would happen to them.


Kano Journal; A Nigerian Shame: The Agony of the Child Bride
LEAD: With a shy gesture, Rahinatu Umoru drew a veil across her face and, in the soft tones of her native Hausa language, unveiled the hidden agony of a Moslem child bride.


Toward a Beautiful Backhand
LEAD: It has been five years since Lu Lesser of Berkeley Heights, N.J., was presented with a flexible, narrow, straight-line, classic diamond bracelet by her husband, Mike. ''Back then, it was just a bracelet to be worn with other diamond bracelets on dressy occasions,'' Mrs.
Lesser said.


Clyde Beatty Circus Performing on L.I.
LEAD: The bigtop of the Clyde Beatty-Cole Brothers Circus is to be up in Sayville, L.I., for performances through Sunday.
More than 35 acts will be featured during the circus's stay at the Long Island Merchandise Mart, Sunrise Highway and Broadway.
Shows are today at 4:30 and 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 1:30, 4:30 and 8:30 P.M.


Adventures of a Sitter
LEAD: WHEN Elisabeth Shue started baby-sitting, she was 10 years old and made 10 cents an hour.
Thirteen years have passed, and Ms.
Shue is still at it.


Plisetskaya to Dance With Graham Company
LEAD: Maya Plisetskaya, the senior ballerina of the Bolshoi Ballet, Rudolf Nureyev and Mikhail Baryshnikov will perform as guest artists with the Martha Graham Dance Company at an opening-night gala Oct. 6 at the City Center.


Santamaria and Camilo
LEAD: Mongo Santamaria, a percussionist, and Michel Camilo, a pianist, are to lead their groups in a Latin-jazz double bill tonight through Sunday at the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street (475-8592).
Sets begin at 9 and 11:30 P.M. through Sunday, plus a 1:30 A.M. show tonight and tomorrow.
There is a $15 cover and a $5 minimum at tables, or a $7.50 charge at the bar.


Punish Pakistan's Perfidy on the Bomb
LEAD: The arrest of a Pakistani trying to violate U.S. export laws shows once again how tenaciously Pakistan pursues the bomb.
It also prompts a familiar chorus of State Department lamentations about the apparent violation, Pakistani protestations of an innocent, peaceful nuclear program and U.S. demands for good


Are Short Skirts At Home at Work?
LEAD: As they try on short skirts, often for the first time in years, working women say they are asking themselves hard questions.
The first questions usually concern how they look in short skirts.
The next are about how and where to wear them.


New York City Pleased With Sale
LEAD: The $600 million competitive sale of New York City revenue anticipation notes yesterday left city officials pleased with the results.


Filipinos File a $22.6 Billion Suit Against the Marcoses for Damages
LEAD: The Philippine Government filed a $22.6 billion civil suit today against former President Ferdinand E. Marcos and his family, seeking damages suffered by Filipinos from what the suit called ''plunder of the nation's wealth.''


Correction
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Tuesday about changes in the capital gains tax in New York State misstated some rates.
Under laws in effect through 1986, a New York City resident in the maximum bracket paid a Federal capital gains tax of 20 percent and additional state and city taxes that brought the effective rate to 25.93 percent.


Sidney Scheuer Dies; Ex-Textile Executive
LEAD: Sidney H. Scheuer, former chairman of the board of the Scheuer Management Corporation and chairman of the National Committee for an Effective Congress, died last night at Roosevelt Hospital of injuries he suffered during a burglary in his Manhattan apartment last week.
He was 94 years old.


Colonel North in Movies
LEAD: A popular topic of discussion in town these days is which actors should be cast in the movie or television mini-series that is almost certain to follow the Iran-contra affair.


Hill's Regrets
LEAD: For Bob Hill, whom Rick Pitino has replaced as Knick coach, the announcement last Monday was bittersweet.
Hill said he was ''happy for Rick,'' but he added that the Knicks ''haven't solved any problems.''


Dance: The Bolshoi's 'Giselle'
LEAD: THE Bolshoi Ballet's brand-new production of ''Giselle'' is easier to admire than to love.
Those who think they will be seeing the by-now traditional Bolshoi 1950's staging, with its memorably unabashed emotionalism, are in for a surprise.


Major Setback to Reagan and Party Seen
LEAD: In the view of a variety of politicians, political scientists and strategists from both parties, Ronald Reagan's Presidency will remain damaged for the rest of his term - and his party weakened - despite Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter's testimomy that the President was unaware of the diversion of Iran arms profits to the


Moses Loses After Slip
LEAD: Edwin Moses fell on a rain-slicked track today at the Paris International meet and lost a 400-meter hurdles race for the second time in six weeks.


Eight Are Injured in Fire At Midtown Welfare Hotel
LEAD: Eight people were injured, two of them critically, when a fire broke out yesterday in a welfare hotel in midtown Manhattan.


Financial Firm In Britain Sold
LEAD: British and Commonwealth Holdings P.L.C., with interests in transport, hotels and finance, said today that it was buying Mercantile House Holdings for $:490 million, or $800 million.


12 Missing in Chile Flood
LEAD: Flood waters have swept away a bridge north of Santiago, taking with it 12 people and raising to 16 the toll of missing people in five days of heavy rains in central Chile, according to the police.
They said Wednesday night that a helicopter saved two people when the bridge collapsed at La Calera.


U.S. Clears 2 Kuwaiti Ships
LEAD: The United States Coast Guard today cleared the first two Kuwaiti oil tankers to fly American flags and be protected by American naval forces in the Persian Gulf.
The White House said all that remained was for President Reagan to approve a date for beginning the convoy operations.
The Administration has vowed to protect 11 Kuwaiti tankers from attack by Iranian forces.


The Testimony: On the Boland Amendment and the President
LEAD: In his second day of testimony yesterday before the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair, Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter, the former national security adviser, was asked about compliance with the Boland Amendment and other matters.
Here are excerpts from his testimony, as recorded by The New York Times.


WASHINGTON TALK: Political Memo; The Litmus Test: Use It or Confine It to the Lab?
LEAD: If candidates want applause at either Democratic or Republican functions these days, all they have to do is mention the Strategic Defense Initiative or the Nicaraguan contras.


AIDS Is Focus of Koch Church Talk
LEAD: Mayor Koch warned a gathering of black Baptist church leaders in Brooklyn yesterday that the burden of AIDS will fall most heavily on members of minority groups.
He urged his audience to resist any effort to quarantine or discriminate against victims of the deadly illness.


Questions On Municipals
LEAD: An investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission into the legal status of dozens of tax-exempt bond offerings has revived questions about whether local government financings should be more strictly regulated by some Federal authority.


East German to Visit Bonn; Trip Reflects Shift by Soviet
LEAD: A marked improvement in ties between Moscow and Bonn has set the stage for a milestone official visit to West Germany in September by Erich Honecker, the East German leader, according to West German officials and Western diplomats.


Security Pacific Posts Big Loss
LEAD: The Security Pacific Corporation said today that, as expected, it had lost $172.4 million in the second quarter.
This was the banking company's first loss since it began reporting financial results in 1974.


CURRY TRYING TO REPAIR REPUTATION
LEAD: For the nearly 10 months he was the undisputed welterweight champion, Donald Curry was widely viewed as boxing's future superstar.


Pratt &amp; Whitney In Norway Deal
LEAD: Pratt &amp; Whitney, the American jet engine maker, and four Norwegian companies have signed a letter of intent to buy the jet engine division of Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk, the financially and politically troubled state arms maker, the Norwegian Government said.
Pratt &amp; Whitney, a division of the United Technologies Corporation, would probably have a 20 percent interest in a new company, to be called Norsk Jetmotor A/S, with the


Man Acquitted of Killing Officer
LEAD: A black man who admitted killing a white police officer and wounding a second was acquitted today of attempted murder and manslaughter.


Fast Action Urged for Indian Museum
LEAD: Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan sharply criticized New York City officials yesterday for not moving quickly enough to find a new home for the Museum of the American Indian.
He warned that unless a suitable location was found soon, New York might lose another priceless resource.


Fires Rage in Pacific Northwest
LEAD: A volunteer helping a regular firefighter haul hoses in a remote area south of Spokane, Wash., on Wednesday.
Firefighters contained the 900-acre blaze yesterday morning, but not before at least 24 homes were destroyed.
Wind-whipped fires also burned thousands of acres of timber and rangeland in Idaho, Oregon and Utah.


Fort Hamilton Tour
LEAD: The military history of Brooklyn is to be explored tomorrow on a Fort Hamilton walking tour sponsored by the Brooklyn Historical Society.
The two-hour tour begins at 1 P.M. at Fourth Avenue and 95th Street in the Fort Hamilton section.
Admission is $5.
Information: (718) 624-0890.


The War on Verbosity
LEAD: Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige said yesterday that he had been making progress in his campaign to cut down on the bureaucratic and verbose language in Government communication.
Memorandums reaching his office these days, he said, are rarely longer than a page or two.
And as for use of the passive tense - a common bureaucratic crutch - that has been virtually eliminated, he said.


MONEY FUND ASSETS RISE
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 386 money market mutual funds increased $948.4 million, to $238.56 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 96 institutional funds increased $1.19 billion, to $66.24 billion.
Assets of the 200 general-purpose funds decreased by $244.2 million, to $67.41 billion.


CONGRESS MARKS BIRTH AT FETE IN PHILADELPHIA
LEAD: Two hundred years from the day when the framers of the Constitution reached a critical compromise that led to the founding of Congress, 200 Representatives and Senators assembled at Independence Hall today to mark that pivotal national event.


The Message and the Medium of Oliver North
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Iran's Immunity
LEAD: In New York last year, an Iranian representative to the United Nations was arrested for shoplifting.
Charges were dropped when he claimed diplomatic immunity.
This year an Iranian consular official was arrested in Manchester, England, for shoplifting and other offenses.
When the British Government ruled that the official's status did not qualify for immunity, Iran seized a British diplomat in Teheran and threatened to bring charges that could carry a death penalty.


Film: 'La Gran Fiesta'
LEAD: IT'S 1942 and a big night in San Juan, P.R., where the casino is being turned over to the United States Navy.
Among the guests at the farewell party is Jose Manuel, the son of Don Manolo Gonzalez.
Jose Manuel's marriage to Rita, the daughter of Don Miguel de la Torre, is about to be announced.
But Jose Manuel loves Raquel and has no sooner given the bad news to Rita than he learns that his father, Don Manolo, has been falsely accused by his partner, Don Antonio Jimenez, of being involved in anti-American activities.


Leetch Report Denied
LEAD: The attorney for Brian Leetch denied a report published yesterday in The New Haven Register that the Rangers' No. 1 draft choice in the June 1986 draft had turned down a four-year $1 million offer from the National Hockey League team in order to play for the United States Olympic team next winter in


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  EARLY REAGAN. By Anne Edwards. Illustrated. 617 pages. William Morrow. $21.95.


Film: 'Robocop,' Police Drama With Peter Weller
LEAD: IF it's violence you're after, ''Robocop,'' now showing at the National and other theaters, gives full value.
In his first American movie, Paul Verhoeven, a Dutch director (''Soldier of Orange''), doesn't let the furiously futuristic plot get in the way of the flaming explosions, shattering glass and hurtling bodies.


Japanese Agree to U.S. Demands On Controlling Technology Sales
LEAD: Japan, stunned by American fury over the sale of sensitive technology to the Soviet Union by the Toshiba Machine Company, agreed today to demands that Tokyo clamp down on exports of such equipment to hostile countries, the Commerce Department said.


Reagan Won't Comment on Admiral
LEAD: President Reagan refused to comment today on whether he had been deceived by Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter.


Grand Jury to Look Into PTL
LEAD: A Federal judge in North Carolina has ordered a grand jury to investigate the management of the PTL television ministry under its founder and former president, Jim Bakker, according to a published report.


Times Will Add $400 Million Plant in Edison, N.J.
LEAD: The New York Times Company said yesterday that it planned to spend $400 million, its largest capital investment ever, on a new printing plant in Edison, N.J.


DEAVER TRIAL DELAYED FOR MONTHS AS DEFENSE APPEALS ORDER ON JURY
LEAD: The perjury trial of Michael K. Deaver was postponed today for at least three months after defense lawyers said they would appeal to the Supreme Court an order requiring that the jury selection be conducted in public.


Justice Dept. Inquiry Said to Focus on St Germain
LEAD: Representative Fernand J. St Germain, Democrat of Rhode Island, has become the subject of a criminal investigation by the Justice Department into large entertainment bills paid by a prominent lobbyist for the savings and loan industry, thrift industry lobbyists and lawyers close to the case said today.


Dining Out Guide: Grilled Fare
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
ARIZONA 206, 206 East 60th Street (838-0440) - **(Nov. 14, 1985) Offering a direct route to some of the best California- and Southwestern-style food around is this long, narrow East Side restaurant with undulating molded plaster walls, natural-wood floors and tables, and lovely arrangements of desert flowers.


Colonel North Buttons
LEAD: Two local entrepreneurs, Frank and Barbara Enten, say they have been doing nicely making and selling buttons that show Colonel North being sworn in before the Congressional committees and bear the legend: ''An American hero.
Duty, honor, country.''


The Message and the Medium of Oliver North; Support and Believe
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Japan and 'Star Wars'
LEAD: Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and Ambassador Nobuo Matsunaga of Japan are concluding an agreement on participation by Japanese business and industry in the Strategic Defense Initiative.


ADMIRAL RECALLS NO POINTED QUERY WHEN HE RESIGNED
LEAD: Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter testified today that when he resigned last November, neither Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d nor Donald T. Regan, the White House chief of staff, asked him who had approved the diversion of Iran arms profits to the Nicaraguan rebels.


Gannett's Profits Rise 16.2%
LEAD: The Gannett Company said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings jumped 16.2 percent from the 1986 period, primarily because of strength in its newspaper operations.


Channel 5 Offers 'Beans Baxter' in Trouble
LEAD: Resembling a Frankenstein's monster more than the situation comedy it was meant to be, ''The New Adventures of Beans Baxter'' lurches onto Channel 5 tomorrow night at 8 in an hourlong premiere.


City Dad, Country Mom
LEAD: Two friends recently transferred to New York talked about the effects of the change on their families.
One family chose to live in the city, the other chose to live in the suburbs, and they have reciprocal regrets.
As their conversation shows, the grass is always greener; so is the non-grass.


Film: 'Ping Pong'
LEAD: FLAVORFUL glimpses of London's Chinatown - the back alleys of restaurants, a gambling den, a traditional funeral - promise something tasty from ''Ping Pong,'' but the main dish doesn't live up to the starters.


6 Americans Killed in Salvador
LEAD: Six Americans were killed Wednesday night when their helicopter crashed on a mission to evacuate a wounded American military adviser, an American Embassy spokesman said today.


Dollar Bounces Back And Gold Moves Higher
LEAD: The dollar rebounded against most major foreign currencies yesterday after plunging a day earlier on reports of a larger-than-expected United States trade deficit.


'The Doctors Wilde,' 2 Veterinarians
LEAD: OH, those warm, wonderful married veterinarians!
You wouldn't believe their crazy life.
If it's not a tiger with a dental problem, it's a sea lion with no appetite.
Mostly, though, on ''The Doctors Wilde'' it's an abused elephant named Katie.
Someone wants to put her away.
Will this happen?
You can find out on C


Storm Kills 68 in South Korea
LEAD: Rescue workers hunted for victims today after a typhoon provoked floods, mudslides and stormy seas that killed at least 68 people and left 101 missing along the southern coast.


The Message and the Medium of Oliver North; It Can Happen Here
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Washington's Course Worries Allies
LEAD: As the United States embarks on a new policy initiative in the Persian Gulf, the testimony of former officials about the Iran-contra affair is being widely viewed among its European allies as a sign of chaos at the heart of the Reagan foreign policy machinery.


Polls Find an Increase In Support for Contras
LEAD: The American public is now about evenly split on whether to provide military aid for the contras, according to two national polls taken after Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North testified in Washington and strongly urged such aid.


Jim Morris Hails the Chief, Blithely
LEAD: Standing behind a podium affixed with an undersized replica of the Presidential seal, Jim Morris, Ronald Reagan impersonator, is holding his nightly press conference in the Ballroom, a cabaret in Chelsea.
Sucking in his lips and arching his eyebrows while narrowing his eyes to a grandfatherly twinkle, the 30-year-old comedian adds 40 years to his appearance.


The Message and the Medium of Oliver North; Misguided Officer
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A calendar of lectures, tours and exhibitions in The Home Section yesterday misstated the site of an exhibit of terra-cotta panel designs.
It is at the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue, near 50th Street.


Afghan Diplomat Accused Of Auto Attack on Woman
LEAD: A high-ranking Afghan diplomat on his way to buy an air-conditioner at an appliance store in Queens has been accused of ramming a woman in a dispute over a parking space.


Music on the Hudson
LEAD: A all-Tchaikovsky program, conducted by Imre Pallo and including Diana Kacso, a pianist, as soloist, is to be presented by the Music on the Hudson festival tomorrow evening at 8:30 at Lyndhurst in Tarrytown.
Tickets are $5.
Information and directions: (914) 631-7766.


Homes Rising Near 2 Old Beach Club Sites in Bronx
LEAD: Ever since two lively beach clubs in the Castle Hill section of the Bronx were boarded up a few seasons ago, that part of the borough - a small peninsula washed by two creeks that feed into the East River - has slipped into desolation.


Nutrasweet Faces A Senate Hearing
LEAD: Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, said he would hold a hearing in September on health concerns about aspartame, the popular artificial sweetener marketed under the brand name Nutrasweet by the Monsanto Company.
The hearing will be held by the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, which has jurisdiction over the Food and Drug


Dance: Merrill Ashley and John Meehan at the Pillow
LEAD: The Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, which since the 1930's has been America's most eclectic summer dance festival, turned its attention to ballet Wednesday night when two stars appeared as guests and a young ensemble displayed its versatility.


Cowboys Release Hill
LEAD: In a move seen as part of a shake-up after a 7-9 season, the Dallas Cowboys yesterday released Tony Hill, a wide receiver.
Coach Tom Landry said that Hill, a 10-year veteran, had weight problems and had failed to show up for three weigh-ins this summer.


Economic Scene; UNCERTAINTIES OF TRADE GAP
LEAD: PROPHECIES are based on ''imperfect knowledge,'' Oliver Wendell Holmes, the jurist, once observed.
Yet ''every year, if not every day, we have to wager our salvation upon some prophecy,'' he said.
And prophecies don't always come true.


Brooklyn Congregations Struggle to Repair Old Churches
LEAD: Hundreds of the aging and once stately houses of worship that helped give Brooklyn the name ''City of Churches'' are in severe disrepair, with many congregations closing off parts of the buildings because they are unsafe.


Greece Says Split With U.S. On Terrorist Group Is Ended
LEAD: A dispute between the United States and Greece over charges that Greek officials had contacts with an Arab terrorist organization was settled today, a Government spokesman said.


OIL MARKETS: UP, BUT UNEASY
LEAD: Driven by concerns that the war between Iran and Iraq could disrupt oil supplies from the Middle East, world crude oil prices have moved above $22 a barrel in volatile trading this week.
However, energy experts in the United States said yesterday that the market's fears have exceeded the realistic prospects of a cutoff of crude oil supplies or even of a substantial reduction in Middle East shipments.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JULY 17, 1987
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-8


INSIDE
LEAD:  British Airlines to Merge
British Air is to take over a rival, strengthening its position against the huge American airlines formed by mergers.
But some discount fares could be lost.
Page D1.
Takeover String Continues
Kohlberg, Kravis, which has spent $30 billion on companies, offered to buy Jim Walter, a builder of low-cost houses, for $2.03 billion.


A Jersey Couple's Anguish in a Right-to-Die Case
LEAD: Murray Putzer has been sitting in his home in West Caldwell, N.J., this week, watching the Iran-contra hearings on television.
He is also slowly starving to death.


DINER'S JOURNAL
LEAD: FROM the outside, Rio Mar looks like a frayed Latin shots-and-beer bar catering to butchers in the old West Side wholesale meat district. ''It's a great place,'' a usually sensible friend assured me. ''Nobody knows about it.'' With more than a little skepticism, I gave it a try.


RJR Nabisco Net Rises
LEAD: RJR Nabisco said its second-quarter profits were $299 million, or $1.16 a share, up 18.1 percent from $253 million, or 91 cents a share, a year earlier.
Its revenue rose 5 percent, to $4.02 billion from $3.83 billion.


The Message and the Medium of Oliver North; Unanswered Questions
LEAD:  To the Editor:


RESTAURANTS
LEAD: THE industrial underbrush of far-west Chelsea, dotted with squat brick warehouses and auto repair shops, is hardly the terrain where Manhattan's fashionable night owls congregate.
If Larry McIntyre keeps up the good work, they soon will, for Chelsea Central is one of the best hidden bargains I have come across this year.


Advertising; A GLOBAL VENTURE FOR Y.&amp;.R.
LEAD: YOUNG &amp; RUBICAM'S two joint ventures with foreign agencies have been merged to form a three-way venture whose other partners are Dentsu of Japan, the world's largest agency, and Paris-based Eurocom, the largest agency on the Continent.
Y.&amp;R. is America's No. 1.


Corrigan Returns to Long Island, the Right Way
LEAD: Douglas (Wrong Way) Corrigan arriving by train yesterday from his home in California to celebrate the 49th anniversary of his flight from Brooklyn to California that ended in Ireland.
With Mr.
Corrigan was Harry Wagner, director of the Grand Royal Hotel in Hempstead, L.I., the sponsor of the trip.


BRITISH AIR WILL BUY BRITISH CALEDONIAN
LEAD: British Airways announced yesterday that it would take over its smaller rival, British Caledonian Airways, to increase its already formidable position as a worldwide carrier.


Bonds Gain in Quiet Trading
LEAD: Bond prices rose slightly yesterday, bolstered by the dollar's recovery from its sharp decline on Wednesday.


What Criminal Justice in New York Can Learn
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Admiral Incredible
LEAD: The Congressional committees have many questions to ask Rear Adm.
John Poindexter about his role as national security adviser in the Iran-contra affair but one question rises to the top: Why should anyone believe him?


Milbury Retires Again
LEAD: Saying he hoped to mold minor leaguers in his own hard-working style, Mike Milbury, a Boston defenseman, announced his retirement yesterday to become coach and general manager of the Bruins' farm team in Portland, the Maine Mariners of the Amerian Hockey League.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  An Infant Cinema


Gridlock on Capitol Hill
LEAD: Attending House and Senate hearings is an essential part of life for many Washingtonians.
In fact, so many hearings are held that scheduling problems sometimes arise.


IRAN THREATENING TO CUT FRENCH TIES
LEAD: The quarrel between France and Iran worsened today as the Iranian authorities threatened to break diplomatic relations unless France removed its police guard from the Iranian Embassy here and the French Government refused to do so.


Plight of Homeowners
LEAD:  To the Editor:


T.S. RYAN, A LEADER IN REPUBLICAN PARTY IN CONNECTICUT, DIES
LEAD: Theodore S. Ryan, a former Republican national committeeman who was long active in Connecticut politics and in ski area development in Colorado, died Wednesday at his home in Lakeville, Conn.
He was 82 years old.


Sanwa Said to Agree To Buy Brophy, Gestal
LEAD: In a transaction that could face significant political obstacles, Sanwa Bank Ltd. has agreed in principle to buy Brophy, Gestal, Knight &amp; Company L.P., one of the two remaining primary dealers of Treasury securities not already owned by a larger organization, sources close to the deal said yesterday.


Irish Music Festival
LEAD: More than 30 Irish and Irish-American singers, musicians and dancers are to take part in the annual Irish Music Festival tomorrow at 1 P.M. at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, S.I.
Among those to appear are Donal Lunny, a singer and song writer; Paddy Glackin, a fiddler; the Irish Tradition, a group from Baltimore; Christy Barry, a flutist and tin whistler, and James Keane, an accordionist.


Court Appeal Halts Fund By Robins
LEAD: A Federal court said an appeal by a stockholder committee of the A. H. Robins Company could go ahead, temporarily holding up a $15 million emergency medical fund intended to help some Dalkon Shield claimants.
The order by the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit stops Robins from putting money into a medical fund for about 1,000 women who became sterile after using the birth control device.


Trio at Waverly Jazz
LEAD: The trio of Sirone on bass, Billy Bang on violin and Zen Matsuura on percussion is to perform tonight and tomorrow at Waverly Jazz, 147 Waverly Place (627-5601).
Music begins at 10:30 P.M.; there is no cover or minimum.


U.S. Seeks the Deportation Of Accused Auschwitz Guard
LEAD: The Justice Department instituted deportation proceedings today against a Massachusetts man who, the Government says, served as an Auschwitz concentration camp guard during World War II.


Blinder, Robinson To Appeal Ruling
LEAD: Blinder, Robinson &amp; Company said that it would appeal a decision by a National Association of Securities Dealers committee to seek penalties against the investment company.
The penalties were sought for purported improprieties in the pricing of securities and escrow of funds, the company said.


Beirut Holds Army Mechanic In Prime Minister's Slaying
LEAD: A Lebanese Army mechanic was charged today in connection with the assassination of Prime Minister Rashid Karami last month.


A WALL ST. SECTOR BLOSSOMS
LEAD: On Wall Street, where quick action now rules over measured deliberation, and a meritocracy has replaced the gentleman's club, one of the last guardians of the old style has finally joined the fray.


NEKOOSA TO ACQUIRE OWENS-ILLINOIS UNIT
LEAD: The Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the forest products holdings of Owens-Illinois Inc. for $1.15 billion.


BRIEF WORDS ON BEING 'GENERALLY AWARE'
LEAD: Admiral Poindexter was questioned during yesterday's session about his conversations with high Administration officials in the period leading up to his resignation Nov. 25, 1986.


ZAYRE TO TAKE BIG WRITE-OFF
LEAD: In an unusual move, the Zayre Corporation, one of the nation's largest discounters, said it would take a $40 million write-off in the current quarter to cover markdowns and ''competitive repricing'' planned for its major division, the 340 Zayre discount stores.


'New York 8' Member Is Held
LEAD: A man identified by law-enforcement officials as belonging to a self-proclaimed black revolutionaries' group known as the ''New York Eight'' was arrested yesterday after a state trooper stopped a car he was driving near Monroe, N.Y., the state police said.


Albany Panel Censures Housing Department
LEAD: New York State's administration of rent guidelines is ''chaotic'' and in such disarray that tenants and landlords are denied a fair hearing of rent disputes, a State Assembly panel concluded today.


Early-Music Ensemble
LEAD: Aston Magna, the early-music ensemble, is to perform works by Lully, Buxtehude and Mozart tonight at 8 at the Bard College Chapel in Annandale-on-Hudson.
Tickets are $8.
Information and directions: (914) 758-6822.


Offbeat Antics, All in Serious Fun
LEAD: IS it outrageous?
Imaginative?
Unexpected?
Then it's probably part of Serious Fun!, a distinctly offbeat festival that begins tonight at Alice Tully Hall and runs through Aug. 2.


6 NORTHEAST STATES SUE E.P.A. OVER LACK OF ACID RAIN CURBS
LEAD: Six Northeastern states filed suit yesterday against the Federal Environmental Protection Agency in an effort to force the agency to curb power-plant emissions that cause acid rain.


Man Held in Aliens' Deaths
LEAD: A man being held in Sonora, Mexico, will be charged with negligent homicide and smuggling undocumented farm workers out of Mexico in connection with a desert trek by 25 men and boys that left three dead, a Mexican prosecutor said today.
The man, Manuel Partida Beltran, allegedly accepted $350 to $400 from each emigrant for setting up a 50-mile route for them from Los Vidrios, Sonora, to Aztec, Ariz., and then left them ''without food, without medicine, with only enough water for four hours.


TW Services To Get Denny's
LEAD: TW Services Inc. said today that it would acquire Denny's Inc. for $218 million in cash and the assumption of the restaurant chain's debt, making the deal worth $843 million.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the withdrawal of Councilman Joseph F. Lisa's nomination as chairman of the New York City Council's health committee carried an erroneous and incomplete account of Mr.
Lisa's reaction.
In saying ''That's unfortunate,''


Pakistan Denies Any Link To Atom Arms Plot in U.S.
LEAD: The Government of Pakistan denied today that it was involved in any way in an attempt to export a steel alloy from the United States illegally for possible use in making nuclear weapons.


A Wilderness Ramble in Brooklyn
LEAD: Huge concrete slabs rest amid the tall reeds, eerie reminders of a long-ago plan to transform the south Brooklyn waterfront into a great harbor.
Seagulls perch on partially submerged wood pilings where a 17th-century grist mill once stood.
And, as children play on the ballfields north of Avenue U, an occasional speedboat pulls into the shallow, freshwater creek that bisects the wetlands of Marine


Gooden Starts the Mets' Great Chase
LEAD: The Mets, nine and a half games down with 75 to go, began the great chase last night with flares and rockets and a seven-hitter by Dwight Gooden that buried the Cincinnati Reds, 9-0.


Who's Giving the Signals?
LEAD: A key question has been: Was the baserunner running on his own, or did he get a signal from the third-base coach?
And if he did, was it relayed from the manager?
In other words, who called the shots?


Film: 'Eat the Peach,' Motorcyclists' Whimsy
LEAD: PETER ORMROD'S ''Eat the Peach'' is a fictional film, but it's based on the kind of true story no one could ever invent.
Mr.
Ormrod, who formerly worked in television, came across a man named Connie Kiernan who had brought his dream to life in his own backyard, and taken his inspiration from ''Roustabout,'' the Elvis Presley movie.


From Syracuse's Hope to an Indictment
LEAD: He was this city's hope, a stubborn Democrat who overcame the odds and rose beyond Syracuse to become a spokesman for all of America's mayors.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I said: 'Mr.
President, I assume that you are aware of the paper that Ed Meese has found, that reveals a plan to transfer funds to the contras.
I was generally aware of that plan, and I would like to submit my resignation.' And the President responded and said that he had great regret, and that this was in the tradition of a naval officer, of accepting responsibility.


Transamerica Income Soars
LEAD: The Transamerica Corporation said today that its net income for the second quarter rose 53.6 percent, to $106 million, or $1.37 a share, from $69 million, or 88 cents a share, a year ago.
Revenues rose 25 percent, to $1.95 billion, from $1.56 billion.


Art: 'Iliazd and the Illustrated Book' at the Modern
LEAD: IN a quiet way, the Museum of Modern Art is doing precisely what it ought to do in mounting an exhibition called ''Iliazd and the Illustrated Book.'' Not only does it have an echo out of all proportion to its size, but it also introduces to the museum's huge public a man who lived the adventure of our century to the full.


Executive Cited In Fraud Scheme In Mass Mailing
LEAD: The president of a major mass mailing and bill collection company in New York City was accused yesterday of defrauding the Postal Service of more than $5 million in postage over 10 years.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY
STEPPING OUT IN BROOKLYN
Celebrate Brooklyn, the spirited summerlong festival of the performing arts in Prospect Park, turns to dance this weekend.
Several renowned companies, presenting works ranging from classical ballet to Irish step-dancing, will take the stage tonight, tomorrow and Sunday at 8 P.M.


The Crickets In Tribute to Buddy Holly
LEAD: WHAT'S summer without a few crickets?
In this case, we're talking about the Crickets - the musicians who backed Buddy Holly on his hit records and concert appearances.
This weekend, the Crickets are playing a ''Tribute to Buddy Holly'' to open Summerpier, the South Street Seaport Museum's annual summer series of free outdoor concerts.


Chamber Orchestra
LEAD: The St.
Bartholomew's Chamber Orchestra is to present works by Handel and Bach Sunday at 3 P.M. at St.
Bartholomew's Church (109 East 50th Street).
Tickets are $5.
Information: 751-1616, ext. 226, 227.Z


POP AND JAZZ GUIDE
LEAD: Manu Dibango, Beacon Theater, 74th and Broadway (399-4444 or 496-7070).
When Manu Dibango, a West African saxophonist and band leader, played at the Apollo Theater in the early 70's, hot on the heels of his international pop hit ''Soul Makossa,'' he brought a formidable African funk band, with two bassists nailing down the bottom and rhythms that churned up an implacable groove.


The Message and the Medium of Oliver North; The Other Telegrams
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Ambulance Proposals Released
LEAD: Mayor Koch yesterday released recommendations from a draft report by a task force that has been studying slow response time and other problems within the city's emergency ambulance system.
The move came on the same day that one of the members of the task force, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, resigned, complaining that the group had been inactive.


Just Call It Playing With Nuclear Matches
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JULY 18, 1987
LEAD:  Markets


Film: 'Jaws the Revenge,' The Fourth in the Series
LEAD: Before we join the Brody family in the fourth part of the ''Jaws'' saga, here's what's happened in our story so far.
Dad survived a few chilling shark attacks in the original ''Jaws,'' rescued his two sons from another great white in the tepid ''Jaws II,'' and let's not even think about the laughable ''Jaws 3-D.


GOODRICH, B F CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOODRICH, B F CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
551,100,000
759,100,000
Net inc
b38,300,000
c23,800,000
Share earns
1.54
1.02
6mo sales
1,036,700,000
1,487,900,000
Net inc
b42,100,000
c3,100,000
Share earns
1.61
.10


Rise at Texas Instruments
LEAD: Second-quarter net income of Texas Instruments Inc. rose to $62 million, reflecting a continued recovery in the semiconductor market, company officials said today.


GAF CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GAF CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
214,200,000
198,300,000
Net inc
b132,400,000
c25,900,000
Share earns
3.71
.71
6mo sales
208,535,000
190,226,000
Net inc
b174,065,000
c126,635,000
Share earns
-
3.49


Suitors for Texas Thrift Units
LEAD: Several wealthy investors and financial institutions, including Citicorp, are exploring ways to acquire ailing thrift institutions in Texas, a prominent regulator of the industry in the Southwest said today.


Nicaragua Reports Repulsing Attackers In Northern Battles
LEAD: Nicaragua said today that 27 rebels had been killed in attempts to capture three towns in a surge of fighting in the embattled north of the country Thursday.


Houston Officers Sue
LEAD: Two Houston police officers have filed a lawsuit seeking $10.2 million in damages stemming from an incident last July that resulted in assault and battery charges against four Mets.


Music: 'Tosca,' at the City Opera
LEAD: The New York City Opera had some very interesting things to say about ''Tosca'' in its first performance of the summer on Thursday night.
Indeed, the company upheld Puccini's reputation for first-rate potboilers and did so with some eloquence.
This is an opera whose inspiration is deceiving, one that moves with such swift melodrama and is supported by such inviting music that we tend to overlook the two-dimensionality of its characters.


Low-Key Mood, and Little Regret
LEAD: It was hard to discern at first, obscured by the admiral's mild manner and matter-of-fact tone and clubby pipe-smoking and gentle, dimpled smile.


MOORE-HANDLEY INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOORE-HANDLEY INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
23,370,000
20,483,000
Net inc
348,000
394,000
Share earns
.14
.16
6mo sales
46,970,000
40,932,000
Net inc
692,000
733,000
Share earns
.28
.35


The Ethics Act At Issue
LEAD: The Ethics in Government Act of 1978, which Lyn Nofziger is accused of violating, was intended to assure that public servants were held to high standards of conduct, avoiding conflict of interest.


Dipper and the Discus
LEAD: There was never any doubt among National Basketball Association players who competed against Wilt Chamberlain that the scoring and rebounding wonder is one of the strongest men on earth.
Now the 51-year-old Big Dipper has announced that he is aiming to make the United States Olympic team as a discus thrower for the 1988 Games in Seoul, South


Taiwan Loosens the Reins
LEAD: President Chiang Ching-kuo did not act impulsively in ending martial law on Taiwan: it's been in force for 38 years.
So that everybody understands there are still limits, his Government imposed a new security law that continues key political restrictions.
Nonetheless, the 76-year-old son of Chiang Kai-shek deserves a salute.


How Queens Judicial Candidates Were Chosen
LEAD: To the Editor:


Howard McGhee, 69, Is Dead; A Trumpeter and Composer
LEAD: Howard McGhee, a trumpeter and composer and one of the pioneers of modern jazz, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 69 years old.


For One Day, Cyclists Put French Village on Map
LEAD: The chances are that for the nearly 200 silent, sweating competitors who passed through this little mountain hamlet on today's leg of the men's Tour de France, Valleraugue was just another village, barely glimpsed as a strip of asphalt between two rows of narrow old stone houses on the long and arduous route of the world's most famous bicycle race.


Ford Recalling Ambulances to Fix Fuel Problems
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company has recalled as many as 22,000 ambulances to correct fuel problems that have caused at least two dozen fires and 15 injuries, company officials said today.


Frugal Gourmet Wins Pace
LEAD: Frugal Gourmet took the lead at the halfway point tonight and finished a neck ahead of Laag to capture the $902,500 Meadowlands Pace from a field of 12.


Librarian Is Charged In an Embezzlement
LEAD: The suspended head librarian of the University of New Haven has been charged with six counts of larceny and tampering with evidence in connection with the embezzlement of more than $150,000 from the school, officials said.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If the independent counsel wants my scalp, he will have to get it the old-fashioned way.''


U.S. Indicts 3 in the Export Of Equipment to Pakistan
LEAD: Two Americans and a Hong Kong businessman were indicted today for illegally exporting to Pakistan sophisticated instruments and advanced computer equipment that can be used to make nuclear bombs.


Man Is Found Shot In Subway Passage
LEAD: A man was found yesterday evening by the police with a gunshot wound to the head in a well-traveled subway passageway near Times Square.


Boeing to Add Jobs
LEAD: The Boeing Company said it expected to increase its work force during the remainder of the year by 3,000 to 4,000 workers, bringing total employment to about 139,000.
The company said most of the growth would be in the Seattle area, where it expects to increase its work force to about 87,000 by the end of the year, from the current 84,000.


NEW SUMMARY: SATURDAY, JULY 18, 1987
LEAD:  International 2-7  The believability of John Poindexter was challenged by the chairman of the Senate committee investigating the Iran-contra affair.
But the Republican vice chairman of the committee said he believed the admiral.
Page 1  Many people think the President lied when he said he did not know that money from the Iran arms sales went to the contras, despite Rear Adm.


Moves Set by Comsat
LEAD: The Communications Satellite Corporation said today it would sell its manufacturing businesses and dispose of two planned direct-broadcast satellites as part of a major reorganization.


AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,226,869,000
1,198,003,000
Net inc
195,876,000
181,292,000
Share earns
1.33
1.20
6mo sales
2,516,227,000
2,462,685,000
Net inc
412,348,000
378,173,000
Share earns
2.78
2.50


Housing Starts Are Off Again
LEAD: Housing starts fell in June for the fourth straight month, but housing industry economists remain optimistic on the outlook for the rest of the year, assuming mortgage rates do not jump again.


AMERICAN TELEPHONE &amp; TELERAPH CO INC (A T &amp; T) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN TELEPHONE &amp; TELERAPH CO INC (A T &amp; T) (N)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,401,000,000
8,421,000,000
Net inc
596,000,000
422,000,000
Share earns
.55
.37
6mo rev
16,522,000,000
17,131,000,000
Net inc
1,041,000,000
b776,000,000
Share earns
.95
.68


SOUTHWESTERN BELL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWESTERN BELL (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,886,500,000
2,006,000,000
Net inc
248,800,000
279,200,000
Share earns
.83
.93
6mo rev
3,762,500,000
3,924,700,000
Net inc
486,500,000
525,300,000
Share earns
1.62
1.76


WHEELING-PITTSBURGH STEEL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WHEELING-PITTSBURGH STEEL (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
258,790,000
245,338,000
Net inc
b39,321,000
c60,276,000
Share earns
7.25
-
6mo sales
513,849,000
464,967,000
Net inc
b73,278,000
c56,270,000
Share earns
13.45
-


SIGNET BANKING reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIGNET BANKING (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b40,199,000
b21,201,000
Per share
-
.87
6mo net loss
b18,022,000
b40,070,000
Per share
-
1.67
b-Includes a $75 million addition to the loan loss reserve for loans to less developed countries which represents about 40 percent of its exposure in that area.


Guarantees That Collapse
LEAD: NOTHING stands in the way of the consumer when it comes to finding the best deal.
He or she is diligent, tireless, inquisitive, demanding.
But often the consumer -overwhelmed by information, perhaps rushed and afraid that this ''best deal'' might slip away -reaches the point of taking the close-the-eyes-and-hope approach.


ARCO to Press Oil Lease Claim
LEAD: ARCO is seeking nearly $796 million in damages from California and Santa Barbara County because it was blocked from developing oil leases in the Santa Barbara Channel.


Suit Filed to Delay Reopening Of Military Nuclear Reactor
LEAD: Opponents of a deteriorating military nuclear reactor filed suit yesterday to delay its reopening.
Most of the plaintiffs would like to keep the reactor shut permanently.


Mattingly Cracks Another Homer, and a Record
LEAD: The bottle of sparkling wine had been placed in an orange bucket at the corner of Don Mattingly's locker.
It had been put there by a clubhouse attendant to commemorate an achievement Mattingly said he does not comprehend and was not attempting to reach.


To Naval Officers, Poindexter Performance Is a Puzzlement
LEAD: When Navy officers are asked their impressions of Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter's performance before the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair, the response is slow in coming and usually accompanied by perplexed expressions.


RJR NABISCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RJR NABISCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,023,000,000
3,832,000,000
Net inc
299,000,000
c253,000,000
Share earns
1.16
.91
6mo sales
7,512,000,000
7,229,000,000
Net inc
b519,000,000
c482,000,000
Share earns
2.00
1.65


Shelter Issue: Board Braces For Long Day
LEAD: Democracy, as practiced by New York City's Board of Estimate, often takes peculiar twists and turns.
The board's meetings routinely last 15 or 16 hours, winding up at 2 or 3 A.M.
A meeting two weeks ago lasted 24 hours.


AZINGER LEADS BY A SHOT AT BRITISH OPEN
LEAD: Rains came, but the wind was still so gentle that Muirfield continued to be unexpectedly easy today, according to Paul Azinger, the new leader after two rounds of the 116th British Open championship.


Music: A 'Giovanni' Reborn as 'Donna'
LEAD: In the mood for a trip up to the Pepsico Summerfare and a radical rethinking of Mozart's ''Don Giovanni''?
If so, your best bet this summer is probably a piece of music theater called ''Donna Giovanni'' by the Companias Divas of Mexico, which opened Thursday night and will be repeated Saturday at 9 P.M.


NYNEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NYNEX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,010,000,000
2,840,000,000
Net inc
322,800,000
310,800,000
Share earns
1.58
1.54
Shares outst
204,400,000
202,500,000
6mo rev
5,900,000,000
5,510,000,000
Net inc
621,900,000
607,300,000
Share earns
3.05
3.00


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.55
6.56
6.38
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.58
5.71
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.63
5.58
5.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.18
8.21
7.05
30-YR.


CHAMPION INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAMPION INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,161,015,000
1,096,412,000
Net inc
b155,710,000
c50,455,000
Share earns
1.64
.51
6mo sales
2,258,248,000
2,218,748,000
Net inc
211,178,000
c72,456,000
Share earns
2.23
.71


In the Dark About Movies
LEAD: We love Vietnam War movies.


When Bettors Are the Losers
LEAD: THE daily double at Belmont Park yesterday paid $186.
It would have paid $192.60 if the State Legislature had acted last week to reduce the parimutuel takeout from 17 percent to 14 percent.
The measure enjoyed wide support from legislators and track officials, and Albany handicappers made it 3-to-5 to be passed into law.


Hollywood Gamble En Espanol
LEAD: When ''La Bamba'' reaches theaters on Friday, Hollywood will be making its first real test of the Hispanic market for American films.
In Miami, New York, San Antonio, Detroit, Los Angeles, San Jose, Calif., and 20 other cities with large Hispanic populations, the movie will be released in three versions: in English, in Spanish, and in English with


Driving in the Dark
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nominee to Head the F.A.A. Is Confirmed by the Senate
LEAD: The Senate on a voice vote today confirmed the nomination of T. Allan McArtor as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration to succeed Donald D. Engen.


ROGERS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROGERS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
34,013,000
32,116,000
Net inc
560,000
540,000
Share earns
.19
.18
6mo sales
68,306,000
64,980,000
Net inc
1,249,000
872,000
Share earns
.42
.29


Varian Pact With I.B.M.
LEAD: Varian Associates Inc. has announced an agreement with the International Business Machines Corporation that would allow each company to use the other's patents in their respective fields of interest.
Varian, of Palo Alto, Calif., makes equipment in the areas of semiconductor fabrication, communications, medicine and analytical instrumentation.


CHAMPION SPARK PLUG CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAMPION SPARK PLUG CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
250,700,000
208,200,000
Net inc
7,600,000
b4,000,000
Share earns
.20
-
6mo sales
511,000,000
434,300,000
Net inc
14,600,000
b3,900,000
Share earns
.38
-


TRANSAMERICA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSAMERICA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,950,000,000
1,560,000,000
Net inc
b105,955,000
c69,029,000
Share earns
1.37
.88
6mo rev
3,759,952,000
2,999,254,000
Net inc
b216,976,000
113,314,000
Share earns
2.80
1.45


Continental Plans Rise in Air Fares
LEAD: Continental Airlines, falling in line with the nation's other major air carriers, said that it would increase one-way ticket prices $2 to $8, beginning Aug. 1.
The decision by Continental, one of the airline units of the Texas Air Corporation, was expected.
The Houston-based carrier cited rising fuel costs.


Teammate of Gehrig Watches Mattingly
LEAD: On the night Don Mattingly shared the Yankee record of four grand slams in a season with Lou Gehrig and Tommy Henrich, he was watched by one of Gehrig's teammates on the 1927 Yankees.


Queens Man Is Slain In Mall Parking Lot
LEAD: A 23-year-old Queens man was fatally shot in the parking lot of the Green Acres Mall here Thursday night in what the police described as a dispute between two families.


A 15-Yard Span Over a Great Divide
LEAD: Every morning around 9:30 a Jordanian soldier in a powder blue uniform carrying a small bundle under his arm walks to the middle of the Allenby Bridge, which spans the Jordan River.


'Pizza' Conviction Is Dismissed
LEAD: The conviction of a defendant in the ''pizza connection'' drug case has been dismissed because he was shot and could not attend the end of the trial.


U.S SUSPENDS SAVINGS BOND SALES
LEAD: The Treasury announced today that it had suspended all sales of savings bonds, effective Saturday.
Officials also said they would probably cancel a sale of other Treasury securities scheduled for Monday and might have to put off a sale planned for Thursday.


552 Days of Twilight?
LEAD: A lame duck, Safire's Political Dictionary pronounces, is an officeholder whose power is diminished because he is soon to leave office.
By that standard, President Reagan is no lame duck.
He's not scheduled to leave office for 552 days.
At the moment, however, to call Mr.
Reagan a lame duck is almost an overstatement.


NOXELL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOXELL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
115,882,000
101,659,000
Net inc
9,730,000
8,269,000
Share earns
.24
.20
6mo sales
248,985,000
217,273,000
Net inc
23,053,000
19,440,000
Share earns
.57
.48


Jean Reavey Is Dead at 70; A Playwright and Librettist
LEAD: Jean Bullowa Reavey, a playwright, died Monday at Northern Dutchess Hospital in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
She was 70 years old.


Leonard Wins Decision
LEAD: Officials of HBO have decided to include Sugar Ray Leonard as part of the telecast tonight of the World Boxing Association junior middleweight title bout between the champion, Mike McCallum, and the challenger, Donald Curry, from Las Vegas, Nev.


Of Swords And Falling Men
LEAD: Here are some of the things we now know:


The Admiral's Week: Time Off for Church
LEAD: Admiral Poindexter was asked by Richard Leon, minority counsel to the House committee, to describe a typical day when he was serving as national security adviser.


PHILIP MORRIS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILIP MORRIS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,110,000,000
6,534,000,000
Net inc
476,000,000
377,000,000
Share earns
2.00
1.58
6mo rev
13,664,000,000
12,458,000,000
Net inc
862,000,000
693,000,000
Share earns
3.62
2.90


Smeal Is Hailed as NOW Assembles to Choose a New Leader
LEAD: Eleanor C. Smeal, who is stepping down as president of the National Organization for Women, today dominated the opening of the group's convention here, exhorting delegates to double the number of women in Congress, back a female Presidential candidate and push for ratification of a proposed Federal equal rights amendment.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: The Market Place column in Business Day on Thursday, about companies that distribute electronic parts, overstated the earnings that most analysts expect for Avnet Inc.
Their consensus is that Avnet earned about 68 cents a share for the fiscal year, which ended June 30.


GANNETT CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GANNETT CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
789,761,000
716,177,000
Net inc
89,724,000
77,189,000
Share earns
.56
.48
6mo rev
1,492,918,000
1,330,918,000
Net inc
142,254,000
122,034,000
Share earns
.88
.76


DENIES WRONGDOING
LEAD: A Federal grand jury found that Lyn Nofziger illegally ''profited from the political reputation and influence'' he gained as a senior White House aide, according to an indictment unsealed here today.


U.S. Appeals Court Expedites Hearing on Walsh's Authority
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has agreed to hurry its consideration of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's latest challenge to the authority of the Iran-contra special prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A report in the Company Briefs column of Business Day on Tuesday incorrectly characterized the ownership of the Metropolitan Broadcasting Corporation.
The company is no longer a subsidiary of Metromedia, having been sold to a group of private investors in 1986.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 50.


Nurse Shortage Is Not Sudden or Surprising
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japan's Efforts to Soften U.S. Anger on Toshiba
LEAD: In its desire to quell American anger over a Japanese company's sale of militarily sensitive technology to the Soviet Union, Japan is taking steps that may seem extraordinary to Americans, but make perfect sense to Japanese.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  In the Far East


GILLETTE CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GILLETTE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
761,700,000
678,500,000
Net inc
58,000,000
46,800,000
Share earns
.50
.37
Shares outst
114,589,000
128,393,000
6mo sales
1,523,800,000
1,333,700,000
Net inc
113,000,000
91,800,000
Share earns
.98
.73
Shares outst
114,749,000
126,403,000


U.S. Issues Rise Moderately
LEAD: Prices of Government securities rose moderately yesterday in light trading buoyed by the surge of the dollar to a four-month high against the Japanese yen.


Nurse Shortage Is Not Sudden or Surprising; AIDS Fear Takes Toll
LEAD: To the Editor:


Court-Martialed Marine Freed
LEAD: A Marine whose conviction on rape and attempted murder charges was overturned by an appeals court earlier this month was freed from prison Friday, the Marine Corps said.


ROPAK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROPAK CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,216,000
13,597,000
Net inc
b772,000
661,000
Share earns
.32
.26
6mo sales
32,670,000
21,883,000
Net inc
b646,000
847,000
Share earns
.28
.34
b-The company said nonrecurring costs form the aborted acquisition of Buckhorn Inc.


Texas River Engulfs Bus and Van; Two Are Dead and 8 Are Missing
LEAD: A raging, rain-swollen river in central Texas swept away a bus and a van full of teen-agers leaving a church camp today.
Two of the 43 people in the vehicles died, and 8 were missing tonight and feared dead.


COLECO INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLECO INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
146,069,000
127,778,000
Net inc
752,000
1,058,000
Share earns
.04
.06
6mo sales
270,539,000
241,196,000
Net loss
8,147,000
b6,796,000
Share earns
-
.40


France Breaks Iran Ties and Isolates Embassy
LEAD: France severed relations with Iran today, and each country prohibited the other's diplomats from leaving.


CENTRAL &amp; SOUTH WEST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL &amp; SOUTH WEST CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
582,428,000
618,511,000
Net inc
85,663,000
83,627,000
Share earns
.82
.79
6mo rev
1,124,109,000
1,205,076,000
Net inc
154,113,000
156,203,000
Share earns
1.45
1.47


The Bork Question
LEAD: Two old lions of the Washington bar and the Democratic Party have entered, on different sides, the steadily growing conflict over President Reagan's nomination of Robert H. Bork to replace Justice Lewis Powell on the Supreme Court.
That suggests something about how the battle will be fought.


SOCIAL DEMOCRATS LEAD IN PORTUGAL
LEAD: Economic good times have increased the chances of the right-of-center Social Democratic Party to gain a majority in general elections here Sunday.


Re-creating Hambone, Body Music of the Past
LEAD: It is undeniably the speediest of the many star turns in ''The Comedy of Errors,'' playing these days at the Vivian Beaumont Theater.
Yet, to Derique McGee, his hambone body-rhythm routine is never quite fast enough. ''I keep trying for that playing-card-in-the-bicycle-spoke sound,'' he said.


Partial Collapse of Bronx Building Slightly Injures Three
LEAD: Emergency workers sifting through the rubble left when the second floor collapsed in a two-story building at White Plains and East Gun Hill Roads.
Officials said there was no reason to believe that there was anyone trapped inside.
Three people were treated for minor injuries. (The New York Times/Alan


Thatcher Visits Washington And Hails Reagan Leadership
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, bolstered by her recent election victory in Britain, made a one-day visit to Washington today and appeared to offer a message of reassurance to the American public about its President's stature.


Man Held in Aliens' Deaths
LEAD: A man being held in Sonora, Mexico, will be charged with negligent homicide and smuggling undocumented farm workers out of Mexico in connection with a desert trek by 25 men and boys that left three dead, a Mexican prosecutor said Thursday.
The man, Manuel Partida Beltran, allegedly accepted $350 to $400 from each emigrant for setting up a 50-mile route for them from Los Vidrios, Sonora, to Aztec, Ariz., and then left them ''without food, without medicine, with only enough water for four hours.


The Clarinet Glissando Electrified the Hall
LEAD: To the Editor:


Immigration Service Uses a Mobile Legalization Center to Reach Upstate Workers
LEAD: A farm worker harvesting lettuce near Syracuse yesterday as an agent of the Immigration and Naturalization Service talked to others.
The van, which contains a portable computer, is being used to help illegal aliens apply for temporary residency under the new amnesty law.
The van is one of only 50 in the country and the only one in New York.


Atsuko Chiba, 46; A Writer who Told About Life With Cancer
LEAD: Atsuko Chiba, a Japanese journalist known for her candid pieces describing her battle with cancer, died of the disease July 9 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
She was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Harsh Penalty for Scientist


Cholesterol Researcher Is Censured For Misrepresenting Data in Article
LEAD: A leading scientist known for his investigations into the role of cholesterol in heart disease was censured yesterday by the National Institutes of Health for ''serious scientific misconduct'' and for misrepresenting data he published in a major medical journal.


RIGGS NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RIGGS NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b11,884,000
c8,993,000
Per share
-
.65
6mo loss
1,599,000
c21,357,000
Share earns
-
1.66
b-After an addition of $32 million to loan loss reserves for lesser developed countries and those with recently restructured debt.


SHEARSON LEHMAN BROTHERS HOLDINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHEARSON LEHMAN BROTHERS HOLDINGS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,314,800,000
1,067,500,000
Net inc
61,400,000
60,400,000
Share earns
.66
-
6mo rev
2,575,000,000
2,181,800,000
Net inc
137,500,000
b150,500,000
Share earns
1.60
-


In New Haven, Pizza Is Serious
LEAD: If you think pizzas come out of stainless-steel ovens or, worse, from cardboard boxes in supermarket freezers, a field trip to New Haven is in order - not just to see the old-fashioned coal-fired ovens, but because no city in the United States takes its pizza as seriously as New Haven.
Natives are as proud of the city's role in introducing ''tomato pies'' to America as they are of Yale.


New World in Bid For Kenner Parker
LEAD: The makers of Monopoly today found themselves in a real-life battle of high finance.


APPLIED MAGNETICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APPLIED MAGNETICS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
58,113,000
33,693,000
Net inc
b5,014,000
c2,458,000
Share earns
.67
.36
Shares outst
7,516,975
6,825,399
9mo sales
147,351,000
92,529,000
Net inc
b10,095,000
c4,224,000
Share earns
1.43
.62
Shares outst
7,046,984
6,474,938


STONE &amp; WEBSTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STONE &amp; WEBSTER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
81,012,000
81,119,000
Net inc
b15,154,000
9,586,000
Share earns
2.05
1.31
6mo rev
157,258,000
155,190,000
Net inc
b25,773,000
14,092,000
Share earns
3.48
1.92


The Testimony: 'I Simply Didn't Want Outside Interference'
LEAD: In his third day of testimony yesterday at the Congressional hearings in Washington, Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter was questioned further on his role in Iran-contra affair.
Here, as recorded by The New York Times, are excerpts from his testimony.


AMERICAN PRESIDENT COS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN PRESIDENT COS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
424,900,000
325,300,000
Net inc
20,500,000
4,400,000
Share earns
.89
.21
6mo rev
866,900,000
673,700,000
Net inc
40,000,000
b5,200,000
Share earns
1.73
-


New Fans for Diamonds
LEAD: Diamonds, the world's hardest, most dazzling asset, are attracting a new wave of customers.


Repayment To Guinness
LEAD: A High Court judge has ordered a former director of Guinness P.L.C., Thomas J. Ward, to return to the brewing company $:5.2 million, or $8.4 million, that he received during the company's takeover of the Distillers Company last year.


PANEL'S CHAIRMAN SAYS POINDEXTER LACKS CREDIBILITY
LEAD: Senator Daniel K. Inouye, the Democratic chairman of the Senate investigative committee, today openly challenged the believability of Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter's testimony on the Iran-contra affair.


BOWATER INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOWATER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
297,952,000
226,509,000
Net inc
16,752,000
16,763,000
Share earns
.43
.53
Shares outst
35,338,000
29,378,000
6mo sales
580,883,000
426,583,000
Net inc
28,565,000
b23,937,000
Share earns
.75
.71
Shares outst
36,815,000
29,457,000


Veiled Realities
LEAD:  SPIRITS and Other Stories.
By Richard Bausch. 237 pages.
The Linden Press/ Simon &amp; Schuster. $15.95.


Nurse Shortage Is Not Sudden or Surprising; A National Service Job?
LEAD: To the Editor:





CONTEL CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTEL CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
745,594,000
775,431,000
Net inc
46,901,000
56,882,000
Share earns
.61
.74
6mo rev
1,468,588,000
1,472,516,000
Net inc
101,553,000
105,855,000
Share earns
1.32
1.38


Darling Dealt Complete Loss
LEAD: Just when they seemed to be achieving noble things in their pursuit of first place, the Mets took a monumental tumble last night.
Ron Darling was tagged for four runs in the ninth inning, including a two-out, three-run home run by Nick Esasky, and the Cincinnati Reds bushwacked the Mets, 5-2.


Elaine Brody Is Dead at 64; Author and Music Professor
LEAD: Elaine Brody, an author and professor of music in the Faculty of Arts and Science at New York University, died of cancer Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
She was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


PIONEER-STANDARD ELECTRONCS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIONEER-STANDARD ELECTRONCS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
57,660,863
51,538,499
Net inc
801,798
b144,168
Share earns
.15
.03
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $254,815.


Rain Comes Too Late for Homes in Washington
LEAD: The remains of three houses, burned to the ground in a 900-acre fire that destroyed 24 houses south of Spokane.
A weather system out of the Pacific Ocean brought rain and snow that helped crews contain fires that have blackened some 48,000 acres in seven Western states.
At least two men have been killed.


CROWN CORK &amp; SEAL CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROWN CORK &amp; SEAL CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
483,761,000
465,019,000
Net inc
26,748,000
23,781,000
Share earns
2.56
2.21
6mo sales
862,102,000
822,191,000
Net inc
43,891,000
39,177,000
Share earns
4.20
3.63


UPJOHN CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UPJOHN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
665,000,000
594,000,000
Net inc
79,000,000
65,000,000
Share earns
.42
.34
6mo sales
1,300,000,000
1,100,000,000
Net inc
159,000,000
128,000,000
Share earns
.85
.68


Trout Wants A Ring, Too
LEAD: There can be no point in trying to pretend to have a normal childhood when baseball is growing into a passion and your father possesses a World Series ring.


Dr. George E. Murphy, Professor of Pathology
LEAD: Dr.
George E. Murphy, a professor of pathology at the Cornell University Medical College and chairman of the group responsible for the Upper East Side recreation complex known as Asphalt Green, died of cancer Wednesday at New York Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.


PARLUX FRAGRANCES reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARLUX FRAGRANCES
Qtr to March 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,600,000
6,600,000
Net loss
1,700,000
988,000


Florida Fruit Flies Controlled
LEAD: State and Federal agriculture officials today announced that the battle against the latest infestaion of the Mediterranean fruit fly in Florida has been won.


About New York; Dog Boot Camp: Giving Character To Screwballs
LEAD: On Rudy!
On Remy!
On Roxie and Boomer!
On Peek-a-Boo, Honey Bear, Scarlet and Scone!


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 11.


SAVIN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAVIN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
87,327,000
95,140,000
Net inc
b2,002,000
c3,161,000
Share earns
.06
-
6mo rev
176,156,000
189,941,000
Net inc
b3,512,000
c8,494,000
Share earns
.12
-


Protection Against Sun Is Summer's Best Seller
LEAD: What's hot at cosmetics counters this summer?
Sun-protection products. ''The area is explosive,'' said Terry Hagerty, a vice president and the merchandise manager for cosmetics at Saks Fifth Avenue. ''La Prairie and Chanel brought out lines this year, and the older cosmetic companies are focusing more attention on sun products.


Lautenberg Asks Curbs On TV for Children
LEAD: Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, proposed legislation today to require television broadcasters to present at least seven hours a week of educational programs for children.


Coke Plans Buyback of Shares
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it planned to buy back up to 40 million common shares, or about 10.6 percent of the total outstanding.
The three-year repurchase plan would cost about $1.8 billion at current market prices.


ALEXANDER &amp; BALDWIN INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALEXANDER &amp; BALDWIN INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
173,408,000
136,686,000
Net inc
41,031,000
27,168,000
Share earns
1.54
.97
Shares outst
26,462,000
27,993,000
6mo rev
326,084,000
255,199,000
Net inc
73,634,000
45,532,000
Share earns
2.70
1.63


Olympia &amp; York Moves Into London
LEAD: Olympia &amp; York, the giant Canadian real estate concern, announced today that it would take control of Canary Wharf, the 71-acre development along the Thames that is intended to expand London's financial services industry beyond the the City of London.


8 Plead Guilty in Syracuse Kickback Case
LEAD: Eight men charged in an extortion scheme said to have been controlled by Lee Alexander, the former Mayor of Syracuse, pleaded guilty yesterday to various conspiracy counts.


Quaker in Accord With General Mills
LEAD: The Quaker Oats Company and General Mills Inc. said they had reached an agreement in a trademark dispute.
In a suit filed in Federal District Court in Chicago, Quaker had complained about the use of its logotype on the back of a General Mills box for hot breakfast cereal.
On the box, General Mills compared its cereal with Quaker's brand, asserting that the General Mills product had more vitamins.


2 Convicted of Racketeering In Mafia Construction Case
LEAD: A jury convicted two men yesterday of racketeering charges involving the Mafia's systematic extortion of payoffs in the construction industry of New York City.


Israel to Study Protest About Discrimination
LEAD: The Israeli Government has set up a committee to look into American complaints that some black Americans and Arab-Americans face discrimination when they try to enter Israel, a senior Foreign Ministry official said today.


MCI to Match A.T.&amp;T. Rate
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation said it would match its long-distance rival by cutting its long-distance rates an average of 5 percent.
The reduced rates will go into effect Aug. 1.
The rate change was in response to a similar rate cut July 1 by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


French-West German Brigade Is to Be Kept Outside NATO
LEAD: A planned joint brigade of French and German troops will be headed by a French officer and kept outside the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's integrated military command along with the rest of France's armed forces, the French and West German Defense Ministers announced today.


Mother Guilty Of Murdering Her Daughter
LEAD: Mary Beth Tinning was found guilty today of smothering her 3 1/2-month-old daughter with a pillow.


Soviet Gives Glimpse of Banned Film About Jews
LEAD: In 1967, a Soviet film director told a tale of Jewish life, Jewish suffering, Jewish bravery and Jewish fatalism in a movie about a Red Army commissar who found herself living with a small-town Jewish family while civil war raged around them.


TEXACO CANADA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXACO CANADA (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
684,000,000
680,000,000
Net inc
68,000,000
54,000,000
Share earns
.57
.44
6mo rev
1,360,000,000
1,540,000,000
Net inc
142,000,000
138,000,000
Share earns
1.18
1.14


Stocks Scale a Peak
LEAD: The Dow Jones industrial average closed above 2,500 yesterday for the first time.
Page 35.


NASHUA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NASHUA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
220,070,000
177,098,000
Net inc
6,847,000
5,833,000
Share earns
.70
.60
6mo sales
414,564,000
346,078,000
Net inc
12,997,000
11,512,000
Share earns
1.33
1.19


The Connecticut Primary
LEAD: Most of Fairfield County, Connecticut, will soon pick a successor to the late Stewart McKinney in Congress.
A small vote is likely in the primaries next Tuesday and special election Aug. 18.
Delay until fall would have been better.
Now it's up to vacationing absentees, and voters at home, to make an extra effort.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about New York State's legislative budget, and a related picture caption, incorrectly described the Legislature's television operation.
The Legislature finances and maintains its own television-taping studios out of its operational budget.
It is separate from Nyscan, a cable television channel that provides coverage of state government hearings and other proceedings.


VERDICT RETURNED IN MAGAZINE TRIAL
LEAD: A Federal jury in the bitter six-year legal fight over the sale of The Atlantic magazine found today that none of the five sellers in the case had committed fraud.


NOLAND CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOLAND CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
112,207,620
112,782,642
Net inc
1,842,437
1,675,317
Share earns
.50
.45
6mo sales
202,294,677
207,328,046
Net inc
b2,686,324
2,492,708
Share earns
.73
.67


Wheels of Fortune
LEAD: Rush hour was steamy and anxious commuters packed the bus, swaying back and forth as it played stop-and-go up Third Avenue.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Billie Jean King, Stan Smith, Alex Olmedo, Bjorn Borg and Dennis Ralston will be inducted today into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in Newport, R.I.
Oscar Johnson and Dorothy (Dodo) Cheney will be awarded special commendations in recognition of their outstanding contributions to the sport. .


Sketches of the Principals In Nofziger-Wedtech Case
LEAD:  Lyn Nofziger


MERCK &amp; CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCK &amp; CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,249,300,000
1,005,000,000
Net inc
235,100,000
173,200,000
Share earns
1.72
1.23
Shares outst
136,700,000
140,800,000
6mo sales
2,360,400,000
1,926,100,000
Net inc
436,300,000
331,000,000
Share earns
3.19
2.35
Shares outst
136,600,000
140,700,000


Dance: Three Premieres by the Frankfurt Ballet
LEAD: One can imagine the field day William Forsythe will have with the Iran-contra hearings.
How language functions, how the same words are redefined to assume different meaning -these are issues that the 38-year-old American choreographer is exploring in the Frankfurt Ballet.


HUTTON, E F GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUTTON, E F GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
848,280,000
670,208,000
Net inc
b45,884,000
c4,736,000
Share earns
1.39
-
6mo rev
1,719,309,000
1,400,440,000
Net inc
b111,990,000
d35,353,000
Share earns
3.40
1.12


Senate Aids Sugar Refiners
LEAD: The Senate today narrowly approved a provision in the omnibus trade bill that would give a $365 million break to a handful of American sugar refiners.


FIGGIE INTERNATIONAL HOLDINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIGGIE INTERNATIONAL HOLDINGS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
247,672,000
234,412,000
Net inc
10,643,000
9,846,000
Share earns
1.51
1.45
6mo sales
485,452,000
454,891,000
Net inc
20,509,000
17,568,000
Share earns
2.90
2.76


Ex-New York Commissioner Is Convicted of Lying to Panel
LEAD: Anthony R. Ameruso, New York City's Transportation Commissioner from 1978 until his resignation last year, was convicted yesterday of lying under oath to a panel investigating governmental corruption.


Grand National Team Play Is Narrowed to Four Entries
LEAD: Teams from California, Indiana, Louisiana and Pennsylvania competed in the semifinal stage of the Grand National Team Championship here today.


ALUMINUM CO OF AMERICA (ALCOA) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALUMINUM CO OF AMERICA (ALCOA) (N)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,409,400,000
1,234,100,000
Net loss
b91,200,000
c53,300,000
Share earns
-
.63
6mo rev
2,684,400,000
2,418,100,000
Net loss
b41,800,000
c54,700,000
Share earns
-
.64


TEXAS INSTRUMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS INSTRUMENTS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,371,600,000
1,244,100,000
Net inc
b61,900,000
12,300,000
Share earns
.73
.12
6mo sales
2,643,500,000
2,389,400,000
Net inc
b145,700,000
c11,500,000
Share earns
1.77
-


Nature Wins Over Development at Delaware Water Gap
LEAD: The Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area, 69,629 acres of mountains and scenic gorges on the edge of the New York metropolitan area, will be kept largely pristine and undeveloped under a master plan adopted by the National Park Service.


'In the Name of Fairness,' a Sharp Rebuke
LEAD: After several objections by Richard Beckler, Admiral Poindexter's attorney, over questions to his client, Senator Daniel K. Inouye, chairman of the Senate committee, made a statement about the fairness of the committee and the credibility of the witness.


Your Money; Gifts to Minors Offer Choices
LEAD: ''MAKING a gift directly to a minor is a good way of dispersing funds for non-useful purposes,'' said Julian S. Bush, senior estate partner of the New York law firm of Shea &amp; Gould.


RUSSELL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RUSSELL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
98,776,000
95,298,000
Net inc
7,170,000
8,265,000
Share earns
.18
.20
6mo sales
208,166,000
193,134,000
Net inc
16,858,000
18,298,000
Share earns
.42
.45


Hollings Accuses TV of Ad Overload
LEAD: The sponsor of a bill to restore some regulation of the broadcast industry accused television executives today of using too many commercials and reducing news departments.


Reviving the Rockaways: A Bitter Trail
LEAD: After two decades of frustration and failure, New York City is trying again to redevelop two miles of oceanfront in Queens that is one of the nation's most conspicuous setbacks in an attempt at urban renewal.


Peru Rebels Kill Policeman
LEAD: Peruvian rebels shot dead a police officer in Lima today after a night of violence in which 10 bombs exploded in the capital and part of the country was blacked out.
The police said that nine people were wounded in the attacks and that 500 people suspected of rebel activity, 10 of them believed to be members of the Maoist Shining Path guerrilla group, had been detained in the capital.


Did Reagan Know? Did Poindexter Tell?
LEAD:  Reagan


Top Italy Court Annuls Warrants Against 3 Vatican Bank Officials
LEAD: In a major legal victory for the Vatican, Italy's highest court today annulled arrest warrants accusing an American Archbishop and two other Vatican bank executives of fraudulent complicity in the billion-dollar collapse of Banco Ambrosiano.


Herb and Cora Taylor, Publishers, Are Killed
LEAD: Herb and Cora Taylor, publishers of books on diving, were killed Tuesday in the crash of a light plane near Lincolnville, Me.
Mr.
Taylor was 45 years old and Mrs.
Taylor was 46.
They lived in Locust Valley, L.I.


OXFORD INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OXFORD INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to May 29
1987
1986
Sales
145,657,000
129,919,000
Net inc
1,694,000
2,556,000
Share earns
.15
.23
Yr sales
553,380,000
533,581,000
Net inc
10,614,000
10,304,000
Share earns
.95
.93


Scoop of Justice for Howard Johnson
LEAD: Howard Johnson's vanilla, chocolate, coffee and strawberry ice cream are not really Howard Johnson's, a jury has ruled.
They are Paul H. Beckner's.
Coming coincidentally on the fifth day of National Ice Cream Week, the jury in Suffolk Superior Court found on Thursday that Howard Johnson's had misappropriated Mr.


Subways' Ridership Rises to 3.6 Million, Highest Since 1974
LEAD: New, rebuilt and graffiti-free subway cars are luring people underground in numbers not seen in more than a decade, the Transit Authority reported yesterday.


MOLLIE GOLUB
LEAD: Mollie Golub, former president of the Mizrachi Women's Organization of America, a Zionist organiztion now known as AMIT Women, died of pneumonia Tuesday in Maimonides Hospital.
She was 85 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


RALSTON PURINA CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RALSTON PURINA CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,404,700,000
1,264,200,000
Net inc
b55,700,000
62,000,000
Share earns
.78
.82
9mo sales
4,359,600,000
3,910,400,000
Net inc
b426,100,000
c298,100,000
Share earns
5.83
3.88


Democratic Candidates United Over Iran Affair
LEAD: Democratic Presidential candidates joined today in pungent criticism of President Reagan, Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter and Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North for their roles in the Iran-contra affair.


ETHYL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ETHYL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
420,251,000
406,006,000
Net inc
47,783,000
48,317,000
Share earns
.39
.38
Shares outst
123,705,000
126,233,000
6mo sales
809,250,000
784,004,000
Net inc
94,138,000
83,526,000
Share earns
.76
.66
Shares outst
123,840,000
126,141,000


Nurse Shortage Is Not Sudden or Surprising; Largely Women's Work
LEAD: To the Editor: As someone who has worked in New York City hospitals since 1978, I have seen over the last decade a steady decline in the number and quality of nurses in our hospitals.
A nurse must work nights, weekends, holidays and, when staff shortages exist, double shifts.


Manila Signs Debt Accord
LEAD: The Philippines yesterday signed a $13.2 billion debt rescheduling agreement that includes provisions to allow conversion of some debt into ownership of Philippine property.


CRAZY EDDIE INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRAZY EDDIE INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
78,052,000
64,500,000
Net loss
2,282,000
b2,426,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


A Majority in New Poll Still Find Reagan Lied on Iran-Contra Issue
LEAD: Despite Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter's testimony supporting the President's account, a majority of Americans still say that President Reagan lied when he said he did not know that money from the Iran arms sales was channeled to the Nicaraguan rebels, a New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.


BAUSCH &amp; LOMB INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAUSCH &amp; LOMB INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
212,155,000
173,082,000
Net inc
20,619,000
19,468,000
Share earns
.67
.64
6mo sales
400,790,000
324,058,000
Net inc
34,784,000
31,822,000
Share earns
1.14
1.05


Nurse Shortage Is Not Sudden or Surprising; Rewards Remain
LEAD: To the Editor:


FORT HOWARD PAPER CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORT HOWARD PAPER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
472,543,000
394,148,000
Net inc
48,351,000
46,767,000
Share earns
.72
.70
6mo sales
866,851,000
713,587,000
Net inc
83,458,000
83,754,000
Share earns
1.24
1.25


Dollar Is Driven Higher By Fears Over Gulf War
LEAD: The dollar closed sharply higher yesterday against major currencies in a rally spurred by heightened fears over tension in the Persian Gulf.


North Carolina Arts Prize
LEAD: John Cheek, a bass-baritone who has performed with opera companies in the United States and abroad, is this year's recipient of the North Carolina Prize for his outstanding work in the performing arts.
The award, which carries a $10,000 grant, is given annually for excellence in the performing or visual arts to an individual born in North Carolina or residing in the state.


Music: Carmaig de Forest
LEAD: Carmaig de Forest, a singer-songwriter from San Francisco who was at CBGB on Wednesday and has been performing elsewhere around town, has a skinhead haircut, wears jeans that are ripped at the knee, and plays the ukulele.
His recent album was produced by Alex Chilton, and his ad hoc backup band at CBGB included Will Rigby of the dB's on drums, Gordon Gano of the Violent Femmes on guitar, and Tony M


GRACE, W R &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRACE, W R &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,147,380,000
920,788,000
Net inc
b33,777,000
c86,366,000
Share earns
.79
2.06
Net inc
b81,544,000
c83,306,000
Share earns
1.92
1.98
b-After a loss of $625,000 for the quarter and net of $26,997,000 for the 6 months both from discontinued operations; and a charge of $1,584,000 for the quarter and a gain of $6,882,000 for the 6 months both related to tax adjustments.


New Curb Seen On East Bloc
LEAD: Top officials of Cocom, the Western trade body, have made progress in tightening controls on sensitive exports to Warsaw Pact nations after a two-day meeting here, Cocom sources said today.


NICOLET INSTRUMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NICOLET INSTRUMENT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
32,178,000
27,125,000
Net inc
1,518,000
b10,463,000
Share earns
.23
1.59
b-Includes gains from discontinued operations of $9,428,000.


Reform or Regulation for College Sports
LEAD: College coaches and athletic directors run collegiate sports - and as big business.
That was clear from the recent special convention of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
The coaches and directors slapped down or eviscerated every proposal offered by the reform-minded Presidents' Commission.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A dispatch from Sydney, Australia, on Tuesday about American reaction to the Australian election incompletely described New Zealand's status in the Anzus alliance.
The United States announced last August that it was suspending military obligations to New Zealand under the Anzus treaty because New Zealand refused to allow port calls by


SOVIET TESTS NECLEAR DEVICE
LEAD: The Soviet Union detonated a nuclear device today, its 11th underground test since abandoning a freeze earlier this year.


LOCKHEED CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOCKHEED CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,892,000,000
2,563,000,000
Net inc
100,000,000
96,000,000
Share earns
1.51
1.45
6mo sales
5,450,000,000
4,807,000,000
Net inc
186,000,000
183,000,000
Share earns
2.81
2.77


Gold and Silver Decline; Oil Contracts Up Again
LEAD: Gold and silver futures prices declined sharply at the Commodity Exchange in New York yesterday, undermined by the stronger dollar.


NEWHALL LAND &amp; FARMING CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWHALL LAND &amp; FARMING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
39,542,000
38,286,000
Net inc
6,711,000
9,633,000
Unit earns
.32
.50
Units outst
20,710,000
19,435,000
6mo rev
64,437,000
68,083,000
Net inc
11,685,000
16,301,000
Unit earns
.56
.86
Units outst
20,715,000
18,935,000


Court Again Postpones a Plan on Garbage Barge
LEAD: A State Supreme Court Justice in Brooklyn today continued to block a plan to burn the contents of the garbage barge Mobro and set a hearing on the issue for next week.


A Split Decision
LEAD: The six-member State Athletic Commission in California split its vote yesterday on the appeal filed by Albert Davila of the decision to stop his North American Boxing Federation bantamweight championship bout June 27 against Frankie Duarte.
A seventh member of the commission was absent and because of the 3-3 vote, no determination was made and


Postal Talks With 2 Unions Stall Over Settlement With a 3d
LEAD: Contract talks between the Postal Service and its two largest unions have broken off with the pacts scheduled to expire at 12:01 A.M.
Tuesday.


Tanana Blanks Mariners
LEAD: Alan Trammell had three hits, including his 14th home run, and Frank Tanana pitched a three-hitter to lead the Detroit Tigers to a 7-0 victory last night over the Seattle Mariners.
Tanana (9-6) faced the minimum number of batters through seven innings.


Rev. William Coffin Is Said to Be Choice Of New Peace Group
LEAD: The Rev.
William Sloane Coffin, senior minister of the Riverside Church, is expected to announce his resignation at services tomorrow, according to church sources.


F.D.A. Handling of Research On NutraSweet Is Defended
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration followed proper procedures in approving the sale of the artificial sweetener aspartame and is conducting adequate follow-up studies to monitor its safety, the General Accounting Office says.


Racial Tension in Norwalk Simmers Over Deaths
LEAD: Only blocks from the bars and bistros that line this city's newly renovated waterfront district, the streets are steaming with fear and anger and resentment.


Three Hurt in Beam Collapse At Theater Under Demolition
LEAD: Three workmen were injured yesterday morning when a steel beam collapsed in a movie theater they were demolishing in midtown Manhattan.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tour de France  A Narrow Finish: Jean-Paul Van Poppel of the Netherlands outsprinted the pack yesterday to win the 17th stage of the Tour de France cycling race, but Charles Mottet of France retained the leader's yellow jersey.
Van Poppel beat Guido Bontempi of Italy by the width of an inner tube at the end of the 148.5-mile route from Millau to Avignon.


Dewey Warren
LEAD: The insurance broker Dewey Warren Holdings P.L.C. said it planned to raise its stake in the merchant bankers Morgan Grenfell Group P.L.C. to 7.85 million shares, from 1.15 million.
It also said it planned to start a rights issue for an unspecified sum.
Buying 6.7 million shares would cost the company about $:33.2 million, or $53.2 million.


ITT Considering Sale of STC Stake
LEAD: The ITT Corporation confirmed that it was considering the sale of its 24 percent stake in STC P.L.C., a British company that makes electronics and telecommunications equipment.
ITT's 131 million shares in STC have risen in value to about $700 million, up from a little under $300 million last summer and $500 million in March, based on prices on the London Stock Exchange.


P. D. Bennett Wed To Miss Putnam
LEAD: Katharine Lawrence Putnam, a daughter of Mrs.
Roger D. Masters of South Woodstock, Vt., and Augustus Lowell Putnam of New York, was married yesterday to Peter Dudley Bennett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Bennett of Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
William N. Peabody, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the South Woodstock Community


Forcing Buildings to Respect the Hills
LEAD: IN his autobiography, Frank Lloyd Wright took a gentle swipe at one of the most enduring symbols of a free and boldly individual America: the house on a hill.


MOVIES, BOOKS AND THE REAL STORY
LEAD:  To the Editor:


In Old Delhi, Ethnic Tension Haunts Market
LEAD: Every evening, according to residents of the tiny lanes and narrow buildings that make up the historic and crowded walled city of Old Delhi, policemen in jeeps and on motorcycles drive along the main roads announcing the approaching curfew.


Teams From South and West Play for National Bridge Title
LEAD: Bridge teams from the San Francisco and New Orleans areas clashed here this afternoon in the final of the Grand National Team Championship.


SURPRISE CHALLENGE SOUGHT IN CUP RACE
LEAD: A return to an America's Cup series the way it once was, with massive sailboats such as the 125-foot J Class boats competing for yachting's oldest trophy, forms the nucleus of a challenge filed by a New Zealand yachtsman.
If approved, the proposal would shut out syndicates from other challenging nations.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: New Toy for Boys of Summer THEY are truly the boys of summer. ''We have so many water toys, it's unbelievable,'' said 35-year-old Gary L. Shoemaker of Centereach. ''You know boys and their toys.
Our wives were delighted when we started barefoot water-skiing because we didn't have to buy any more equipment.


New York Adds to List of Fish Too Tainted for Consumption
LEAD: New York State has imposed new restrictions on eating fish caught in six rivers and lakes and in Long Island Sound because of danger from toxic chemicals.


An Unequal Battle Over 'Equality'
LEAD: STATE REPRESENTATIVE PAUL JACQUES in Maine knows how it feels to be in a cat fight.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  BLOOD CRIES.
By John Weisman. (Viking, $17.95.) Spies, terrorists, a hit team and lots of action; they sound like the ingredients of a thriller.
But John Weisman's third novel uses them as a backdrop for the story of an assimilated American Jew's spiritual journey in Israel - from naivete to disillusionment, from faith to commitment.


SIKHS WADE ASHORE IN CANADA CLUTCHING ATTACHE CASES
LEAD: AMID concern in Canada last week about the arrival of another boatload of illegal immigrants on the Atlantic coast, a story in The Toronto Star seemed illuminating.
While the Government in Ottawa was reporting an avalanche of telegrams and telephone calls demanding that the 174 Sikhs who waded ashore from an aging freighter in Nova Scotia be sent home to India, the newspaper looked into the history of the 155 Tamils from Sri Lanka who arrived last August in similar fashion.


DANA E. MORTON PLANS TO WED ROBERT EMERY
LEAD: Dana Elizabeth Morton and Robert Langworthy Emery plan to be married Aug. 22.
The future bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee E. Morton of Shrewsbury, N.J., who have announced her engagement to a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Emery of Rumson, N.J.


Rehabilitation Riles West Side Tenants
LEAD: RESIDENTS of a newly rehabilitated brownstone at 61-63 West 104th Street in Manhattan threw a party for themselves last month and, giving in to their collective sense of humor, they turned on all the individual heating units in their eight apartments.
The result: The building started to vibrate.


ROMEO AND JULIET OF UPPER MANHATTAN
LEAD:  FLORRY OF WASHINGTON HEIGHTS  By Steve Katz. 206 pp.
Los Angeles: Sun &amp; Moon Press.
Cloth, $15.95.
Paper, $10.95.


AMERICNAS FLYING MORE AND FEARING MORE
LEAD: A GROWING number of experts have been warning of an ''erosion'' of safety in air travel.
Although the low number of accidents that have occurred during the last two years would normally be reassuring, critics see several disturbing trends: The number of near-collisions and controller errors has sharply risen, while airline deregulation has resulted in cutbacks in safety and engineering staffs and the hiring of less-experienced pilots.


The Buck Stops There!
LEAD: For the first few days of Admiral Poindexter's testimony, the audience at the Iran-contra hearings was silent and even solemn.
But by the end of the first week, when he explained that misrepresenting the truth to the Congress was no ''lie'' and concealing the facts was no ''cover-up,'' people began to laugh.


Red Sox Top Athletics On Homer in 10th, 5-3
LEAD: Dave Henderson hit a two-run 10th-inning home run today after Jim Rice's two-out, two-strike homer had tied the score in the ninth to give the Boston Red Sox a 5-3 victory over the Oakland Athletics.


Blue Bird
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE SOUND AND THE FLURRY OF WILLIAM FORSYTHE
LEAD: THE RULE OF THUMB IS THAT a choreographer works best with his own company, the dancers with whom he is most familiar.
There is no reason to doubt that the rule holds true as well for William Forsythe and the Frankfurt Ballet, the West German company headed by the American choreographer since 1984.


Temporary Order Keeps Woman Alive in Jersey Right-to-Die Case
LEAD: A New Jersey Supreme Court justice today temporarily barred the family of a comatose woman from removing her feeding tube against the wishes of a nursing home.


Minority Business
LEAD: To the Editor:


MICHELLE KENNEDY MARRIES
LEAD: Michelle Tara Deborah Kennedy and Jonathan Christie Moffett, students at St.
Michael's College of the University of Toronto, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Blessed Sacrament in Toronto.
The Rev.
Edward Boehler performed the ceremony.
The couple's parents are Alfreda Kennedy of Toronto and Owen Kennedy of Scarborough, Ontario, and Mr.


Cambodia's Few Concessions to a Harsh Life
LEAD: ''Our farmers' rice is sold to the free market,'' said Kong Som Ol, Cambodia's Minister of Agriculture.


President Says Support For Contras Is on Rise
LEAD: President Reagan said in his weekly radio address today that support for the Nicaraguan rebels had dramatically grown as Americans learned the facts about Nicaragua.


The Australians Stuck Together
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


HEATING UP AT THE COOLER
LEAD:  WHERE ALL THE LADDERS START  By Ron Loewinsohn. 223 pp.
New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press. $17.95.


Taiwan Ends Martial Law
LEAD: President Chiang Ching-kuo of Taiwan last week lifted the martial law that was imposed 38 years ago by his father, Chiang Kai-shek.


INQUIRY SHORTENS LIST OF WITNESSES STILL TO TESTIFY
LEAD: After Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter finishes testifying before the Iran-contra committees early next week, only five more witnesses are scheduled to appear before the hearings end, probably in early August.


Pick a Country, Buy a Mutual Fund
LEAD: MUTUAL fund investors who want to venture into international waters typically consider two routes.
They either buy a global fund, which invests in both American and foreign markets, or an international fund, which invests solely in foreign markets.


DISCREET MANEUVERS
LEAD: THESE EXAMPLES MAY BE TOP-FLIGHT and top-priced, but they contain all the makings of the genre: a particular style of attire called discretion - better yet, deception - dressing.
It has probably always existed, whatever the current fashion mode.
But now, when clothes play such an overt role in pronouncing a woman's place in life or personal point of view, this deliberately discreet way of turning oneself out is even more intriguing.


'POLITICAL THEATER' FOR CHILDREN
LEAD: ONE day en route to Grand Central Terminal from Darien, Kay Arthur started to write a play.
On the way back home, she finished it.


THE BLOODIEST BATTLE
LEAD: Except for your editors' use of a picture of buddies from the 96th Infantry Division, William Manchester would have us believe that the Marines were the entire show on Okinawa.
The truth is that Okinawa was that rare - perhaps only - time that the Marines and the Army invaded an island together and fought and died together throughout the campaign.


photo of Ernest Hemingway and his father, Clarence Edmonds Hemingway, in 1928 (From ''Hemingway'') (page 25)
LEAD:  HEMINGWAY  By Kenneth S. Lynn.
Illustrated. 702 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.95.


Ex-Mayor Called Head of Syracuse Kickback Ring
LEAD: Lee Alexander, who served four terms as Mayor of Syracuse and six terms as president of the National Conference of Democratic Mayors, was pictured by Federal prosecutors last week as the ringleader in ''one of the largest'' public corruption cases in the country.


Don Juan Legend Explored
LEAD: THE thematic cement holding together a good many of the programs at this year's Summerfare Festival at the State University of New York at Purchase is the Don Juan legend. ''You'd have to be a true glutton to take it all in,'' conceded Christopher Hunt, the artistic director, ''but we will actually be having more than 20 presentations within 48 hours on the subject of Don Juan, including films, lectures and other special events.


WHAT COMFORTS AIDS FAMILIES
LEAD: There were missed opportunities in Lou Ann Walker's article.
Another loss, secondary to the quick killer AIDS, is that many families are robbed of the time needed to respond to the information that a family member is gay.
It is not uncommon for families initially to react with hostility toward a gay member, sometimes refusing to speak to him, disowning him, etc.


PICTURES FROM THEIR NIGHTMARE
LEAD:  BEYOND WORDS  Images From America's Concentration Camps.
By Deborah Gesensway and Mindy Roseman.
Illustrated. 176 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. $24.95.


PROTECTING SWANS IS A PRIORITY
LEAD: Gregory G. Chasko, the Department of Environmental Protection's Waterfowl Project leader, remarked in the June 7 article ''State Order to Kill Swans Challenged'' that Friends of Animals's efforts on behalf of mute swans amount to a ''publicity stunt.'' That's a cheap shot.
When government officials break the law in advancing their own interests, it is a citizen's duty to go to the public.


MUSEUM PROPOSAL IS JUST THAT
LEAD: The article ''Museum Plan Again Opposed''  [ June 28 ]  implied widespread opposition to the Heckscher Museum's revised expansion plans.
I found the tone of this article inaccurate and misleading as to the actual status of the museum's expansion.


Groovy Rolls to Impressive Victory in Tom Fool
LEAD: Only a dull racing surface and a punishing package of 128 pounds kept Groovy from setting his third consecutive track record yesterday, as the nation's leading sprinter scored a 6 1/2-length victory in the $114,000 Tom Fool Stakes.


Pioneer Addiction Center Heals With Basic Methods
LEAD: Nearly 40 years ago, when alcoholics had hardly anywhere else to go, an old white farmhouse here, staffed by a counselor, a handyman and a cook called Ma, opened its doors.


A New Basketball League Puts a Ceiling on Height
LEAD: There were tryouts yesterday for a new professional basketball league for the ''little'' guys - those 6 feet 4 inches and under.


FINDING OUT WHAT'S PLAYING
LEAD: In the recent article ''Theater Festival Opens Season'' I noted the observation: ''Generally, it takes tourism to make summer festivals viable.
Long Islanders tend to go elsewhere for their summer entertainment.''


SHOREHAM'S CRITICS IGNORE REALITIES
LEAD: NEWSPAPER articles about possible blackouts on Long Island are reminiscent of the old Pearl White movie series, with one difference.
Pearl White faced the same size villain, the same size hero and variations of the same size danger each week.


WHO'S NOT IN THE HALL OF FAME WHO SHOULD BE
LEAD: Jacob Nelson (Nellie) Fox.
When compared with other middle infielders, Fox clearly appears to belong in Cooperstown.
Fox's .288 career average is better than those of (among others) Johnny Evers, Joe Morgan, Bill Mazeroski, Pee Wee Reese, Joe Gordon, Phil Rizzuto, Ernie Banks, Luis Aparicio and Maury Wills.


Schroeder Can Qualify for U.S. Funds After Donations at NOW Convention
LEAD: Representative Patricia Schroeder brought her undecided quest for the Democratic Presidential nomination to the National Organization for Women convention here today and walked away with enough money to qualify for Federal matching campaign funds, NOW officials said.


SARAH ROBINSON IS ENGAGED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Eliot Robinson of Old Bennington, Vt., and Sarasota, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Mitchell Robinson to Kevin Michael McGarghan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward McGarghan of Burlington, Vt.
The future bride, who graduated from the Buxton School and the University of Vermont, is animal-control officer for the city of Burlington.


SHREDDING, EK-SETERA
LEAD: ''Ek-setera'' need not be a ''general colloquialism'' to which we all have to adjust.
It is a display of ignorance that could be cured if Latin were required - even one year of it - in high school.
I had two.
I don't use this to read Caesar or Virgil, or even the more difficult tombstones.
But I sure know that ''et'' means ''and.


POSTINGS: 186,000 Sq. Ft.; Danbury Square
LEAD: Some developers think more is better when it comes to shopping centers.


Jazz in July
LEAD: Here is the schedule of the 92d Street Y Jazz in July Festival.
All programs begin at 8 P.M.
This week: Tuesday - ''Stomp Off,'' with the Jim Cullum Jazz band and Vince Giordano and the Nighthawks playing the music of Benny Goodman in the 1920's, featuring Phil Bodner on clarinet. ''Stridemonster!


NANCY E. O'NEILL PLANNING TO WED
LEAD: A September wedding is planned by Nancy Elizabeth O'Neill and Douglas Barrack Kelly.
Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard James O'Neill of Redding, Conn., have announced their daughter's engagement to the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Ray Kelly of Hudson, Ohio.


WHERE GLASNOST HAS ITS LIMITS
LEAD: Of all Mikhail Gorbachev's new policies, that of ''openness'' (glasnost) has intrigued Western journalists most.


Vocal Technique
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Of Cues and Such
LEAD:  Byrne's Standard Video of Pool &amp; Billiards  Premiere Home Video. (800) 972-5858, ext. 310. 60 minutes. $29.95.


38 Youths From U.S. Cultivating Cultural Roots in Thailand
LEAD: Guy Suesuntisook has Pop-Art Bermuda shorts and an American passport.


Sinclair Lewis's Secretary
LEAD:  To the Editor:


MOVIES
LEAD:  About Last Night . . .
With Rob Lowe, Demi Moore, James Belushi, Elizabeth Perkins.
Directed by Edward Zwick. 1986.
RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video. 113 minutes. $79.95.
Although only a year has elapsed since it was released, the romantic comedy ''About Last Night . . .'' now stands as a relic of another era: a time before AI


Q and A
LEAD:  Babies in Japan


JANE HAUSNER IS WED TO THOM DAUGHERTY
LEAD: At the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park yesterday Jane Whitman Hausner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gabriel Hausner of Mount Kisco, N.Y., and Thom Daugherty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Daugherty of Whitehall, Md., were married by Justice E.Leo Milonas of the Appellate Division, First Department, of State Supreme


Data Bank: July 19, 1987
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
I Q'87
IV Q'86
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,735.2
$3,696.1
$3,655.9
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.8
1.1
3.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
I Q'87
IV Q'86
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$136.6
$144.5
$126.9


McCallum Wins by Knockout
LEAD: Donald Curry had the word ''REDEMPTION'' on the back of his black robe when he entered the ring at Caesars Palace Indoor Sports Pavilion tonight.


Edberg Adds Charisma
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Displaced By Radon, Residents Plan Suit
LEAD: FOR little more than 22 months, Dorothy Tascoe's home has been a small furnished apartment in this, the town in which she grew up.


Mattlingly Ties Home-Run Record
LEAD: he announcement was made long before a record was considered a possibility.
Don Mattingly had hit home runs in three consecutive games, merely another impressive statistic in a season that has grown from a struggle to a year that meets even his standards.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD: GILLESPIE AND FRIENDS Dizzy Gillespie, the legendary jazz trumpeter whose puffed-cheeks trademark is the lament of high school music teachers everywhere, will perform at Monmouth Battlefield State Park Saturday afternoon and evening.


MISS PRIME PLANS AUGUST WEDDING
LEAD: The engagement of Darcy Prime to Thomas Alexander Neville, a son of Emily Cheney Neville of Keene Valley, N.Y., and the late Glenn T. Neville, has been announced by the future bride's parents, Ruth M. Prime of Lake Placid, N.Y., and Theodore F. Prime of Essex, N.Y.
The couple plan to marry Aug. 29.


SETTING THE PROPER SCENE
LEAD: WE'VE HAD TWO MAJOR real estate deals made in our bar,'' Joe Silverberg confides.
Coming as it does from a man in the business of selling suits, not spirits, that admission startles.
But not much about Bigsby &amp; Kruthers's lavish new two-story emporium in the heart of Chicago's financial district conforms to predictable notions of men's retailing.


MS. STONE TO WED A. D. RICHARDSON
LEAD: The engagement of Patricia Marty Stone to Alexander Dee Richardson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Merz Richardson of Chautauqua, N.Y., has been announced by Mrs.
David McKendree Key Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., and Edward Durell Stone Jr. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., parents of the bride-to-be.
The wedding to be Oct.


DO LIFEGUARDS DO WHAT THEY'RE PAID TO DO?
LEAD: YOU'VE seen them on the beach before - bronzed, muscular bodies with sun-bleached hair sitting in lifeguard chairs.
They wear dark sunglasses and white nose protectors, twirl a whistle around a finger and have ''Lifeguard'' stamped on all their apparel.


When Good Health Is Part of the Job
LEAD: Montgomery Securities encourages good health by making sports an integral part of its culture.
The joke around the San Francisco company, in fact, is that your annual bonus depends more on your performance on the company's athletic squads than on its investment team.


American Laboratories, Foreign Brains
LEAD: HALF of the students in the classrooms of Andrew Frank, professor of mechanical engineering at the University of California at Davis, are foreigners.
Sixty of the 400 scientists employed by the Pittsburgh-based Rockwell International Corporation are foreign.


Economic Everest Awaits The Next President
LEAD: With the campaign for the White House under way, it is worthwhile to consider how the next President might promote American economic interests in a world dramatically altered by powerful market forces and shifts in the economic strengths of nations.


Homeless Criticize Voucher Delays
LEAD: ''SOCIAL SERVICES pays $707 a week for me to stay at the Coachman Hotel,'' said Diana Immediato. ''That's almost $3,000 a month.'' ''I could rent a whole house for less than what they're paying for me to stay in one room,'' she went on. ''It's rough.
We have two double beds for me and my three kids.


Is Our Choice Democracy or Covert Activities?; An American Hero?
LEAD: To the Editor:


East End
LEAD: To the Editor: Regrettably Matthew Reisz's excellent article on the East End's Jewish heritage (Travel, June 7) made no reference to any of the area's pugilists.
The most famous was Daniel Mendoza, the fighting Jew from Whitechapel, who held the British heavyweight championship from 1791 to 1795.
Weighing only 160 pounds, he consistently defeated heavier men by his speed and boxing ability.


U.S. and Japan In Federation Cup
LEAD: The defending champion United States will meet unseeded Japan in the first main round of the 1987 Federation Cup international women's team tennis competition, which runs from July 26-Aug. 2.


Without the Playground, Mothers Meet at the Office
LEAD: ''HOW to Nurture and Maintain a Family Culture When You Work All Day, Your Mother Lives in Omaha and Your Housekeeper Comes from Ethiopia'' was the topic and it drew an eager audience.
The Working Mothers Forum of the Washington Women's Bar Association was in session.


Stockholm
LEAD: The Lake Malar Queen, as the Swedish capital with its waterways, bright summer lights and greenery is called, takes in 14 islands between the Baltic Sea and Lake Malaren, the lake's Swedish name.
Parks and gardens, outdoor cafes and a network of ferries and sightseeing boats make it easy for visitors to spend much of their time outdoors.


CHILDREN LEARN TO TRY HARDER AT FRESH AIR FUND CAMP
LEAD: Gate 6 of the bus terminal at the George Washington Bridge was packed with 130 children waiting expectantly for the 8:30 A.M. bus to Fishkill, N.Y.


Matching Wits With New York Fare-Beaters
LEAD: The New York City Transit Authority, which estimates that it loses $100 million a year to fare-beaters, is tired of being taken for so many rides.


South Korea Struggles to Find Its Future
LEAD: FOR the moment, the streets of Seoul are quiet.
The student and church radicals who led the demonstrations last month are on vacation or regrouping after winning major concessions.
And economic growth, always a point of national pride, is still as lusty as ever.


Pakistani Accused Of Seeking Alloy to Make Atom Bomb
LEAD: Arshad Z. Pervez, a Canadian citizen who was born in Pakistan, has been trying for months to buy a special steel alloy that could be used in making nuclear weapons, according to a Customs Service affidavit filed July 10 in Federal Court in Philadelphia.
Mr.
Pervez was arrested and accused of giving $1,000 to an undercover agent posing as a Commerce Department official as a partial payment to get an export license for the alloy,


ON THE NAUGATUCK: SOCIAL SCIENCE AFLOAT
LEAD: BENEATH towering highway bridges and past the backs of billboards, the procession of canoes made its way along the Naugatuck River, its occupants talking of Indians, colonial settlers and the bygone days when factories harnessed the river's power to transform Waterbury into a manufacturing center.


Is Our Choice Democracy or Covert Activities?; A Good Show
LEAD: To the Editor:


Venice
LEAD: To the Editor: In Q &amp; A (Travel, May 31), a reader asks if Tintoretto's painting ''Paradise'' has been reinstalled in the Doges Palace in Venice.
Stanley Carr correctly answered that it was reinstalled in the palace in 1985 after two and a half years of restoration work.


CYNTHIA A. CAREY AND C. B. LALONE WED IN MANHASSET
LEAD: The marriage of Cynthia Ann Carey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis J. Carey Jr. of Sands Point, L.I., and North Palm Beach, Fla., to Charles Bernard LaLone took place yesterday at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Manhasset, L.I.
The bridegroom is a son of Marie T. LaLone of Locust Valley, L.I., and Bernard H.


EDITORS' NOTE
LEAD: A photograph on pages 18 and 19 in The New York Times Magazine today with an article about Miami purports to show the scene as police officers arrested drug smugglers who had been forced down after their plane failed to respond to the control tower of Miami International Airport.
Actually, the photograph was taken about four years ago at the Homestead, Fla., Air Force base at the request of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation to illustrate an advertisement for a Westinghouse radar product.


Exploring the Curious Cult of the Corvette
LEAD: It was an oppressively hot day in White Plains, and Guy Zani Jr. was driving one of his Corvettes with the roof down. ''I'm a little low now,'' he said. ''I've only got six Corvettes.
Usually, I've got eight or ten.
This one's a 1957.
Some great-looking car, right?''


INSIDE
LEAD: Schroeder Collects at NOW  Patricia Schroeder, who may run for President, addressed the NOW convention and got enough money to qualify for Federal funds.
Page 22.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  'BEST OF CONNECTICUT' ART  A substantial exhibition of contemporary art opens with a reception from 1 to 5 P.M. today at the Connecticut Gallery in Marlborough, remaining through Aug. 23. ''The Best of Connecticut,'' an all-media show, is dedicated to Reuben Nakian, the Stamford sculptor who died last year.


Headliners; Out of Reach
LEAD: The Italian Government is not a great enough authority to command obedience from the Vatican, according to a ruling last week by Italy's highest court.
The court ruled for the Vatican in a case in which Italian prosecutors sought to extradite Archbishop Paul C. Marcinkus, the head of the Vatican bank, on charges of fraud related to the 1982 failure of Banco Ambrosiano.


WHO'S NOT IN THE HALL OF FAME WHO SHOULD BE
LEAD: Dick (Rowdy Richard) Bartell is long overdue for the Hall of Fame.
His 18-year batting and fielding statistics combined are better than half the shortstops in the Hall of Fame, and Phil Rizzuto, too.
He outhit Reese by 15 points.
He dominated National League shortstops in the 30's by any measure.
And he was a winner.


FESTIVAL CELEBRATES MISUNDERSTOOD POLKA
LEAD: TO many people, the polka is a fast-paced, frenetic dance, indigenous to Poles and those of Polish descent, who alternately whirl and jump around to rousing tunes that to the uninitiated sound remarkably alike.


Votes in Congress; Last Week's Tally in Key Eastern States
LEAD:  Senate  1.
Trade Reorganization: Vote to kill an amendment to the omnibus trade bill that would reorganize the Department of Commerce into the Department of Industry and Technology, and the office of the United States Trade Representative into the United States Trade Administration.
Approved 73 to 21, July 14.


Q. &amp; A.: Ridding Marble of Rust
LEAD: Q. I HAVE some beautiful marble steps leading up to the front entrance on the outside of my house.


Headliners; Overzealous
LEAD: Who says the Internal Revenue Service is heartless?


Danger in the Gulf: How U.S. Navy Girds for Escort Duties With Tankers
LEAD: When the first Kuwaiti tankers to fly the American flag pass through the Strait of Hormuz, probably in the next several days, they will be escorted by American warships assigned to see them safely past an avowedly hostile Iran.


JAPAN PONDERS THE PRICE OF SOVIET TRADE
LEAD: LONG after the discovery that the Toshiba Machine Company had illegally sold propeller-milling equipment to the Soviet Union, the aftershocks are still rattling Japan and increasing tensions with the United States.
Virulent American reactions, including threats of bans on Toshiba imports and the smashing of a Toshiba radio by members of Congress, have forced the


Britain to Review Citizenship in War-Crimes Case
LEAD: The Home Office plans to review the citizenship status of a man reported to be a Nazi war criminal who lives in Scotland, according to a Government spokesman and representatives of a Los Angeles-based organization that investigates war crimes.


THE VALUE OF INTERNS IN THE WORKPLACE
LEAD: Mary Jane Genova's essay, 'Student Raid on Corporations''  [ Opinion page, June 7 ]  puzzles me.
She relates that student interns at best contribute nothing and at worst impede productivity.


OPENING TO ISRAEL?
LEAD: ''WE came here to do a technical job only,'' said Yevgeny Antipov, the head of the first Soviet delegation to visit Israel since Moscow broke off relations after the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
But not many Israelis believed him.
After all, the eight Soviet envoys, whose official mission last week was to survey Russian Orthodox properties, spent most of their time politicking, whether it was delivering the morning greeting in Hebrew on a popular radio program, posing in swimsuits for photographers, visiting the Israeli Foreign Ministry or inviting anti


WHO'S NOT IN THE HALL OF FAME WHO SHOULD BE
LEAD: Thurman Munson's career statistics rival or surpass every catcher who has been inducted in the Baseball Hall of Fame, and on that basis alone, he has rightfully earned a place in Cooperstown.
Munson's case, however, is strengthened by the intangibles that ordinarily weigh heavily in distinguishing the great from the good.


Strawberry's Other Side
LEAD: WHEN Darryl Strawberry was a rookie four years ago, a veteran catcher on the Mets observed the 21-year-old's ability to crunch a baseball, to fly around the bases, and to fling a throw from the right-field corner with the power of no one, perhaps, since Clemente.


Dance: Holly Fairbank, in the Park
LEAD: CENTRAL PARK was the star of the show Friday evening when Holly Fairbank presented ''Pooldance'' beside the pool in the park, between West 100th and 103d Streets.
The work, which lasted slightly more than 20 minutes, was performed by Holly Fairbank and Dancers and members of Veritas, a drug-free therapeutic community, to music by Julie Lieberman played on amplified violin and guitar by Ms.


THE ULTIMATE RESILIENCE OF THE DEFENSE
LEAD: IT is quite extraordinary that two of the greatest geniuses of the mating attack, the former world champion, Bobby Fischer of the United States, and the present world champion, Gary Kasparov of the Soviet Union, have chosen to be spokesmen for the defense in the case of the Poisoned Pawn Variation of the Najdorf


Correction
LEAD: A Travel Advisory item May 24 incorrectly suggested that travelers could apply for passports at the Northeast Passport Processing Center on Varick Street in New York.
Applications filed at court houses and post offices are processed at the center, but it is not open to the public.


Miss Bryant Has Wedding
LEAD: Heather Corbally Bryant, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas Wallace Bryant of Lexington, Mass., and John Matthew Jordan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kurt Matthew Jordan of Fort Wayne, Ind., were married yesterday at the Harvard Memorial Church at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.


PERILS AT THE BEACH
LEAD: FOR those on the East Coast, the dog days of July are best relieved by beating a path to the beach.
There, ocean breezes cool the spirit and warm sands soothe the body.
Since many such jaunts to the beach are with friends or family, there's a natural inclination to bring a camera along.
What better time to record the family, after all, than when everyone is luxuriating in feelings of relaxation and relief?


In the Green Hills of Cantabria
LEAD: The green hills and grazing cattle may remind a visitor of Britain or Switzerland.
It is Cantabria in northern Spain, however, nestled between the Basque country to the east and Asturias to the west.


MISS HIGGINS PLANS TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Barbara Olin Higgins to William Edward Epifanio 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Epifanio of Stamford, Conn., has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
William Waugh Higgins of Greenwich, Conn., parents of the bride-to-be.
A September wedding is planned.


WHO'S NOT IN THE HALL OF FAME WHO SHOULD BE
LEAD: The late Branch Rickey is said to have defined five qualities that scouts should look for in a potential regular major league player: to be able to run, throw, field, hit, and hit with power.
It is my contention that no player, excluding pitchers, should merit selection to the Hall of Fame unless he is outstanding in at least three of those five categories.


INTRODUCING PLAYWIRGHTS TO TELEVISION CAMERAS
LEAD: EACH summer, theater buffs flock to the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford to attend public readings of new stage plays being developed at the National Playwrights Conference there.
Also developed at the conference are television works for which there are no public showings.
Of the dozen playwrights whose works were selected for this year's conference, running from June 29 through July 26, two - Donald Drake and Richard


Killer Marries in Prison
LEAD: A former Tufts University professor who admitted killing a reputed prostitute four years ago has married in prison, according to his lawyer.
William Douglas, serving an 18- to 20-year sentence for the March 1983 hammer slaying of Robin Benedict, was married at the state prison in Gardner on July 7, the attorney, Thomas Troy, said.


GORBACHEV'S GAMBLE
LEAD: SEATED BEHIND A LONG TABLE IN THE INTIMATE yellow and white Hall of Plenums in the Kremlin last month, Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev, General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, presided over a crucial two-day gathering of the party elite.
Flanking Gorbachev were nine full members of the ruling Politburo; facing him, in the gradually elevated rows of cushioned seats, were the 300 members of the party's Central Committee, a body that has the authority to appoint - and remove - the General


MISS FURTH IS ENGAGED TO THEODORE LEHRMAN
LEAD: Dr.
Hans G. Furth and Madeline B. Furth, both of Washington, have announced the engagement of their daughter Catherine Furth to Theodore D. Lehrman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert O. Lehrman of New York and Edgewater, N.J.
A Sept. 6 wedding is planned.


LOVING CHILDREN ENOUGH TO SAY NO
LEAD: EVERYONE from the First Lady to the classroom teacher has quickly adopted the ''Just say no'' to drugs theme.
There is no finer example for our children than to see the strength and unity of the American people from every walk of life rallying together in a crisis situation.


MUSSELS STAR IN 4 WARM-WEATHER DISHES
LEAD: FOOD for summer, especially for summer entertaining, requires planning in order to fulfill three necessary requirements.
It must be appealing to serve and eat in warm weather, take advantage of abundant seafood and produce and be easily prepared in advance.
If a recipe also provides the kind of leftover that can be turned into another effortless meal over the weekend, so much the better.


Police Fire Tear Gas Into Crowd at a Funeral in South Africa
LEAD: Mourners carrying the coffin of Ashley Kriel as they scrambled for cover when the police tried to enforce Government restrictions on funerals.
Mr.
Kriel died in a scuffle with police last week.
Page 5. (AP)


Compassion and Integrity
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Iran Announces Maneuvers In Persian Gulf Next Month
LEAD: Iran announced today that marine, land and air forces would hold maneuvers in the Persian Gulf, the Strait of Hormuz and the Sea of Oman in August and said these were a warning to the superpowers.


France's Socialist Presidents
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Q. &amp; A.: Ridding Marble of Rust
LEAD: Q. I HAVE some beautiful marble steps leading up to the front entrance on the outside of my house.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Chester Township  $325,000  513 North Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; hardwood floors, fireplace, pool, 3.25 acres; taxes $5,371.
Greenwood Lake  $218,000  Laurel Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 27-year-old ranch; 2 kitchens, walk to beach; taxes $3,387.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.66
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.24
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.61
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.52
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


MIDLIFE MUSIC
LEAD: I can sympathize with Marty Goldensohn and his struggle to keep up with music today (About Men, ''Midlife Music,'' June 21).
It's easier when your kids are older and they play their own records; it also helps to drive two hours a day to work so that you can listen to all that new music in your car.


SHERYL GRAFF FIANCEE OF DR. J. S. SCHREIBER
LEAD: Sheryl Lisa Graff, who graduated from the Harvard Law School in June, and Dr.
Jonathan Scot Schreiber, a surgical resident at the New York University Medical Center, are planning a Sept. 13 wedding.
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Robert Graff of Woodmere, L.I., have announced their daughter's engagement to a son of Dr.


POSTINGS: Hoboken Offices; Bank Restoration
LEAD: When it was built in 1890, the Northern Renaissance Revival structure at the corner of Washington and Newark Streets in Hoboken, N.J., was a grand office building with a bank on the ground floor and professional tenants above.


Mostly Mozart Will Dance Its Way to a Birthday Party
LEAD: TONIGHT AND AGAIN ON THURSDAY, Mostly Mozart will celebrate its 21st birthday with a first: The musicians will move to the floor and dancers will take over the stage of Avery Fisher Hall.


WHAT COMFORTS AIDS FAMILIES
LEAD: This is an open letter to those relatives of AIDS patients who are more interested in their ''social image'' than in their dying children's comfort.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Garbo in Central Park  While he was writing about Proust's Madame Swann walking in the Bois de Boulogne, Wallace Fowlie himself used to relax by walking in Central Park at dawn.
In ''Sites: A Third Memoir'' (Duke University), he describes a remarkable encounter during one of his strolls.


COLONEL NORTH AND ZEALOTRY'S THREAT
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's televised testimony at the Congressional inquiry concerning his role in the Iran-contra affair reveals a person of total commitment and fervent dedication.
His youthful good looks, and articulateness have come across exceptionally well on the television.


COUNTRY FARE IN A GARDEN SETTING
LEAD: PEOPLE driving past Ma Chere in Woodmere no doubt notice the big red caboose in front and perhaps think of children's birthday parties, Cokes, burgers and Shirley Temples.
But this is a French country restaurant in a garden setting.


Don't Knock The Stadium
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Tourist Misinformation
LEAD: Picture a first-time visitor to New York City standing on the little traffic island in Times Square, studying the maps on the information kiosk.
She is looking for a place to eat.


Sports of The Times; Ali's Boxing Curse
LEAD: In boxing more than in other sports, life is seldom easy for the great ones after they climb down from the ring for the last time.
But for three of the best, champagne turned to vinegar.
Joe Louis couldn't knock out the Internal Revenue Service auditors.
Sugar Ray Robinson has been struggling with Alzheimer's disease, and Muhammad Ali is up against Parkinson's Syndrome.


CORRECTION
LEAD: The caption last Sunday on a picture of the Bolshoi Ballet's production of ''Raymonda'' reversed the identities of the two dancers.
Aleksei Fadeyechev was on the left, Lyudmila Semenyaka on the right.


MAKING THE GRADE
LEAD: FROM WOLFGANG Puck to Alice Waters, America's leading chefs have become superstars.
But today's food lovers are never satisfied with the tried and true: they are always on the prowl for the next star, the latest trend.
This year, the hunt became an organized competition when Manhattan's Citymeals-on-Wheels program held a sophisticated version of the Pillsbury Bake-Off.


THE SOIL IS RIPE FOR CONTENTMENT
LEAD: THERE'S an old Yankee quip about the rocky challenge of Connecticut terrain to the plow - ''Buy meat, get bone; buy land, get stone!'' Despite the geological realities, hordes of us Nutmeggers are again braving sore joints to spade and hoe our way to a summer garden that will be the talk of the neighborhood.


THE BLOODIEST BATTLE
LEAD: William Manchester's article ''The Bloodiest Battle of All'' (June 14) was the most moving piece I have ever read on the nature of war, and, particularly, battle.


PERFECTING WOMAN
LEAD:  PALOMINO  By Elizabeth Jolley. 260 pp.
New York: A Stanley Moss Book/Persea Books. $15.95.


Koch on Accountability, Corruption and Judgment
LEAD: EIGHTEEN months after they began, New York City's corruption scandals continue.


THREE ACTRESSES TRY THE UNLIKELY
LEAD: WHEN three enterprising young actresses start a small Off Off Broadway theater company, one would expect them to do original plays, experimental plays, even esoteric plays and perhaps rarely seen revivals.


They Changed With Seasons
LEAD: Bo Jackson, who is playing major league baseball with the Kansas City Royals, signed last week to play pro football in the fall with the Los Angeles Raiders, once the baseball season ends.
Many athletes who have tried in the past to juggle two sports look at Jackson's ambitious plans with understanding, encouragement, skepticism, apprehension or some combination of the above.


In Wind, Azinger Sails On
LEAD: Finally the 116th British Open got a traditional storm, and it turned the Muirfield links into a fortress for the third round after the course had suffered two days of total surrender in calm air.


BOLD IRANIAN RAID ON FRENCH CRAFT HEIGHTENS GULF TENSIONS
LEAD: AS United States Navy ships prepare to escort Kuwaiti tankers that will fly the Stars and Stripes in the Persian Gulf, the attack last week on a French container ship made clear some of the risks of challenging Iran.
On Monday, two gunboats that the French believe were manned by Iranian Revolutionary Guards sprayed the merchant ship Ville d'Anvers with machine-gun fire for 20 minutes.


Dr. Peter W. Roome Jr. Is Wed to Marie Serrell
LEAD: The wedding of Marie Mulhall Serrell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Machen Mulhall of Riverside, Conn., to Dr.
Peter Willemse Roome Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roome of Greenwich, Conn., took place yesterday.


Jamaican Drug Gangs Thriving in U.S. Cities
LEAD: A large number of Jamaicans in the United States and Canada, most of them illegal aliens, have created a widespread criminal organization involved principally in importing and distributing narcotics, according to Federal officials.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  World University Games  U.S.
Beaten in Final: Yugoslavia defeated the United States, 100-85, in the men's basketball final yesterday, and Rumania collected five gold medals in rowing in Zagreb, Yugoslavia.
Drazen Petrovic, rated Europe's best basketball player, scored 35 points for Yugoslavia, which never trailed and had a 50-38 halftime lead.


Private Matters, Public Talk
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


GUIDEBOOK TO ARMAGEDDON
LEAD:  A WORLD BEYOND HEALING  The Prologue and Aftermath of Nuclear War.
By Nicholas Wade. 190 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $15.95.


Thatcher Came To Praise Reagan
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher was riding the high end of the seesaw last week as she flew into Washington to say a good word for Ronald Reagan, her ideological soulmate. ''Now more than ever we need American leadership and your President is uniquely able to give it and will give it,'' the British


HOW SHE MET A GOD
LEAD:  THE FEMALE OF THE SPECIES  By Lionel Shriver. 405 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $17.95.


A Higher Penalty On Student Loans
LEAD: Nearly one million people who are in default on their student loans are about to receive an ultimatum: Pay by Oct. 1 or be held liable for the collection costs later.


Music-Making in the Key of Versatility
LEAD: WHEN DICK HYMAN SITS down at the piano, nobody laughs.
Those who are familiar with his work, however, will probably smile in anticipation, knowing they're in for a good time.
It's not just that he is a marvelous jazz pianist and a gracious performer; they know that his idea of jazz - well, let him say it: ''I still believe in the fun of music.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Buchanan, N.Y.  $160,000  279 Church Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, aluminum siding, 1-car garage; taxes $1,452.
New Rochelle, N.Y.  $219,500  51 Emmett Terrace  3 bedroom, 1 1/2 bath, 50-year-old frame colonial; eat-in kitchen, sun porch, carport; taxes $2,416.


Low Savings
LEAD: To the Editor:


OPTOMETRIST HELPS THE SKILL OF VISION
LEAD: ''YOU only can perform as well as you can see, and seeing is a learned skill,'' said Dr.
Leon Revien, a Great Neck optometrist, who has used this principle as a basis for his visual skills program since its inception 15 years ago.
Dr.
Revien says he has improved the performance of more than 1,500 professional athletes, including football, baseball, hockey, golf and tennis players, as well as Air


29 ESTABLISHMENTS CITED BY NEW YORK UNDER HEALTH CODE
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 29 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


MAYORAL WHEELS
LEAD: IT began as a joke, Mayor John Cesar of Brewster said last week, explaining what had led him to suggest to the members of his Village Board of Trustees that perhaps they could buy him a vehicle, or ''perhaps a pair of shoes.'' The problem was that the Mayor's aging car was ready for the junkyard.


NO MATCH FOR LENIN
LEAD:  ALEXANDER KERENSKY  The First Love of the Revolution.
By Richard Abraham.
Illustrated. 503 pp.
New York: Columbia University Press. $29.95.


OIL PRICES AND IMPORTS RISE BUT GAS LINES ARE UNLIKELY
LEAD: AFTER a long spell of glutted markets and sliding prices, American consumers suddenly find that nearly all the news about oil is bad: The average retail price of gasoline has climbed back up to $1 a gallon, inventories of crude oil and petroleum products have dropped to the lowest level for this time of year since 1973, and demand is rising twice as fast as most analysts expected.


Anne Whiteman Marries a Banker
LEAD: Anne Margaret Whiteman and Andrew Clark Brummer, 1985 graduates of Colgate University, were married yesterday at the Church of the Gesu in University Heights, Ohio.
The Rev.
Francis T. Dietz performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.


Brooklyn Residents Sue Rose
LEAD: ANGRY over what they perceive as a flawed environmental impact statement, a group of residents living near the Fort Greene Landmark District is suing to stop the $530 million Atlantic Center urban renewal project that civic leaders view as a mainstay for the redevelopment of downtown Brooklyn.


ERIK SCHWARZ IS WED TO ELIZABETH TANNER
LEAD: Elizabeth Tanner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Stetson Tanner of Plattsburgh, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Erik L. Schwarz, a son of William H. Schwarz of New York, and Tita Bergendahl of Minneapolis.
The Rev.
Dr.
Earl Johnson Jr. performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.


A Times Sq. Cinema Nurtured By the 'Merchant of Menace'
LEAD: IT is apparently the largest glass block facade in New York City, an unusual Art Moderne theater of blue and white glass with streamlined aluminum fins.


The Global March to Free Markets
LEAD: IN Moscow, entrepreneurial comrades are running their own beauty parlors and auto repair shops, while in China many farmers are eschewing the communal system in favor of selling produce they grow themselves.


North Testimony Now a Book
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's testimony last week before Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair was sometimes explosive.
But a book of that testimony arrived at area bookstores yesterday with little more than a thump.


Corrigan Responds
LEAD: GENE CORRIGAN, the Notre Dame athletic director, sharply denied a report that Notre Dame had concocted a story that injuries would cause Alvin Miller, a wide receiver, to miss the 1987 football season.
The report said the story was to cover the fact that Miller signed a contract with a sports agent and thus forfeited his eligibility.


WHEN IMPULSIVENESS LEADS TO VICTORY
LEAD: IT is understandable that a player who has a rare opportunity to take part in a world championship should have a feeling of euphoria when he sits down and that may lead to impulsiveness or disaster.
It can also lead to triumph as it did on the diagramed deal from the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest in May.


Living in Luxury in Bangkok
LEAD: After a few nights in one of Bangkok's best hotels, most people would willingly give up the familiarity of their own bed and pillow in exchange for the pampering: room service that never stops, impeccably attired staff that anticipates your every move, laundry wrapped in gift packages decorated with real flowers.


DOROTHEA MATTHEWS WEDS
LEAD: At the Helen Hills Hills Chapel at Smith College in Northampton, Mass., yesterday Dorothea E. Matthews, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Matthews of Ridgefield Park, N.J., was married to J.Richard Schneider, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George Schneider of New Dorp, S.I.
The Rev.
John Webster of the United Church of Christ officiated.


WHO'S NOT IN THE HALL OF FAME WHO SHOULD BE
LEAD: It seems appropriate to enter the name of Tony Oliva, the former Minnesota Twin All-Star and current coach, for consideration.
As a player, Oliva fulfills all the criteria the veterans committee demands when considering someone for the Hall of Fame.
In an abbreviated 15-year career, Oliva compiled a .304 average.


THE SOIL IS RIPE FOR CONTENTMENT
LEAD: I KNEW the earth so well when I was young; it was a constant friend.
Its feel and smell were part of every day.
I knew our yard - all one and a half acres of it - like the back of my hand.
I could have walked it blindfolded then, and can still - some 30 years later - sketch it on paper in labeled detail.


Deaths at a Prison Hospital Lead to Inquiries
LEAD: A series of deaths at the Bridgewater State Hospital for the Criminally Insane has touched off a dispute in which correction officials, guards and relatives of inmates are trading accusations.


SOVIET CALLS THE TUNE IN A DUET SET IN GERMANY
LEAD: IN dealing with West Germany, the Soviet Union has traditionally reached for the carrot and the stick, seeking to lure the pivotal country of the NATO alliance eastward and then beating up on it when it failed to respond with sufficient docility.
Yet these conflicting impulses have bedeviled Moscow's efforts to come up with a coherent


Is Our Choice Democracy or Covert Activities?; Vitality of Our System
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHO'S NOT IN THE HALL OF FAME WHO SHOULD BE
LEAD: I should like to add my name to those urging the election of Dick Bartell to the Hall of Fame.
Statistics, of course, are subject to many interpretations, but Bartell's should be carefully considered.
They are in many instances better than those of half the shortstops in the Hall, both for hitting and for fielding effectiveness and range.


The Winds of Asia
LEAD: It is hot, muggy and rainy here and any day the streets may be filled again with riot and tear gas.
But it is a wonderful time to visit Seoul.
The city has the tang of liberty, clear and heady.


Jazz: Charles DeForest
LEAD: CHARLES DEFOREST, an easygoing variant of Bobby Short who has been singing and playing piano in New York almost as long as Mr.
Short, has moved into the Lounge at One Fifth Avenue (at Eighth Street) where he is performing in an open-ended run a repertory that is sometimes a challenging parallel to Mr.


TIPS FOR KEEPING THE CROPS COMING
LEAD: REPLANTING will be important to keep vegetable patches productive.
Beans have finished; reseed rows.
Chard seed goes where spinach and early lettuce have grown.
Beets and carrots replace radishes.
Broccoli, Chinese cabbage and head lettuce seedlings that were started indoors can be transplanted to individual pots; they will be set outdoors later this month.


MOVIES, BOOKS AND THE REAL STORY
LEAD:  To the Editor:


MICHELE J. EPLEY ENGAGED TO WED DOUGLAS R. BOND
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Marion Jay Epley 3d of Bronxville, N.Y., of the engagement of their daughter Michele Jean Epley to Douglas Randall Bond, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Minor Casey Bond of Williamsburg, Va.
An October wedding is planned.


Q. &amp; A.: Ridding Marble of Rust
LEAD: Q. I HAVE some beautiful marble steps leading up to the front entrance on the outside of my house.
Unfortunately, on one of the steps and the riser below it there is a large rust stain.
Are there suggestions you can make to remove this unsightly stain?


Headliners; In Harness
LEAD: It seems that William Shawn found a friendly place to land when he was forced to bail out of his job as editor of The New Yorker last February.
Mr.
Shawn, who ran The New Yorker for 35 of his 79 years, has been hired by his old friend Robert W. Straus as a book editor for Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.
Mr.


N.F.L. Already Gunning for Jackson
LEAD: Years ago, Bo Jackson's ambitious plan to play pro football immediately after this baseball season might have been greeted with indifference.
In these days of longer and overlapping seasons and almost year-round football training, his plans, and his somewhat boastful announcement of them, have evoked near hostility.


MARTIN BREGMAN JUGGLES PROJECTS TO MAKE A MOVIE
LEAD: THESE ARE FRUSTRAT-ing days for a movie producer.
Hundreds of scripts are put into development by the studios, but nervous executives postpone the start of production as long as possible.
When the day finally approaches for the studio to commit $15 million to film the script and another $10 million to market the film, the easiest decision is to drop the project.


Landslide Hits Italian Resort After Heavy Rains, Killing 7
LEAD: A landslide caused by three days of heavy rain struck a mountain resort hotel today and killed seven people, the news agency Ansa said.


JAMES G. AUCHINCLOSS, A LAW STUDENT, AND KRISTIN MORRIS DELAFIELD ARE WED
LEAD: Kristin Morris Delafield, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter B. Delafield of New York, was married yesterday to James Gordon Auchincloss, a son of Bayard Cutting Auchincloss of Santa Barbara, Calif., and the late Mary Christy Pratt Williams.
Cannon Gethin B. Hughes performed the ceremony at All Saints-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church in Montecito,


Sending Graphics Over the Wires
LEAD: MANY people use their personal computers regularly to send documents over the telephone lines.
I file my weekly columns by moden, for example.
Nevertheless, personal computer communications remains a relatively slow-growing stepchild of the electronic revolution.


AT THE HEARINGS, A WHIFF OF DEJA-VU
LEAD: AS TELEVISION DRAMA OR vaudeville, the Iran-contra hearings send forth signals we have been trained to recognize in popular entertainment.
No sooner does a character appear on our screens than the conventions of show business come into play.
We can tell at once from what he wears and how he bears himself whether that fellow is to be trusted; we know from the way she smiles or licks her lips whether that woman is lying.


Broadcast TV
LEAD: A trio of Hollywood classics will light up the home screen this week - first-rate dramatizations of major novels.
John Steinbeck's ''Grapes of Wrath'' (1940) gets a prime-time run-off (for a change) Tuesday evening at 8 on Channel 55.
And Channel 13 has ''The Heiress,'' from the retitled stage adaptation of Henry James's ''Washington Square,'' on Friday at 11 P.M.


Street Fashion; Madonna Still Calls The Sartorial Tune For Fans
LEAD: SO what's up these days with the Madonna set?
When seen during the singer's tour two years ago, her fans, mostly a bit under teen-age, displayed a penchant for lace skirts, fingerless gloves, out-from-underwear and piled-on bracelets and necklaces.
Pretty funky, and not surprising, because that's what


In Albany, Angry Legislators Bite Press
LEAD: IN this year of strained relationships in Albany between Governor Cuomo and the Legislature and even between lawmakers themselves, few have been as strained as those involving the legislators and the press.


WHO'S NOT IN THE HALL OF FAME WHO SHOULD BE
LEAD: The unjustly forgotten Ken Williams.
When Williams roamed the outfield for the St.
Louis Browns in the 1920's, they were not the bedraggled Brownies of lore, but one of the American League's better outfits.
A Hall of Famer, George Sisler, played first base for those Brownies; no keeping him out of Cooperstown.


SUMMER CAMPAIGN TRAIL
LEAD: FROM the town dumps to the beaches on the weekends and from the train stations to the shopping centers on weekdays, the candidates are everywhere these days, trying to find the voters and remind them that there are primary elections on Tuesday in the Fourth Congressional District in Fairfield County.


Trinkets but Still No Gold at Wreck
LEAD: ABOARD THE SOSI INSPECTOR, off Massachusetts, July 15 - The cluster of plastic milk crates the divers sent up this afternoon from the wreck of the Republic contained a case of beer bottles from the second-class dining pantry, an ornate window from the first-class smoking salon and a cut-glass vase, intact and unmarked.


Unclassic Sweaters From Scotland
LEAD: In the Scottish workshop where Joy Baszucki designs her handmade sweaters, there isn't a tweedy-looking crew neck or a cable-stitched cardigan in sight.
If you have a strand of pearls just waiting to grace the neckline of a pastel pullover, cross her name off your list.
But if you like sophisticated lines, brilliant colors that you would never think of putting together but that somehow look exactly right.


Nominee to Head the F.A.A. Is Confirmed by the Senate
LEAD: The Senate on a voice vote today confirmed the nomination of T. Allan McArtor as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration to succeed Donald D. Engen.


AIDS Roundtable: 12 Show Concern Over Tests, Morality and Politics
LEAD: The 12 people who gathered around a table to talk about AIDS and its effect on the 1988 elections were clear about several things: they were scared, they wanted the Government to do more and they expected that politicians would duck the issue.


No Headline
LEAD: Is Our Choice Democracy or Covert Activities?


ANOTHER PROBLEM ON WASTE IS LOOMING
LEAD: WHILE the state wrestles with the public storm created by the problem of disposing of radon-contaminated soil and tries to convince some towns to accept a hazardous-waste treatment facility, another serious siting problem looms on the horizon.


Mattingly Ties Record
LEAD: Yankees' Don Mattingly last night after tying major-league record of home runs in eight consecutive games.
Section 5. (AP)


Dance: The Crowsfeet Collective
LEAD: ''LE JOUR et la Nuit'' was the title of a dance by Yves Musard that was performed on Friday at the Central Park Band Shell as part of the park's SummerStage festival.
But the name could have served the entire program, for the eight pieces performed by the Crowsfeet Dance Collective had a daylight transparency and Mr.


Q. &amp; A.: Ridding Marble of Rust
LEAD: Q. I HAVE some beautiful marble steps leading up to the front entrance on the outside of my house.


Labor Federation Backs Anti-Pretoria Rebels
LEAD: South Africa's biggest anti-apartheid labor federation today formally adopted as a ''guiding document'' the political program of black guerrillas fighting to end white rule.


WHAT WE CALL HOME
LEAD:  LEGACIES  By Nancy Potter. 134 pp. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. $11.95.


Green Mountains of Vermont Abuzz Over Butter
LEAD: Forget Oliver North.
Forget the Iran-contra affair.
A matter closer to home has set the placid Green Mountains abuzz and rocked Vermonters' already shaky trust in government and human nature.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, JULY 19, 1987
LEAD:  International 3-15  After John Poindexter's testimony before the committees investigating the Iran-contra affair ends early next week, only five more witnesses are scheduled to appear before the hearings end.
Page 1  The contras killed nine soldiers, three children and a pregnant woman, but failed to capture their target Thursday in their first major attack since the Iran-contra hearings focused American public attention on their movement.


Dance Festival in Durham
LEAD:  To the Editor:


THE VALUE OF INTERNS IN THE WORKPLACE
LEAD: Mary Jane Genova has done a disservice to interns - among whom I count myself - who find themselves working very hard for their temporary employers.
Her ''Student Raid on Corporations'' perpetuates the untruth that student employees are nothing more than nepotistic dead weight.


LIFE BEFORE PROLIFERATION
LEAD:  STEMMING THE TIDE  Arms Control in the Johnson Years.
By Glenn T. Seaborg with Benjamin S. Loeb.
Illustrated. 495 pp.
Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books. $24.95.


'THE BUCK STOPS HERE'
LEAD: FOR more than seven months, since Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d disclosed that profits from the secret sale of American weapons to Iran had been secretly used to arm the Nicaraguan rebels, Americans have been trying to unravel the tangle, seeking in particular the answer to one key question: What did President


Stevenson Retires
LEAD: AFTER winning three Olympic boxing titles and three world amateur championships, Teofilo Stevenson of Cuba has ended his career, according to a Cuban official, who said that the 36-year-old boxer was now an instructor and would not fight again.
The official, who asked not to be identified, also told The Associated Press in Havana that


A Thin Disguise
LEAD: WE ALL WEAR DISGUISES.
The simple act of dressing is a disguising.
Clothes are disguises, beards, pitch of voice, what we say, what we keep secret.
Costumes declare us, but disguises protect us from exposure.
Wearing them, we blend in.
Every salesman dressing for a client knows the drill, every young intern pulling on a white lab coat, every recent graduate struggling with an unfamiliar suit and tie.


In NortH SALEM, A REALISM IN WHICH APPEARANCES DECEIVE
LEAD: IT may be a cliche that appearances can deceive, yet it's always a surprise when they do.


Pierre Lardinois Dies at 62; A Dutch and Europe Official
LEAD: Pierre Lardinois, a Dutch statesman and commissioner for agriculture in the European Community from 1973 to 1977, died Thursday, the Dutch Agriculture Ministry said Friday.
He was 62 years old.


Company Subsidies for Staying Well
LEAD: In each of the past three years, many employees of the King Broadcasting Company in Seattle have received checks for as much as $700.


Rehoboth, Del.
LEAD: To the Editor: Travelers who take the advice of Robert McG.
Thomas Jr. to vacation at Rehoboth Beach (Travel, May 31) ought to visit the Island Field Museum on the edge of the Delaware River near Milford, Del., on their way to Rehoboth.
The site houses an exhibition of an excavation of a cemetery of Delaware's pre-Indians, Indian being a term coined by Columbus and therefore not suitable for earlier peoples, as a curator of the museum informed me.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  CURTAIN UP ON SEASON


'NEW ROMANTIC LANDSCAPE' AT THE STAMFORD WHITNEY
LEAD: REPRESENTED by artists as diverse as Blake and Goya, Delacroix and Caspar David Friedrich, Romanticism is easier to recognize than define.
It's no easy matter to determine its life span either, for, though the movement didn't begin in earnest until the early 19th century, its spirit is visible in the mid-1700's, notably in the ''blot'' drawing of the English watercolorist Alexander Cozens.


Sports Cliches
LEAD: To the Editor:


ST. GEORGE
LEAD: CHARLES STERLING thinks his apartment in Staten Island's St.
George section may have the best view around.
New York Harbor is nearby.
There are the freighters, tugs and the yellow and blue ferryboats he knows so well.
To his right is Brooklyn, to his left the Statue of Liberty and straight ahead are the skyscrapers of that other island.


Q and A
LEAD:  Balloon Mortgage  Question: I bought a co-op apartment about four years ago and at the time I took a balloon loan from the sponsor of the co-op.
The final payment will be due in October 1988.
Last year I decided to change jobs and my new position is not working out as well as I had expected.


Democratic Hopefuls Give Talk on Winning in '88
LEAD: Democratic Presidential candidates lectured state party chairmen from all parts of the country today on how to win in 1988.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  East Islip  $175,000  127 Marilyn Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old split level; new eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
Freeport  $400,000  55 Prospect Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old waterfront colonial; den, Florida room, boathouse, 3-room cottage; taxes $7,200.


5 City Officials Are Indicted In Illinois Voting Rights Case
LEAD: Five municipal officials, including the Mayor and all three City Council members, were indicted Friday on felony charges resulting from the settlement of a lawsuit over voting rights.


A Rule for the Rough Times
LEAD: Craig Stadler's latest conflict with the rules of golf should never have happened.
Most people here think the man known as the Walrus should have been aware of the rule he violated in the first round of the 116th British Open while trying to extricate himself from the haylike rough to the left of Muirfield's fifth fairway.


The Uses of Obscurity
LEAD:  To the Editor:


POSTINGS: 120 on the Hudson; Condos in A Factory
LEAD: A late 19th-century factory complex that occupies a full block overlooking the Hudson River in Newburgh, N.Y., was, until recently, abuzz with the production of lawn-mower parts and security uniforms.
But now the low-rise, rectangular, red-brick structure, on a two-acre site at the corner of Johns and South Williams Streets, awaits conversion into 120 condominiums, to be called the Commons at Washington


LISA ROBINSON IS ENGAGED TO MARRY JOHN J. HELMER
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Vincent Robinson of St.
Charles, Ill., of the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Bingham Robinson, to John Jeffrey Helmer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Horton James Helmer of Stamford, Conn.


Reunions
LEAD: To the Editor: ''Reunion Tactics for the Family'' (Practical Traveler, May 24) by Betsy Wade brought back fond memories of our family reunion last June when 58 of us from various parts of the world gathered at Quisisana on Lake Kezar, Me.
We had perfect accommodations, ample facilities for family meetings, delicious food and cheerful service by a talented staff who entertained us nightly in a variety of musical programs.


IT'S MY STREET (AND DON'T CALL IT BUFORD)
LEAD: I LIVE on Beaufort Street. (That's B-e-a-u-f-o-r-t.) It is in Orchard Hill, the Elmsford side, in unincorporated Greenburgh.
It may be hard to find, but it should not be that difficult to pronounce.
The people we bought our house from called it BO-fort, using the French pronunciation for ''beau,'' and we continued to do so, as our new neighbors did, too.


Outcroppings in the Baltic
LEAD: The Aland Islands, 6,500 granite outcrops and millions of pine trees, are sprinkled in the Baltic Sea between Finland and Sweden like a Viking raider's hastily discarded booty.
The very name derives from the old Norse for water land, from which we get the English word island.


'Ironweed' Is Nourished By Kindred Souls
LEAD: ''IRONWEED,'' THE PU-litzer Prize-winning novel by William Kennedy, seems to belong to Albany as much as the ghost of Mayor Corning.
But, in a quirk of the movie business, the book took its first step toward the screen on a beach in Brazil, where Hector Babenco, the director of ''Kiss of the Spider


WHO'S NOT IN THE HALL OF FAME WHO SHOULD BE
LEAD: In this era of superstars (with super statistics and super salaries to match), we tend to lose sight of the fact that the Hall of Fame at Cooperstown was originally intended to honor not only players of exceptional ability, but those of exemplary virtue and integrity as well.
It is with this fact in mind that I state my case for the inclusion of Gil Hodges in the Hall of Fame.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''They've thrown everything but the kitchen sink at the market this week.
North, Poindexter, miserable balance of trade figures, a bond market that's gone no place.
And yet we've gone into record highs.''


MUSSELS STAR IN 4 WARM-WEATHER DISHES
LEAD: FOOD for summer, especially for summer entertaining, requires planning in order to fulfill three necessary requirements.
It must be appealing to serve and eat in warm weather, take advantage of abundant seafood and produce and be easily prepared in advance.
If a recipe also provides the kind of leftover that can be turned into another effortless meal over the weekend, so much the better.


MOVIES, BOOKS AND THE REAL STORY
LEAD:  To the Editor:


RESIDENTIAL RESALES
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended July 4  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $490,000  77 Seventh Avenue (14th St.)  (Vermeer)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar, penthouse co-op; 24-hr. doorman, large kitchen, 1,000-sq.-ft. terrace, 3 exposures; maintenance $799, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Kingman Associates)


Hanoi Said to Agree to Meet on Missing
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz confirmed today that Vietnam had relented and agreed to American conditions for a meeting with a special envoy to discuss the issue of missing servicemen.


A Big Stride for Super-VHS
LEAD: EVER SINCE SUPER-VHS -the latest version of the popular VHS video recording format - made its American debut at the Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago in May, video fans have been awaiting the first independent tests of the new technology.
Now the results are in.


MISS YERKES TO MARRY ALAN GOLDSTEIN
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Estile Yerkes 3d of New York and Fishers Island, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Tyson Yerkes to Alan Leslie Goldstein, the son of Bernard Goldstein of Phelan, Calif., and Francine Goldstein of Westlake Village, Calif.
The couple plan to marry Aug.


JANET ROBYN PINSKY PLANS TO WED ALAN GINSBERG
LEAD: The engagement of Janet Robyn Pinsky to Alan Justin Ginsberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Ginsberg of New York and Bridgehampton, L.I., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Pinsky of Montreal and Stowe, Vt.
A Sept. 13 wedding is planned.


Lovers Sentenced in Escape From Prison in a Helicopter
LEAD: A prison escapee who hijacked a helicopter, flew into a Federal prison and spirited his lover to freedom was sentenced to 25 years in prison Friday.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  WITHIN NORMAL LIMITS.
By Todd Grimson. (Vintage Contemporaries/Random House, Paper, $5.95.) Darrell Patterson, a doctor in his 30's, is the kind of guy who dislikes his 7-year-old son for crying and not being very good at sports, and who is proud when his wife cheats at tennis.
Is this first novel a joke?


MELISSA AND JANICE CLEVELAND TO MARRY
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Cleveland of Boston have announced the engagements of Dr.
Cleveland's daughters Melissa Carol Cleveland and Janice Lee Cleveland to Stephen Carol Bernhardt and Dana Stanley Washburn, respectively.


Mets Let Another Slip Away
LEAD: How is this for blowing the opportunity: The Mets took the field last night knowing that the St.
Louis Cardinals had already lost in San Diego for the second time in three days, and all they had to do was beat the Cincinnati Reds to jump one game closer to first place.


Gilberto Freyre of Brazil Dies
LEAD: Gilberto Freyre, an internationally acclaimed sociologist and prolific author, died of a brain hemorrhage today, his doctor said.
He was 87 years old.


SHREDDING, EK-SETERA
LEAD: It is discouraging to see how William Safire has joined the ranks of other members of the press who revel in the humor of the involvement of Fawn Hall in the Iran-contra affair (On Language, ''Fawn Hall's Shredding, Ek-setera,'' June 21).


Horse Maneuvers
LEAD: It's been almost two years since a limousine and a horse-drawn carriage collided on West 49th Street, injuring four tourists and causing the horse's destruction.
That episode spurred a movement to extricate carriages from city traffic once and for all.
Yet to date, nothing has been done.


Land Is Bought for Preserve
LEAD: Eight parcels of forested land in the Adirondack Mountains totaling 1,459 acres have been bought by New York State to be added to the State Forest Preserve, according to the State Department of Environmental Conservation.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  YONKERS SALUTE  A production of ''1776,'' the musical about the Declaration of Independence that won a Tony award, is the Asbury Summer Theater's salute to the 200th birthday of the United States Constitution.
Nine performances are scheduled in Weyand Hall of the Asbury United Methodist Church at 167 Scarsdale Road in Yonkers.


North's Bicentennial Lesson
LEAD: The testimony of Lieut.


Minnesota Hormel Plant Gains Union Control
LEAD: Workers at the flagship plant of Geo.
A.
Hormel &amp; Company have regained control of their union local 14 months after the union's international unit placed the local in trusteeship and removed its officers for refusing to end a strike.


No Headline
LEAD: SEVEN years ago a group of Herman Galvin's friends asked him to teach them Yiddish.
As a result of that request, Mr.
Galvin embarked on a labor of love.


Dance
LEAD: Drums, chants and the delicate tremor of ancient stringed instruments will echo through the woods of the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival in Becket, Mass., this week, with ''African Tradition and Heritage,'' an unusual gathering of dancers, weavers, musicians and artists from Africa.
Four companies will participate in the program, which opens Tuesday and runs through Saturday.


Is Our Choice Democracy or Covert Activities?; Executive Order 12333
LEAD: To the Editor:


Doubling the Square
LEAD: Until 1976 when the city's first Greenmarket was set up in Union Square, drug peddlers perched on its fences like birds on telephone wires and the grass was trampled and strewn with litter.
But the market brought in a new kind of customer - people looking for fresh vegetables, home-baked breads, local cheeses - and, suddenly, druggie's paradise became foodie's heaven.


Rock: Andy Summers
LEAD: ANDY SUMMERS became one of the most influential guitarists in rock as a member of the Police, the trio that dissolved in 1982.
Now he has started his own band, which opened a two-night engagement at the Ritz on Thursday.
With Mr.
Summers as lead singer (joined by Nan Vernon on backup vocals), the band's set was divided uncomfortably between Police-style pop songs and more atmospheric material.


DEBORAH JENSEN BECOMES A BRIDE
LEAD: Deborah Jensen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Tennyson Jensen of Weston, Mass., and Moultonboro, N.H., and Randolph Harrison Barker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Randolph Barker of Ithaca, N.Y., were married yesterday at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Weston.
The Rev.
David B. Van Dusen performed the ceremony.


Fearing a Fuel Crisis, Burundi Turns to Peat
LEAD: The Irish sent bog engineers; the Finns sold harvesters, and the Americans financed stove research.


FRANCE PROPOSES 2 SIDES EVACUATE EMBASSY STAFFS
LEAD: Seeking to calm the crisis caused by its breaking diplomatic relations with Iran, France suggested today that both countries agree to evacuate their respective diplomats and embassy personnel within five days.


Adult Bookstore Roils Lindenhurst
LEAD: WELLWOOD AVENUE in the heart of Lindenhurst, with its ice-cream parlors and delicatessens, the village hall, funeral home, church and railroad station, all in the space of a few blocks, gives the impression of Small Town, U.S.A.
But residents of this otherwise placid South Shore community are mobilizing for battle against what they see as the coming of 42d Street in


Two Against the Current, One With the Tide
LEAD: BACK IN THE 1970'S A PHOTOG-rapher once described SoHo as ''the center of the center of the center of the universe.'' What he meant was that the streets around West Broadway were then the focus of the New York art scene, that the New York art scene was the focus of art in the United States, and that art in the United States was the focus of art internationally.


Winning One For the Homeless
LEAD: The lack of a private abode should not make a person ineligible for public benefits in New York City, the New York State Supreme Court ruled last week.


TILLING DOESN'T MEAN KILLING
LEAD: GREEN THUMB, my anonymous tipster on botanical fertility rites of Long Island, called me the other day and he was hopping mad.
He insisted that he had a message for the world, one that he thought might help stop the killing.


Agents To Face Stringent Regulation
LEAD: In an effort to insure proper representation of players by agents, the Major League Baseball Players Association will issue regulations this week that, among other things, will prevent agents from tying clients to long-term agreements.
Agents will also be required to provide full disclosure of the financial dealings between them and their clients, as well as submit to audits, if requested.


The Joys of Ad Land
LEAD: WOULDN'T IT BE great to get out of America and go live in Ad Land?
I thought about it again the night of the awful storms.
Awful, awful storms.
They flattened the corn and brought so much water down the creek that the fences washed away.


IT TURNS OUT MEMORY LANE HAS POTHOLES
LEAD: I WENT home recently - back to the town where I was born.
Where I went to school.
Where I was married.
And where one of my children was about to be graduated from college.


Stuart Sherman Performs With Paradox
LEAD: A MAN ARRIVES AT A RESTAU-rant on the top floor of a Tokyo hotel and strikes up a conversation with the bartender.
The customer explains that on his way up to the 78th floor, he arbitrarily exited the elevator on the 25th floor and stood in front of Room 2538, where he had a vision of a man sitting by a window, reading a book.


A Formidable U.S. Fleet Is Gathering
LEAD: Sailors call the American guided-missile destroyer Kidd a ship of the ''Ayatollah class'' because four of the class were built for the Shah before Iran's revolutionary clergy toppled him.
The ships wound up in the United States Navy, and today the Kidd is in the Persian Gulf to escort tankers past Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's forces.


Next Week; Are Knicks Back on Track Now?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Bombing in London Wounds Leading Khomeini Opponent
LEAD: A bomb exploded Saturday and wounded a leading opponent of the Iranian Government as he drove through a busy shopping area.


Judith A. Hart Is Wed To Christopher Lavin
LEAD: The marriage of Judith A. Hart, an associate in the law firm of Rucci, Gruss, Jex &amp; Gleason in Darien, Conn., to Christopher J. Lavin, a real-estate developer in Wilton, Conn., and a partner in MCL Systems there, took place yesterday at the Wilton Congregational Church.
The Rev.
Robert Gormbley performed the ceremony.


Pig on the Loose Is No Poke
LEAD: A fugitive pig is on the loose in town, setting off burglar alarms, breaking doors off hinges, stealing dog food and eluding the police.


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  Competitive Labor Costs


SUDDENLY, THE CONGRESS IS WORRIED ABOUT A BUDGET
LEAD: REPRESENTATIVE TRENT LOTT of Mississippi, the House Republican whip, emerged from a meeting with the President on domestic issues last week to face a bank of microphones and a barrage of questions on the Iran-contra hearings.
He fielded several and finally he snapped: ''Contrary to what might appear in the media, we still have a legislative agenda under way.


THE CRUCIAL TASK OF TRAINING BROKERS
LEAD: THESE are hectic times for brokerage firms, faced with intense competition in the financial marketplace.
The barriers that once separated financial territories have been removed.
Now brokerage firms, banks and insurance companies all are vying to sell the same customer a variety of financial products and services.


The Biggest Mystery In the Cosmos
LEAD: ''LET ME BE CLEAR,'' SAID DR.
Roger Lynds in a telephone interview from the Kitt Peak National Observatory in Tucson, Ariz. ''We don't know what they are.'' The astronomer was referring to the largest objects yet observed in the universe - two luminous blue arcs, hundreds of trillions of miles long, some three times the expanse of our own Milky


A HILLBILLY WHO WOVE A ROCK-AND-ROLL SPELL
LEAD: ON A COLD SATURDAY night in late January 1956, a seismic shock flickered across American television screens as Elvis Presley gyrated into national consciousness for the first time.
To a sheltered 14-year-old boy growing up in a New Jersey town not unlike Springfield, the sanitized suburban paradise of ''Father Knows


Lisa Paul to Wed in Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
George Rosenthal of Clearwater, Fla., and White Plains have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Rosenthal's daughter Lisa Merideth Paul to Joel Andrew Levinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Levinson of Delray Beach, Fla., and Marlboro, N.J.
Ms.
Paul, a daughter also of Robert Paul of Concord, Mass., is creative manager of special advertising sections for USA Weekend in New York.


VIRGINIE T. SOUBIRAN, A LAWYER, IS TO MARRY
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Jean Marc Soubiran of Paris have announced the engagement of their daughter, Virginie Terese Soubiran, to Theodore Edward Niedermayer, a son of Dr.
George Huntas Niedermayer and Gretchen Sedam Niedermayer of Philadelphia.
The couple plan to marry Sept. 12 in Paris.


Padres Send Cards to Defeat
LEAD: Chris Brown singled home John Kruk with one out in the 10th inning as the San Diego Padres posted a 4-3 victory over the St.
Louis Cardinals today.


AIDS Case Barred by Airlines
LEAD: An American diagnosed as having AIDS left today on a United States Air Force plane bound for the United States after commercial air carriers refused to fly him because of his illness.


TAKEN FOR PATRICIANS
LEAD:  THE NEWTON LETTER  By John Banville. 81 pp. Boston: David R. Godine. $12.95.


Pact Signed on Development Of Industrial Park in Newark
LEAD: The signing of an agreement for the joint development of a new industrial park in Newark was announced yesterday by the city and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


Competition Intensifies for Well-Located Buildings
LEAD: AFTER amassing more than 100 hotels in small-city and suburban settings, Aircoa Holdings made its first move into New York City a few months ago.
The Denver-based company took over a small, old hotel with a good address - the sort of establishment enjoying a lucrative revival in older cities throughout the country.


Notebook; LaRussa Working Wonders With the Athletics
LEAD: TONY LaRUSSA, the manager who was viewed as unfit to serve as ringmaster for the Chicago White Sox circus last year, has a new role this season.
He is playing magician with the Oakland Athletics.
LaRussa has manipulated the Oakland pitching staff so deftly that the Athletics have become a legitimate contender in the most crowded of the four division races.


Quality Housing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Astaire's Achievements
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Mount Kisco Awaits Arrival of T.W.A.
LEAD: WHEN Trans World Airlines moves its headquarters in October from Manhattan to the Village of Mount Kisco, which covers only 2.5 square miles and has a population of 8,500, the airline will be the largest business there.


TIMOTHY JAMES CASEY WEDS CECILY J. PASCHAL
LEAD: Cecily Jay Paschal, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Guy Paschal of Purchase, N.Y., was married at the Rye (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church yesterday to Timothy James Casey, a son of Mrs.
Robert Dillon Casey of Highland Park, Ill., and the late Mr.
Casey.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Donald W. Poole, assisted by the Rev.


SHELDON PENNOYER, AN ARCHITECT, WED TO PENELOPE G. BEAL, A MUSEUM AIDE
LEAD: At the Chocorua Island Chapel at Squam Lake in Holderness, N.H., Penelope Gay Beal, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. Beal Jr. of Lincoln, Mass., and Squam Lake, was married yesterday to Sheldon Kellogg Pennoyer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Geddes Pennoyer Jr. of Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
F.Goldthwaite Sherrill, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.


Space Age Succeeds Stone Age on Pacific Isle
LEAD: John Frum is coming, and so is Prince Philip.
They will bring planeloads of such wealth as the world has never known and deposit it on the lip of the volcano that still snorts molten lava.


FUTURE ENGINEERS GETTING MORE HUMANITIES REQUIREMENTS
LEAD: MANY engineering students have traditionally regarded humanities courses as educational frills.
Recently, however, in an effort to prepare students to better deal with the social and ethical implications of their chosen fields, schools such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are increasing their emphasis on arts and social sciences.


AN INSECURE FUTURE FOR SOME BULBS
LEAD: CATALOGUES are arriving from mail-order companies with colorful springtime pictures of hardy bulbs in bloom.
Merchants are reminding gardeners to start planning for fall planting and to send their orders promptly.
As is always true, those who are first with their orders get first choices.


Death Toll at 8 In the Flooding Of Texas Bridge
LEAD: Searchers found six more bodies today in the Guadalupe River, and the authorities disclosed that the church camp bus and van filled with teen-agers leaving a church camp Friday were washed away as they tried to skirt the churning waters.


Conviction Set Aside, Marine Free, for Now
LEAD: A Marine whose conviction on rape and attempted murder charges was overturned by an appeals court earlier this month was freed from prison Friday, the Marine Corps said.


THE BLOODIEST BATTLE
LEAD: I was deeply affected by William Manchester's description of infantry combat on Okinawa.
I also thoroughly enjoyed his account of the humiliation of that dreadful old phony, John Wayne.


SITE QUESTIONS COULD UPSET HOUSING PLAN IN YONKERS
LEAD: AN ''alternative'' housing-integration plan approved by the Yonkers City Council nearly two weeks ago and ''welcomed'' by a Federal judge seeking an end to segregation in the city appeared last week to be facing an uncertain future.


WHAT DO THEY WANT?
LEAD:  MEN IN FEMINISM  288 pp. New York: Methuen. Cloth, $29.95. Paper, $11.95.


A Love for Morgans Spurs a Trainer
LEAD: When Lawrence Poulin returned to his home state of Maine after a disappointing year away, he had so little money that he had to use credit cards to pay his way back.
He came home with his wife, their two children and a dream that one day he would be a respected horse trainer.


Train Robberies
LEAD: To the Editor: Your readers may be interested in knowing of the latest method of robbing travelers on European trains.
A friend reports that he and a companion had their daypacks ransacked while using them as pillows during a nap between Madrid and Barcelona.
Both travelers awoke, startled and disoriented, to find the packs still under their heads but without various valuables.


OUT OF THE WOODS
LEAD: WHEN NOEL JEFFREY, A Manhattan-based interior designer, was asked to build a house in East Hampton, L.I., for clients for whom he had already completed a large apartment in the city, he jumped at the chance.


Big Raid by Contras Produces Casualties But No Visible Gain
LEAD: United States-backed Nicaraguan guerrillas killed nine Sandinista soldiers, three children and a pregnant woman Thursday but failed to capture their target here.
It was their first major attack since the Iran-contra hearings in Washington focused American attention on their movement.


MUSIC
LEAD:  OperaFest  A Gala Concert at the Zurich Opera  With Jose Carreras, Mirella Freni, Nicolai Ghiaurov, Gwyneth Jones, Alfredo Kraus, Lucia Popp, Mara Zampieri and other artists.
Video Artists International. 92 minutes. $59.95.


LYNNANN QUIGLEY TO MARRY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Quigley of Holmdel, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lynnann Quigley to William V. Cuddy Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cuddy of Greenwich, Conn., and Nantucket, Mass.
Ms.
Quigley is an equities trader at the Y.M.C.A.
Retirement Fund in New York.
Her fiance is a commercial real-estate broker for the Rostenberg-Doern Company in White Plains.


Wild Rice Harvest From Idaho's Lakes
LEAD: Al Bruner dons ear protectors, sunglasses and a baseball cap, steps into his airboat harvester named Heron and roars away.
It's August in St.
Maries, Idaho, a tiny town just an hour and a half from Spokane, Wash., and the wild rice harvest is on.


Ballet: Ananiashvili As the Bolshoi's 'Giselle'
LEAD: NINA ANANIASHVILI and Andris Liepa are relatively young dancers.
And they were a very young Giselle and Albrecht in an enthusiastically received performance of ''Giselle'' on Thursday, presented by the Bolshoi Ballet at the Metropolitan Opera House.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: John H. Filer; 'WE ARE NOT A SELFISH SOCIETY'
LEAD: JOHN H. FILER, the former chief executive of the Aetna Life and Casualty Company, headed a commission 13 years ago that made a ground-breaking inquiry into philanthropy called ''Giving in America,'' and later studied a streamlining of Connecticut's government.
Mr.
Filer, 62 years old, has retired from Aetna and returned to private law practice, but philanthropy and government issues remain his concerns.


DOUGLAS S. BAKER, BROKER, MARRIES ELLEN L. SCHREIBER
LEAD: Ellen L. Schreiber, the director of business development for the Julien J. Studley real-estate brokerage and consulting firm, and Douglas S. Baker, a real-estate broker with the Williams Company, were married yesterday.
Judge Barbara G. Zambelli of the Mount Vernon (N.Y.) City Court officiated at Estherwood in Dobbs Ferry, N


A CLASSICAL BONANZA AND GERSHWIN
LEAD: IF you're especially fond of Mozart, Beethoven and other classical composers of that era, this is your week.
The bonanza starts today at 4 P.M. when the Quartetto di Venezia plays Boccherini's charming 1804 String Quartet at Music Mountain, filling out the program with two Italian rarities of the 1920's, Malipiero's ''Rispetti e Strambotti'' and the ''Doric'' Quartet of Ottorino Respighi.


Opera: 'Cavalleria' and 'Pagliacci'
LEAD: WHEN the customer asks for ham and eggs, it would probably be a mistake to put something fancier on the table.
The New York City Opera therefore served up fairly unsurprising new productions of those inseparable dishes ''Cavalleria Rusticana'' and ''Pagliacci'' on Friday evening.
However, several of the company's singers came through with honor in both one-acters and, ultimately, the crude, unsheathed emotions of the Mascagni and Leoncavallo music did cut their way to the surface.


Wilander and Carlsson in Clay Final
LEAD: Top-seeded Mats Wilander defeated his fellow Swede and doubles partner, Joakim Nystrom, by 6-4, 7-5 today in a semifinal match of the United States Clay Court Championships.


Is Our Choice Democracy or Covert Activities?; Power to Make War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Police Shoot Brooklyn Man After He Threatens Woman
LEAD: A police officer shot a Brooklyn man in his apartment early yesterday after the woman he lives with called the police and told them he was armed and had threatened to kill her and her 8-year-old son, the police said.


Raising a Million for 'Les Mis'
LEAD: AS theatergoers were raving about the hit Broadway musical ''Les Miserables'' earlier this year, the New York theater community was buzzing about another complex tale.
This one told of Karen Goodwin, an industrial psychologist, and Elizabeth Williams, an art history professor, and how they got the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company to raise more than $1 million for the London and Broadway productions of 'Les Mis,' as it came to be known.


BEHIND THE PLIGHT OF PART-TIME TEACHERS
LEAD: The plight of the part-time instructor in the state community college system  [ ''The Sorry Success of a Part-Time Teacher,'' Opinion page, June 21 ]  is the result of three factors:


New Museum Of Indian Art In Southwest
LEAD: Ask an anthropologist about the origin of American Indians, and the response is likely to be a dissertation on carbon dating and the Bering Strait.
Ask a Navajo, and the answer will be that they came from the underworld.


PUBLISHING GAMBLE IS PAYING OFF
LEAD: AN ARTICLE entitled ''With Art and Craftsmanship, Books Regain Former Glory'' (The New York Times Magazine, Oct. 28, 1984) called attention to the re-emergence of small-press publishing in the United States.


Sweeping Welfare Revision Plan Stresses Responsibility of Parents
LEAD: Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan today proposed a sweeping revision of the nation's basic welfare program, emphasizing parental responsibility rather than Government handouts.
He expressed confidence that the two houses of Congress could reach agreement on the issue in the coming year.


A City Beset by Drugs and Violence
LEAD: ALL ITS LIFE, Miami has depended on image for survival.
Over the years, it has hired some of the nation's most creative publicists to sell it to the world as a lotus land, a haven for middle-class hedonists, a place to make a fortune in real estate speculation, a city of intercontinental commercial excitement.


CLEANING: ILLUSION, TRANQUILITY
LEAD: I MAKE household special effects.


Merkur's Hatchback Cousin
LEAD: WHEN Ford Motor Company introduced its Merkur into the United States in 1985, the car turned a lot of heads.
It wasn't so much that it was good-looking.
It was just, well . . . mightily different.


HE LIKES IT HERE, MOSTLY
LEAD:  IN SEARCH OF MELANCHOLY BABY  By Vassily Aksyonov.
Translated by Michael Henry Heim and Antonina W. Bouis. 227 pp.
New York: Random House. $15.95.


HOW THE 'FRENCH STYLE' GOT THAT WAY
LEAD: WE HAVE GOTTEN INTO the habit of throwing adjectives in the direction of French music - ''subtle,''


IN MUSICAL 'CHICAGO,' CRIME PAYS
LEAD: THE Bob Fosse, Fred Ebb and John Kander musical ''Chicago,'' which had its premiere on Broadway in 1975, still manages to bring life to daily newspaper stories of political corruption and covert activities. ''Chicago,'' currently receiving a strong production at Theater Three in Port Jefferson, is a bitter show about murder, greed, corruption and treachery in


Chinese Celadon Seen in a New Light
LEAD: CELADONS - CLAY works traditionally restricted to exquisitely crafted and shimmering jade-green Chinese ceramics of the 10th through 14th centuries - assume a new, larger image in a show at Asia Society Galleries, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, through Sept. 6.


Jazz: Walt Levinsky Plays Goodman Swing
LEAD: THE arrangements with which Benny Goodman established and maintained his standing in the jazz world during the Swing Era have been re-created by numerous groups, usually for nostalgic purposes, during the past 30 years.
But they have rarely been heard in performances as crisply authoritative in the ensembles and appropriately personal in the solos as those by the 14-piece band led by Walt Levinsky, at Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, through Aug.


Moscow Gets Cagey on Arms Control
LEAD: ONE of the Administration's main preoccupations in recent days has been to try to figure out why the Russians have shifted into neutral gear on arms control. ''Nobody really knows what they are up to,'' one Administration official said. ''But there are a whole variety of possible motives.''


Sri Lanka President Meets Indian on Tamil Issue
LEAD: A sudden burst of diplomatic activity between Sri Lanka and India this week has revived hopes of a fresh effort to end the Tamil separatist conflict.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  STOLEN GOODS.
By Susan Dworkin. (Newmarket Press, $16.95.) Susan Dworkin, a playwright, likes dramatic effects; her first novel is pumped full of them.
Disasters, misfortunes and crises punctuate this book like exclamation points.
Chapter one ends with a car crash that kills Vartan Garba the day before his wedding; his fiancee, Anna Karavajian, is propelled to map out a plan for her life, for marriage was ''the only fate she had ever imagined.


'MENTORS' GUIDE TEACHERS
LEAD: AFTER two years of small pilot programs, the State Department of Education is preparing its first large class of ''mentor teachers.''


A New Sense of Urgency to Clean Onondaga Lake
LEAD: Onondaga Lake was a glimmering expanse of water overflowing with fish and plant life when Samuel de Champlain and a company of French soldiers and Huron warriors scouted the swampy shore in 1615 for an advantageous place to engage the Onondaga tribe.


Earl Schwulst, Banker, Dies at 90
LEAD: Earl B. Schwulst, who in the 1960's led a New York City commission that recommended a city income tax and headed a study that assailed racial segregation in public housing, died Tuesday at the Carolton Health Center in Southport, Conn., after a long illness.
He was 90 years old and lived in Southport.


Vivienne R. Gould Weds Paul Schiffer in Houston
LEAD: At the Holy Rosary Roman Catholic Church in Houston yesterday Vivienne Rosalie Gould, the daughter of Mayor Rosalie Santine Gould of McGehee, Ark., and the late Joseph Clayton Gould Jr., was married to Paul Alan Schiffer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ira Leonard Schiffer of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
The Rev.


Jazz on Public Radio
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Cost Bringing Punishments Out of Prison
LEAD: Seven days a week, Charles Marston loads his newly purchased van with carpentry tools and heads out to do home improvements.
The hours are long, but he says: ''I'm scratching by.
Life has never looked so good, and it sure beats jail.''


MUSSELS STAR IN 4 WARM-WEATHER DISHES
LEAD: FOOD for summer, especially for summer entertaining, requires planning in order to fulfill three necessary requirements.
It must be appealing to serve and eat in warm weather, take advantage of abundant seafood and produce and be easily prepared in advance.
If a recipe also provides the kind of leftover that can be turned into another effortless meal over the weekend, so much the better.


In Tennessee, Officials Fight Over Portrait
LEAD: Echoes of the Old South still rumble through this ''New South'' city sometimes.
Recently they dislodged a portrait of Tennessee's Reconstruction Governor from a place of prominence in the State Capitol.


The Education of an Entrepreneur
LEAD: WHEN I left M.I.T. 30 years ago to start a business, I'm not sure I could pronounce the word entrepreneur.
Today, entrepreneur is a hot word.
It's a challenging word, a fascinating word.


WHO'S NOT IN THE HALL OF FAME WHO SHOULD BE
LEAD: Who's not in the Hall of Fame who should be, under current rules?
Nobody!
Already, too many mediocrities (Rabbit Maranville?) have been enshrined.
But if I had to bring up one possibility, perhaps Nellie Fox, certainly the best second baseman in history not represented by a plaque.
Phil Rizzuto played a vital position on an admittedly great team on a reasonably regular basis for a little more than a decade.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I understand what war is, but it is unjust to kill civilians like this.''


Emergency Aid for City Ambulances
LEAD: New York City's Emergency Medical Services, a department that dispatches city-owned ambulances to more than 39,000 seriously ill or injured people each month, is showing weakened vital signs.


NARROW FEET MEAN ELONGATED ELEGANCE
LEAD: Re: Topics, ''Two Feet and a Long Search,'' Opinion Page, June 14:


STATE WARNS OF LEAD IN DRINKING WATER
LEAD: IN a campaign to reduce lead levels in drinking water, the State Health Services Department is sending a letter advising all day-care centers and schools to flush water lines daily.


Theater
LEAD: Wide-eyed and hollow-cheeked, with the spooky, melodramatic delivery of an seasoned teller of ghost stories, David Cale is an enthralling writer-monologuist whose one-man show, ''The Redthroats,'' transmutes everyday experience into Gothically surreal prose poetry.


ROMANTIC MUSICAL FILLS BILL
LEAD: NAME a very romantic musical that takes place more than 100 years ago, has only a half-dozen characters and isn't very well known.


Midwest Village, Slow-Paced, Fights Plan for Fast-Food Outlet
LEAD: People in this unsullied resort village on Lake Michigan are doing all they can to keep a quaint old cafe that serves homemade muffins and zucchini soup from becoming a fast-food place that sells Big Macs and Chicken McNuggets.


Bayreuth
LEAD: To the Editor: It was a pleasant surprise to find the article on Wilhelmina, Margravine of Bayreuth (Travel, May 3).
So far as English-language readers are concerned, this fascinating lady has passed below the horizon of visibility.
She is not included in any recent encyclopedia (or any French or Italian one either) and there is not a single work by or about her in print in either this country or in


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on the film page in this section last Sunday misidentified an actor in ''Adventures in Babysitting.'' The actor is Anthony Rapp.


BICENTENNIAL FOR AN INTERNATIONAL TREATY
LEAD: THE United States Postal Service and Morocco are celebrating the bicentennial of a treaty that marks 200 years of friendship between the two nations.
The first day ceremonies were held simultaneously in Washington and Rabat last Friday.


PATRICIA GROARK WEDS BURKE P. MCCORMACK
LEAD: Patricia L. Groark and Burke Patrick McCormack, vice presidents of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, were married yesterday at Christ the King Roman Catholic Church in Yonkers.
Msgr.
John J. Foley performed the ceremony.


NEW YORKERS, ETC.
LEAD: IF there's one thing Janet Hersh hates it's friends who ask ''What's new?'' True, it sounds innocuous, but Ms.
Hersh and a number of other single women know the code. ''What's new?'' really means ''Who are you dating?'' or, for that matter, ''Are you dating?''


FILM MUSIC HAS TWO MASTERS
LEAD: OH, THE POWER OF MUSIC TO stir the coals of memory - and, pace Noel Coward, it needn't be cheap music, either.
Although 20 years must have passed since I saw Bo Widerberg's ''Elvira Madigan'' for the first and only time, the mood of that sweetly pathetic, sun-dappled Swedish film came stealing back the other evening as I sat listening to Alicia de Larrocha play the Andante from the Piano Concerto No.


CHRISTIAN PUBLISHING INDUSTRY DOES A HARD SELL ON RELIGION
LEAD: THEY call themselves ''God's retailers'' because they think of their bookstores as ministries as well as businesses.
Last week, about 10,000 such entrepreneurs, who either sell or manufacture products ranging from leather-bound Bibles to ''Jesus Loves You'' Frisbees, gathered here in Orange County for the annual trade show of the Christian Booksellers Association.


Stop Smoking, Earn More Money
LEAD: Richard Cullen, a packaging supervisor at the Adolph Coors Company, agreed to let his employer test him for health problems and then provide nutrition counseling to help him lose weight.
His incentive?
Coors will pay a higher percentage of his health claims than it will for his colleagues who refuse to participate in the company's ''wellness'' program.


'Alive From Off Center' Continues to Seek Out Innovative Video
LEAD: ELIZABETH STREB SOARS through the air in perpetual flight, her gravity-defying dance created as much by video artistry as by choreographic skill.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  French Visas: Now No Photo Is Required


Jennifer Wentzel And C. F. Gulden Exchange Vows
LEAD: The marriage of Jennifer Lee Wentzel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan R. Wentzel of Bronxville, N.Y., to Charles Frederick Gulden, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Gulden Jr. of Rye, N.Y., took place yesterday at the Reformed Church of Bronxville.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Bedingfield performed the ceremony.


LAURA L. BROCK WEDS A LAWYER
LEAD: At Holy Trinity Episcopal Church in New York yesterday, Laura Lindley Brock, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mitchell Brock of New York, was married to Robert Blakeman Smith, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Smith of Thornwood, N.Y.


RALPH LAUREN'S ILLUSION
LEAD: Rather than fostering an illusion, Ralph Lauren is the one American designer who understands women and whose clothes fit our life style (Fashion, ''The Americans Who Lead,'' by Carrie Donovan, June 28.) What passes for creativity in the fashion reporter's ivory tower looks unwearable to us out here in the real world.


Tone Color in Audio Design
LEAD: DIFFERENCES IN TIMBRE - or tone color - are the chief consideration in choosing one audio component in preference to another.
This is particularly true of loudspeakers, phono cartridges and CD players, where subtle tonal shadings characteristic of a particular model may inspire delight or dislike.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Governor's House Center of Debate


THE BLOODIEST BATTLE
LEAD: William Manchester's description of Marines booing John Wayne at the Aiea Naval Hospital in Hawaii is hard to believe.
He claims that Wayne was a ''symbol of fake machismo we came to hate.'' Come now, that word was not used in 1945.


Closing Camp for Summer Stuns Scouts
LEAD: CONTRARY to popular belief, Boy Scouts are not always prepared.


A Metamorphosis for Old Williamsburg
LEAD: PROPPED on pillows in his apartment in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, Tim Pratt, a soft-spoken poet and freelance writer, explained his recent migration from the East Village.


LISA BIRNBACH, AUTHOR, TO MARRY IN SEPTEMBER
LEAD: Lisa Regine Birnbach, an author, and Steven Haft, an independent television and film producer, plan to be married in September, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Maks Birnbach of New York, have announced.
Mr.
Haft is a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Haft of New York.


Ideology Plays Role In Suffolk Contest
LEAD: THE Republican primary for the Suffolk County Executive nomination is shaping up as a case of ideology versus organization, according to Republicans on both sides of that struggle.


THE SUN NEVER SETS ON THE ENGLISH NOVEL
LEAD: ''HE would have preferred not to speak to his own kinsmen in English which was after all a foreign language.'' So writes the Nigerian novelist Chinua Achebe of the title character of his 1966 novel, ''A Man of the People.'' But he does speak in English, and not only because ''speeches made in the vernacular were liable to be distorted .


Herring
LEAD: To the Editor: In response to the letter of Benjamin P. Van Inwegen (Travel, June 7), here is the name of at least one substitute for Marshall's Scottish brand herring - Brunswick (Connors) Kippered Snacks (Herring Fillets) - bought at D'Agostino's in New York at 79 cents for the 3.25-ounce tin.
They are packed at Connors Bros.


WHO'S NOT IN THE HALL OF FAME WHO SHOULD BE
LEAD: Richie Ashburn belongs in the Hall of Fame.
He led the National League in batting in 1955 and in 1958.
He was an outstanding clutch hitter.
He was fast on the bases.
He covered the outfield in superb fashion.
ALFRED NUSSBAUM
Brooklyn


Battling Tax Evaders, Finance Chief Wins Points With Koch
LEAD: Mayor Koch had just completed a meeting with Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, in the Mayor's City Hall office one day last week.
As he walked the Presidential aspirant out of the building, Mr.
Koch was overheard mentioning two words that invariably bring a sparkle to his eyes, ''Abe Biderman.


MOVIES, BOOKS AND THE REAL STORY
LEAD:  To the Editor:


A PIVOTAL WEEK
LEAD: As Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North left the witness table, the Iran-contra committees tried to take back control of their proceedings, lecturing the new national celebrity about patriotism, freedom and democracy.
When the week ended some members were questioning the veracity of Colonel North's superior at the National Security Council, Rear Adm.


TREKKING THROUGH DARKEST LONDON By Christopher Hope. 218 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $16.95.
LEAD:  THE HOTTENTOT ROOM


CRACK IS LAMENTED AT EMOTIONAL VIGIL
LEAD: ''Our children are in a very bad situation,'' the Rev.
H.
DeVore Chapman said yesterday from the pulpit of a Brooklyn church. ''They are hooked on drugs that have come straight from the pit of hell, destroying our families and communities.''


POSTINGS: River Vale Reason; A Safety Factor
LEAD: As suburban communities go, River Vale, N.J., is an easy sell.
The Bergen County township, with a population of 9,700, has one traffic light, three golf courses and four and a half square miles of purely residential land.
In addition, it was written up in ''Safe Places for the 80's,'' a 1984 Doubleday publication, as one of the most crime-free communities in


JENNIFER LAW TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Jennifer Ann Law to John Cunningham Riley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Patrick Riley of Marstons Mills, Mass., has been announced by Patricia Rich Law of Camden, Ark., and Pascal Threadgill Law of Mobile, Ala., parents of the bride-to-be.
Miss Law, an assistant vice president of the Shawmut Bank in Boston, and her fiance, an assisitant vice president of Kidder Peabody &amp; Company in Boston, plan to marry Oct.


A Good Reason to Delay Reflagging
LEAD: This week, the Reagan Administration will, in all likelihood, throw away its last slim chance to substitute diplomacy for unwise military operations in the Persian Gulf.


CRAIGIN HOWARD BECOMES A BRIDE
LEAD: Craigin Lee Howard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Calhoun Ludlow Harper Howard of Oak Bluffs, Mass., was married yesterday to James Glenn Salsgiver Jr., the son of Mrs.
Salsgiver of Westport, Conn., and the late Mr.
Salsgiver.
The Rev.
Francis B. Sayre, former Dean of the National Cathedral in Washington, performed the ceremony at St.


Is Our Choice Democracy or Covert Activities?; Who Makes Us Proud
LEAD: To the Editor:


Colorful Flynn
LEAD:  The Sea Hawk
With Errol Flynn, Brenda Marshall, Flora Robson, Claude Rains, Henry Daniell.
Directed by Michael Curtiz. 1940.
CBS/Fox Video 128 minutes. $59.98.
There is something to be said for colorizing a foamy outdoor adventure like this.
As English galleons attack marauding Spaniards, white sails and shipboard browns stand out against blue skies.


4 Killed in Ireland Air Crash
LEAD: A light plane crashed en route from Cork to Dublin today, killing the pilot and all three members of a Dutch family aboard, airport officials said.
The pilot's nationality was not known.


Richard M. Rossbach, A Broker and Author
LEAD: Richard M. Rossbach, a stockbroker and author, died of complications of lymphoma and leukemia on Friday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.


South Koreans in the U.S. Are Going Home
LEAD: Kim Kyung Jae, publisher and co-author of a best-selling book on the South Korean security agency, plans to end 15 years' political exile shortly and join the opposition's election campaign in Korea.


PIT BULL ATTACKS PROMPT A CALL TO STIFFEN LAWS
LEAD: TWO months ago, an 8-year-old girl in New Britain was attacked by a pit bull that knocked her down, broke her leg and inflicted bites that required 47 stitches.


B. BRADFORD BARNES
LEAD: B. Bradford Barnes, the Speaker of the Delaware House of Representatives, died Friday night apparently of a heart attack at Nanticoke Hospital, Seaford, Del.
He was 55 years old.


Turning Prisoners Into Helpers
LEAD: UP to 15,000 people a day phone the State Department of Motor Vehicles offices in New York City for information.
But two years ago, callers were more apt to get a busy signal than information.


Gulf Duty: How Navy Gets Ready
LEAD: Sometime within the next week, American warships are expected to begin escorting the first Kuwaiti tankers to fly the American flag through the Strait of Hormuz.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  'MARIN IN OIL'  Although he made his reputation as a watercolorist, John Marin, one of the pioneers in American modern art, was also an accomplished painter in oils.
In fact, from the early 1930's through his death in 1953 he devoted increasing attention to exploring that medium.
And the results of his interest, said Klaus Kertess, the curator of the Parrish Art Museum, were precursors of the revolutionary American painting of the 1950's.


THE CONTRA LEADERS: A GUIDE TO THE OFF-SCREEN PLAYERS
LEAD: AT the center of the political storm raging in the Senate Caucus Room in Washington is the so-called contra rebel army, which is fighting to overthrow the Sandinistas in Nicaragua.
Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter have testified about how they secretly diverted money to the contras, whom they considered to be a bastion against Communist penetration of the


Blackmun Is Recovering
LEAD: Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun of the Supreme Court is recuperating from minor hernia surgery, and he canceled a speaking engagement scheduled for today, a Court spokeswoman said.
The 78-year-old Justice had the operation in Rochester, Minn., after the Court term ended June 26, the spokeswoman, Toni House, said Friday night.


Dropping In
LEAD: It was a gathering of eagles at the International Tennis Hall of Fame inductions in Newport, R.I., yesterday and, appropriately enough, Billie Jean King arrived at the ceremonies by helicopter.
The 43-year-old King, who won a record 20 Wimbledon titles while virtually dominating women's tennis for most of her 20-year career, was honored along with four other giants of the game: Bjorn Borg, the five-time Wimbledon champion; Stan Smith, who won Wimbledon in 1972; Alex Olmedo, who led the United States Davis Cup team to a famous upset over Australia in 1958, and Dennis Ralston, another Davis


I.R.S. to Help Nail City Tax Evaders
LEAD: Searching parking garages for city residents hiding behind out-of-state license plates is one way to catch tax evaders, and in its recent crackdown the Koch adminstration has been willing to do even that.
Now, however, New York City Finance Commissioner Abraham Biderman has a better tool.
Last week, the city became the first in the country to win the right to look at Federal tax returns.


Jersey's Emphasis Shifts In Bid for Baseball Team
LEAD: Until now, most of the talk about New Jersey's search for a major league baseball team has centered on attracting an existing franchise.


Data Update: July 19,1987
LEAD:
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
May 87
Apr. 87
May. 86
New York
5,493
2,833
5,714
New Jersey
4,942
3,286
6,290
Connecticut
3,398
2,002
2,647
*4*(Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Census Bureau)
*3*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
LEAD: AMERICAN CHILDHOOD by David Willis McCullough.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. 405 pages. $19.95.


PLAYWRIGHT EXAMINES ART WORLD
LEAD: IN ''The Critic,'' a two-act play by B.H.
Friedman that will be read at the Summer Solstice Theater Conference in Amagansett next weekend, Alistair Sharpe, the tragiheroic art critic and gallery director, becomes the victim of a lawsuit because of his passion for telling the truth.


A Connecticut Vogue: Importing Old Barns
LEAD: A barn shortage has struck Connecticut's countryside, forcing some wealthy landowners here to import their rustic dream houses from upstate New York and Vermont.


1,300 Who Help Rather Than Serve Terms
LEAD: The biggest alternative sentencing program in New York City is run by the Vera Institute of Justice, a private group that conducts research and carries out programs in the criminal justice system.


MUSSELS STAR IN 4 WARM-WEATHER DISHES
LEAD: FOOD for summer, especially for summer entertaining, requires planning in order to fulfill three necessary requirements.
It must be appealing to serve and eat in warm weather, take advantage of abundant seafood and produce and be easily prepared in advance.
If a recipe also provides the kind of leftover that can be turned into another effortless meal over the weekend, so much the better.


How to Cash A. Phonybill
LEAD: Two young women bought hundreds of dollars' worth of clothes and got $581 in change after employees of two stores in this central Ohio city had failed to notice that a $1,000 bill bore the phrase ''A.
Phonybill.''


Music: Ravinia Players With Mostly Mozart
LEAD: WITH their performance of Schubert's ''Trout'' Quintet, the Ravinia Institute Players shifted the tone of Thursday evening's concert from serious to sassy.
Until then the proceedings, part of the Mostly Mozart Festival in Avery Fisher Hall, had been, with one exception, distinguished by performances of intensity and restraint.


Music: Bach Mass In B Minor
LEAD: THE Bach B-minor Mass appeared at Avery Fisher Hall Friday night like a sudden interruption to Mostly Mozart's usual pleasant, smoothly flowing course.
Bach's soberness may have seemed a little removed from the graceful and ingratiating repertory around which most of this summer festival is planned, but the concert hall is still an appropriate place for this great construction.


This Band Speaks for Lowbrows and Underdogs
LEAD: COULD SUCCESS SPOIL THE RE-placements?
Not if they have anything to say about it.
On ''Pleased to Meet Me,'' the Minneapolis band's fifth full-length album (Sire 25557-1; LP, cassette and CD), the band declares, ''The sweet smell that they adore -I think I'd rather smother,'' and they describe themselves with ''one foot in the door/ the other foot in the gutter.


ARMY IMPATIENCE IS HINTED IN SEOUL
LEAD: As the drama of speeches and sit-ins and tear gas moves in the direction of democracy, an unspoken question is whether the military might decide to participate with a veto rather than a vote.


Palmer Hits Jackpot
LEAD: A one-day holdout may have cost him three free meals at the Kansas City training table, but Paul Palmer, the record-breaking ground-gainer from Temple, wasn't exactly wasting away.
During the holdout, Palmer signed a $1.35 million four-year contract that includes a $450,000 signing bonus and a $175,000 starting salary.


PETTY TYRANNIES ARE THE WORST
LEAD:  VACLAV HAVEL  Or Living in Truth.
Edited by Jan Vladislav. 315 pp.
Boston: Faber &amp; Faber. $22.50.


A Boy Who Could Have Been Ours
LEAD: WE are new parents, my husband, William, and I. Our little boy was born in November and he is magnificently healthy and happy.
Since his birth, his father and I have discovered that we would drop almost anything to be with our son.
Things we used to rely on for entertainment - like parties, brunches and cocktails - have become inconsequential.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: JULY 19, 1987


MOVIES
LEAD:  Stand By Me  Starring Wil Wheaton, River Phoenix, Corey Feldman, Jerry O'Connell, Kiefer Sutherland.
Based on the novella ''The Body'' by Stephen King. 1986.
RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video. 87 minutes. $89.95.
This rite-of-passage movie plays particularly well on the home screen, and kids like to see it again and again - which seems perfectly fine, even with its R rating (probably for strong language).


BIRDMEN OF DAYTON
LEAD:  WILBUR AND ORVILLE  A Biography of the Wright Brothers.
By Fred Howard.
Illustrated. 530 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Clinic Plans Variation on Fertility Technique
LEAD: As the permutations of artificially induced conception increase, plans for an egg bank have been announced by a major medical center in Cleveland.


Ex-C.I.A. Chief: A Legacy of Doubt On His Role in the Iran-Contra Affair
LEAD: While William J. Casey lived, the Reagan Administration had few figures of greater myth and mystery.


PROTECTING FACES FROM ERRANT PITCHES
LEAD: The injuries during this baseball season to Andre Dawson and Joe Carter, both of whom were hit in the face by pitches, have left a lot of batters talking about what they can do to protect themselves better at the plate.


NOFZIGER IS INDICTED
LEAD: LYN NOFZIGER, a former senior political adviser and White House aide to Ronald Reagan, last week became the second member of the President's inner circle to be indicted as a result of inquiries into whether he too quickly, and therefore illegally, turned to private gain the influence he gained in public service.


Head of C.I.A. Said to Plan Replacing 2 High Officials
LEAD: William Webster, the new Director of Central Intelligence, has decided to replace the head of the Central Intelligence Agency's clandestine service and one of his senior deputies, according to a Congressional official.


Two New Members Elected To the Pulitzer Prize Board
LEAD: Two new members have been elected to the Pulitzer Prize Board, the panel that oversees the selection of Pulitzer Prizes each year, the president of Columbia University, Michael I. Sovern, has announced.


WHO'S NOT IN THE HALL OF FAME WHO SHOULD BE
LEAD: Jim Bunning would be a Jim Dandy selection to the Hall of Fame.
Since retiring in 1971, Bunning has been eligible for 11 years, but the first pitcher since Cy Young to win 100 games and fan 1,000 batters in each league has not received the honor he deserves.
GIL RENBERG
Chappaqua, N.Y.


Verbatim; Questioning the Press
LEAD: ' What you said about the media needed to be said.
They demand to ruthlessly question the ethics of anyone else.
But when anyone else dares to question their ethics, they hide behind the shield of freedom of speech.
They refuse to make the distinction that philosophers throughout the centuries have made between freedom and license.


NO POLICE, NO EXPENSE IN DANIELSON
LEAD: THE last vestiges of the Danielson Police Department will go up for bids next Saturday when officials from throughout the state line up to view the equipment left behind when the officers were laid off.


Art
LEAD: Although some prominent younger artists, including Julian Schnabel, have looked hard at the paintings of Francis Bacon, there is a general feeling in the art community that the file on the 77-year-old English artist is now closed.
Yet, it is clear from the show of Bacon's works at the Marlborough Gallery (40 West 57th Street, through July 31) that his pictorial intelligence is undiminished.


BEST SELLERS: JULY 19, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
MISERY, by Stephen King. (Viking, $18.95.)
Injured and drugged, an author is held captive by a
psychotic fan.
2
2
4
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
(Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $18.95.) A brutal murder
creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and
lawyers.


Rebel Offensive in Salvador's Capital
LEAD: The Government of El Salvador knew all about the latest plot of the leftist rebels to undermine it.
But last week, when the guerrillas sharply stepped up protests and sabotage in the capital of San Salvador, President Jose Napoleon Duarte appeared powerless to stop it.


On Madison Avenue, a Building That Blends In
LEAD: IN AN AGE IN WHICH PRETENSION has become the architectural norm, and the prima donna the expected presence on the landscape, No. 667 Madison Avenue stands out as reasonable, intelligent, and civilized.
This is not one of the great buildings for all time, but it is certainly the right building for this time.


COZY AND SIMPLE IN FAIRFIELD
LEAD: SMALL shopping center in Fairfield is the backdrop for a simple, softly lighted romantic new restaurant called Adrian's Brick Walk.


DEBRA S. RAUSCH ENGAGED
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
George H. Rausch of Weston, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Debra Susan Rausch to David Gene Feitler, a son of Friedel Feitler of Toronto and the late Dr.
Ernest H. Feitler.
Ms.
Rausch is founder and president of Corporate Growth Resources, an executive search organization in Burlington, Mass.


Research Triangle
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ridership Is Up Underground
LEAD: Though there were eight million subway riders in the Naked City 40 years ago, the New York City Transit Authority would be delighted to have daily ridership approaching half that number these days.


WHAT'S NEW IN EMPLOYEE HEALTH PLANS
LEAD: IN corporate offices around the country, the complaints about the high cost of medical care seem to be getting louder.
Spending on medical care by private sources, mainly business, has more than tripled since 1975, to $140 billion last year, according to the Division of National Cost Estimates, a unit of the United States Department of Health and Human Services.


DICRON ARAM BERBERIAN
LEAD: Dicron Aram Berberian, an abstract expressionist painter and a leader in international aid for Armenians, ia, died of cancer Monday cancer at St.
Peter's Hospice in Albany.
He was 46 years old and lived in Easton, Md.


PATRICIA TAGGART MARRIES IN JERSEY
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J., yesterday, Patricia Ann Taggart, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Taggart of Oldwick, N.J., was married to James Latimer Bellis Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bellis of Bedminster, N.J., and Vero Beach, Fla.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Sid and Nancy  Starring Gary Oldman and Chloe Webb.
Produced by Eric Fellner.
Directed by Alex Cox. 1986.
Embassy Home Entertainment. 111 minutes. $79.95.
Home viewers who have not seen the movie before will have only an inkling of what provoked such critical enthusiasm for ''Sid and Nancy.


JENNIFER AIKEN, A TEACHER, MARRIES HOWARD FULTON JR.
LEAD: Jennifer Ann Aiken, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert McCutchen Aiken of West Chester, Pa., and London, was married yesterday to Howard Duer Fulton Jr., the son of Mr.
Fulton of Wilmington, Del., and the late Mrs.
Fulton.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert M. Doss, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Aiken home in West


The Costly Bargain Fare
LEAD: Summertime is charter time, the season when economy-minded travelers reserve with their travel agents for trips to Europe and elsewhere at prices that even the plain-pipe rack airlines cannot match.
The price is low because the charter organizer does not have a complex reservation system and high overhead and can make decisions fast.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A report in the Sports section July 5 on the Henley Royal Regatta misidentified which Yale crew lost in the Ladies' Challenge Plate.
It was the varsity men's lightweight.


MILDRED MATESICH AND A JUDGE ARE WED
LEAD: Mildred Mary Matesich, chief staff counsel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, and Judge Harry T. Edwards of the same court were married yesterday at St.
Alban's Episcopal Church in Washington.
The Rev.
Cally Irish performed the ceremony.
Martha Matesich was maid of honor for her sister, who was also attended by her children, Jessica and Andrew Seidman.


Repairing Co-ops and Condos
LEAD: THE stone facade is cracking, the surface of the roof has blisters and there is dissension among the building's officers over exactly what to do.


Snow White Is No Feminist
LEAD: SNOW WHITE IS A DRIP, AND I SAY THAT WITH fondness and respect for one of the best-loved children's films of all time.
Of all the things we remember so fondly, from the starchy collar on Snow White's gown to the way the dwarfs' bulbous little noses poke over the foot of her bed, the heroine's personality is hardly this classic's greatest selling point.


A Dizzying Array Of Economic Data
LEAD: The trade deficit widened in May to $14.4 billion, from $13.3 billion, as imports, led by oil, hit a record.
Many economists had expected the trade gap to decrease a bit or stay nearly even, and the figures disturbed them, because it indicated that exports are not getting the chance to catch up.
The dollar, which has started to fall from its lofty heights, had an effect as well, and if it continues to drop, the dollar value of imported goods will rise, and that could further widen the gap.


Born of Strife And Controversy, A Lively New Art Museum Finds Itself A Niche
LEAD: IN A CITY BLESSED WITH dozens of museums devoted to subjects as varied as pre-Colombian archeology and the paintings of modern artists such as Diego Rivera and Rufino Tamayo, it would not seem easy for a newcomer to the scene to establish a niche for itself.
But in less than a year since it opened in October 1986, the Centro


Land Beyond Land's End
LEAD: Few places in the world are named as definitively as Land's End.
That is where Cornwall, the land that forms the southwestern corner of Britain, tapers off to a rough point and dramatically abuts in a spectacle of high cliffs and crashing sea.
It is not difficult to imagine that in a distant era the place might have been considered the edge of the world, with the sea abruptly dropping away a little to the west.


Animals of an Urban Zoo
LEAD: AS a child, she remembered seeing cutout animals decorating the walls of the pediatrician's office.


Supertitles in Concert
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Susan Wenzell Becomes Bride
LEAD: Susan Margaret Wenzell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan T. Wenzell of New York and East Jewett, N.Y., was married yesterday to Adam Alexander Waldron, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chester A. Waldron of Pinehurst, N.C., at All Souls Church in Onteora Park, N.Y.
The Rev.
Peter Simon Mein performed the Episcopal ceremony.


Mayor vs. Mouse, Or Long Live TV
LEAD: NOT often is New York's expansive Mayor upstaged.
But a television cartoon character, Danger Mouse, threatened to pull off the feat in March, when the mouse's show was bumped from television to make room for a Sunday morning program featuring Mayor Koch.


Bishops File Brief Against Surrogate Motherhood
LEAD: New Jersey's Roman Catholic bishops have filed a brief with the New Jersey Supreme Court opposing the practice of surrogate motherhood and arguing that it violates the public policy of the state.


BAMBI CROWE PLANS WEDDING
LEAD: Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Mrs.
Crowe of Fort Myer, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Bambi Crowe, to Lieut.
Robert Jeffrey Lymburner, U.S.N., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Lymburner of Sherman, Tex.
An Aug. 15 wedding is planned.


WHAT COMFORTS AIDS FAMILIES
LEAD: Lou Ann Walker's article ''What Comforts AIDS Families'' (June 21), raised a major ethico-legal issue in the mental-health field.
Moreover, by omission, it misinforms on a topic that is currently reshaping professional ethical conduct throughout the country.


Don't Complicate Arrests With Paper
LEAD: Law enforcement officials seem ready to respond in a needlessly limp way to a Federal court decision requiring that an arrested person in New York City be brought before a judge within 24 hours.
If that's not possible, the decision requires at least a sworn statement from the police and prosecutor.


'New Look' Kabuki
LEAD: THE WELL-KNOWN CONFLICTS in contemporary Japan between traditional values and modern ways are being expressed in all walks of life, even in the world of the classical theater, a stronghold of artistic conservatism.
A frequent discussion in Japanese theatrical circles is whether traditional drama can be meaningful to modern audiences.


THE BLOODIEST BATTLE
LEAD: William Manchester errs when he says Brig.
Gen.
Anthony C. McAuliffe did not say ''Nuts'' in response to the German demand for surrender at Bastogne.


Chewing on Words
LEAD: PROFESSIONALS IN the world of food, like sportswriters and baseball players, have developed their own argot to precisely describe certain actions, ideas and objects.
The locker room has been an idiomatic Vesuvius, spouting innumerable contributions such as ''to strike out,'' ''to hit a home run,'' ''bull pen,'' ''utility player,'' and so on, which have been adopted by everyone from rebuffed lovers to newspaper editors.


Newsweek Says North Was a Source of Leaks
LEAD: Newsweek magazine says in its current issue that Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North leaked details to the magazine about the interception of the terrorists involved in the Achille Lauro operation, although the colonel complained at the Iran-contra hearings that revelations by Congressmen about the mission had compromised sensitive intelligence.


Driesell Enjoying Coaching Revival
LEAD: With the nation's best college players preparing for the Pan American Games or having participated in the World University Games, the basketball talent at the United States Olympic Festival is largely undeveloped.


LEE ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEE ENTERPRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
61,798,000
57,483,000
Net inc
8,493,000
8,555,000
Share earns
.33
.33
9mo rev
177,641,000
166,617,000
Net inc
31,135,000
21,380,000
Share earns
1.21
.82


KNOGO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KNOGO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,788,000
10,422,000
Net inc
2,309,000
1,846,000
Share earns
.34
.27


Woman Killed as Train Hits Car in Connecticut
LEAD: A 28-year-old woman was killed today when her car was hit broadside by a southbound Amtrak train and thrown about 190 feet, the police said.


CALFED INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALFED INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
48,200,000
44,500,000
Per share
1.92
2.00
Shares outst
25,038,694
20,884,725
6mo net inc
93,500,000
81,100,000
Per share
3.73
3.62
Shares outst
25,061,953
20,870,923


Advertising; A Thompson Account
LEAD: Now, here for a change, is some plain, ordinary, positive news about the J. Walter Thompson Company: Its Atlanta office has won the $4 million account of the Georgia Federal Savings and Loan.
The institution, the largest savings bank in Georgia and a subsidiary of Fuqua Industries, was formerly served by Fahlgren &amp; Swink.


PENTAGON NURSING AN AGING NETWORK OF KEY SATELLITES
LEAD: The American military, concerned because of the potential loss of some satellites, is taking precautions to prevent the breakdown of space systems essential for reconnaissance, secret communications and early warning of missile attack.


Tigers Winning With Surprising Twist
LEAD: AS the Detroit Tigers prepared to resume the season following the All-Star Game break, Sparky Anderson knew what had to happen if his team were to challenge the Yankees and the Toronto Blue Jays for the American League East championship.


Cuomo Announces Work Safety Grants
LEAD: Governor Cuomo has announced the award of 81 local grants totaling $4.5 million to teach workers about potential health and safety hazards and to raise standards in those areas.


BINKS MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BINKS MANUFACTURING CO (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
53,546,000
39,908,000
Net inc
1,959,000
1,763,000
Share earns
.68
.58
6mo sales
93,511,000
74,044,000
Net inc
3,493,000
3,006,000
Share earns
1.20
.99


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Advertising; Saatchi Sells Stake, Buys Consulting Firm
LEAD: It was announced in London last week that Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., the British-based holding company with a lot of holdings, had sold its 7 percent interest in the WPP Group P.L.C., which is acquiring the JWT Group, the parent of J. Walter Thompson.


LOSS OF TRADITIONS FOR A TINY ETHNIC GROUP
LEAD: The beach beckoning, many of the younger Kalmuks went out to the Jersey Shore today.
But here in the shade of the salmon-colored Buddhist temple that is the spiritual center of one of America's smallest ethnic groups, Noron Adianov sat and wondered whether any of the younger generation would take up religion.


Chile Develops 'Stockholders' Culture'
LEAD: Workers at an iron ore deposit and pellet plant operated by the Pacific Steel Company 300 miles north of Santiago recently asked the general manager to give them a report on profits and investments this year.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Drip, Drip, Drip


FIRST ILLINOIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST ILLINOIS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
5,566,000
3,823,000
Per share
.27
.20
Shares outst
20,865,000
18,703,000
6mo net inc
10,835,000
6,944,000
Per share
.52
.39
Shares outst
20,836,000
17,664,000


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, JULY 20, 1987:
LEAD:  International A2-8, D12


Cultural Drag Racing
LEAD: Race cars get old fast.
Last summer Don Garlits's ''Swamp Rat XXX'' was brand-new from the Florida shops of Don Garlits, the drag-racing legend, and setting 270-mile-per-hour speed records on the nation's drag strips.


MAN ARRESTED IN KIDNAP OF PREGNANT WOMAN
LEAD: A 19-year-old man was arrested yesterday and charged with kidnapping a pregnant woman and her baby son as they waited outside a Brooklyn drug store for the woman's husband to return with medicine for the child, the police said.


Lincoln Vote Safe
LEAD: To the Editor:


PIONEER SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIONEER SYSTEMS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,585,000
11,023,000
Net loss
898,000
b1,157,000
Share earns
-
.36
6mo sales
14,788,000
17,807,000
Net loss
1,557,000
b838,000
Share earns
-
.26


Pop: Roberta Flack
LEAD: ROBERTA FLACK, unlike so many pop-soul singers, has never tailored her music to cater to the trends of the moment.
The singer-pianist, who appeared Saturday at the Beacon Theater, had her first major hit in the early 70's with a Scottish folk song, ''The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face,'' arranged as a semiclassical dirge.


Rick's Cafe to Open On Repertory Stage In the Catskills
LEAD: For a few weeks this summer, a rustic enclave in the hills above this Catskill town will be transformed into wartime Morocco, and one can be certain that in the neighborhood taverns down the road, more than a few glasses will be lifted with a wink and the admonition, ''Here's looking at you, kid.''


EMHART CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMHART CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
629,000,000
527,900,000
Net inc
b28,800,000
20,900,000
Share earns
.92
.71
Shares outst
31,400,000
29,500,000
6mo rev
1,231,600,000
1,037,500,000
Net inc
b56,800,000
40,000,000
Share earns
1.82
1.39
Shares outst
31,200,000
28,700,000


Rockaway Dump Must Be Shut Down for Good
LEAD: To the Editor:


PEOPLES HERITAGE BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES HERITAGE BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,701,000
c3,097,000
Per share
.51
-
6mo net
b9,399,000
c5,627,000
Per share
1.02
-
b-Includes gains from securities of $891,000 for the quarter and $1,554,000 for the six months.


Now France at Irangate
LEAD: France in its turn is learning the wages of trying to make what Ollie North called a ''neat'' deal with Ayatollah Khomeini's Iran.
Relations have now been broken and the French are hunkering down against the possibility of reprisals that could come anywhere - against French diplomats in Teheran, hostages in Lebanon, ships in the Persian Gulf or in


Man, 65, at Center of Court Case In Jersey on 'Right to Die' Is Dead
LEAD: Murray Putzer, a 65-year-old stroke victim whose feeding tube was withdrawn 10 days ago at his insistence, died Thursday afternoon at his home in West Caldwell, N.J., the family's lawyer disclosed yesterday.


PRESIDENT MAY SEEK MORE CONTRA AID
LEAD: White House officials said today that, partly based on public response to the Iran-contra hearings, the Administration was convinced that President Reagan now had a stronger case to seek more aid for Nicaraguan insurgents.


NANTUCKET INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NANTUCKET INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Sales
15,714,064
12,864,292
Net loss
26,798
b271,643
Share earns
-
.10


Greenspan Talent Search
LEAD: Townsend-Greenspan &amp; Company, the economic consulting firm owned by Alan Greenspan, would be dissolved if a well-known economist is not found by midweek to replace Mr.
Greenspan, who has been nominated to be chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.


RESEARCH INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RESEARCH INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,896,400
5,016,300
Net inc
157,300
262,700
Share earns
.10
.16
9mo sales
15,180,000
13,798,600
Net inc
665,200
226,200
Share earns
.40
.16


TV Networks Resume Rotation on Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 9 A.M. on the ABC television network under the network rotation system.
The hearings will also be televised on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New


ZIEGLER CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZIEGLER CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,931,000
7,686,000
Net inc
1,542,000
1,143,000
Share earns
.46
.34
6mo rev
17,904,000
13,439,000
Net inc
2,323,000
1,689,000
Share earns
.70
.50


Pennzoil Plan Will Seek $4.1 Billion From Texaco
LEAD: The Pennzoil Company plans to file a proposal today in Bankruptcy Court that would allow it to submit a reorganization plan under which Texaco Inc. would pay Pennzoil $4.1 billion.


A.T.&amp;T. Unit to Get Japan Job
LEAD: A subsidiary of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company will be awarded a contract next month to research communications systems for Japan's second major international airport, a spokesman for the Kansai International Airport said Friday.


Israel to Shift Policy on Tourists After Complaints of Harassment
LEAD: Israel, responding to complaints about official harassment of black and Palestinian-American tourists, plans some changes that may make it easier for the tourists, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said today.


Miss Kenworthy Wed To T. R. Dyer in Seattle
LEAD: Lise Kenworthy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nelson Atlee Kenworthy of Colonia, N.J., was married yesterday to Thomas Ralph Dyer, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Dyer of Astoria, Ore.
The Revs.
Craig Rennebohm and Michael Litaker, United Church of Christ ministers, performed the ceremony at the Pilgrim Congregational Church in


CONSUMER PLASTICS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSUMER PLASTICS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,600,000
8,600,000
Net inc
881,678
379,669
Share earns
.20
.11
Shares outst
4,400,000
3,500,000
6mo sales
20,900,000
16,200,000
Net inc
1,326,152
569,632
Share earns
.30
.16


Plainfield: Compact, but Complicated
LEAD: The Plainfield Country Club, where the United States Women's Open will begin Thursday, ranks as one of the best courses in New Jersey, which boasts as many outstanding courses as any state.


SPELMAN'S COLLEGE'S FIRST 'SISTER PRESIDENT'
LEAD: Arrayed above the fireplace in the formal dining room of the president's residence at Spelman College in Atlanta are the pictures of four white women and two black men, the first six presidents of the institution during its 106 years of existence. ''And then there's the blank space for me -there where the nail in the wall is,'' said Dr.


CRAWFORD &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRAWFORD &amp; CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
65,219,000
60,887,000
Net inc
3,860,000
3,725,000
Share earns
.33
.32
6mo rev
131,114,000
119,702,000
Net inc
8,100,000
7,329,000
Share earns
.69
.63


ROBERT A. OLSON
LEAD: Robert A. Olson, a soil scientists and teacher, died Saturday of injuries suffered in a car accident.
He was 70 years old.


Off-Duty Officer Stabbed in Dispute
LEAD: An off-duty Port Authority police officer was stabbed and seriously wounded yesterday by two men after a dispute in an elevator in the Polo Grounds housing project in upper Manhattan, the police said.


Social Democrats Win Elections in Portugal
LEAD: Prime Minister Anibal Cavaco Silva cutting a victory cake at his party's headquarters in Lisbon early today after they won the Portuguese national elections.
The victory gave the country its first government with a clear majority since democracy was restored in 1974.
Page A3. (AP)


Words . . . Stop . . . Lots of Words
LEAD: His bosses don't object that Joseph W. Seaman works near a television set tuned in to the Iran-contra hearings.
Somebody might say something that could prompt Americans to send telegrams of support or criticism, and Mr.
Seaman's officemates would be up to their ears in work again.


NEW GUARDIAN OF FIRE ISLAND'S SHORE
LEAD: From Alaska to the Virgin Islands, Noel J. Pachta has proven a successful mediator between man and Mother Nature.
As the new superintendent of the Fire Island National Seashore, however, he faces some of his toughest bargaining ever.


IN BASEBALL, THE RUSSIANS STEAL ALL THE BASES
LEAD: Consider the predicament of a Soviet baseball writer.
How do you explain to red-blooded Russians that Soviet athletes have suddenly taken up the American national pastime?


CROWD SEIZES CRIME SUSPECT
LEAD: A robbery suspect was arrested on the Upper West Side yesterday after several passers-by and a man he is said to have slashed across the forehead chased and captured him, the police said.


Cerone Takes to Mound
LEAD: The evening began with Lou Piniella, the manager of the Yankees, explaining that Dennis Rasmussen had been sent to the minors because of the limited work offered to those in the Yankee bullpen.
The laughter began with Rick Cerone on the mound.
In a move to relieve the relievers, Cerone pitched in a professional game for the first time in the eighth inning of the 20-3 loss to Texas.


White House Humor
LEAD: One school of thought in the White House is that humor can counteract the effect of daily disclosures in the Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair.


Parade Marks Captive Nations Week
LEAD: Sabahat Kwaja with her son, Babur, 2 1/2 years old, outside St.
Patrick's Cathedral yesterday as they waited to join a parade up Fifth Avenue to Central Park for a rally.
They were wearing the native dress of their homeland, Turkestan.
The event has been held annually since 1959, when Congress designated the third week of July as a time to remember once-independent countries that are now under Soviet rule.


GORMAN-RUPP COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GORMAN-RUPP COMPANY (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
17,320,000
17,238,000
Net inc
1,550,000
1,665,000
Share earns
.40
.42
6mo sales
33,303,000
33,452,000
Net inc
2,478,000
2,667,000
Share earns
.64
.68


FRANCE STEPS UP SECURITY IN ITS IRAN RIFT
LEAD: France today stepped up security measures around the world for its ships, planes and armed forces as it braced for a long confrontation in the war of nerves with Iran.


BOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  MARY SHELLEY: A Biography.
By Muriel Spark.
Illustrated. 248 pages.
A William Abrahams Book/Dutton. $19.95.


Mets' Lineup Changes Pay Off
LEAD: He wasn't exactly reaching for the panic button, but Davey Johnson shuffled the Mets' lineup yesterday, anointed Darryl Strawberry as his new cleanup hitter over Gary Carter and said, ''For us to come back in the second half, we've got to get everything we can from Darryl.''


GREAT LAKES BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT LAKES BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,400,000
6,300,000
Per share
1.12
1.62
6mon net
11,100,000
12,900,000
Per share
2.83
3.30
b-After a writeoff of its share of the FSLIC's secondary reserve of $1 million, or 26 cents a share.


Arthur Young Audit Faulted
LEAD: A California jury has found the accounting firm Arthur Young &amp; Company ''professionally negligent'' in its audits of the Osborne Computer Corporation, which is now defunct.


RULING PARTY IN PORTUGAL WINS CLEAR MAJORITY
LEAD: The governing Social Democratic Party was swept back into office in national elections today with a large increase in its popular vote, giving Portugal its first majority Government since the establishment of democracy in 1974.


MILLER, HERMAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MILLER, HERMAN INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Sales
160,110,000
134,834,000
Net inc
9,072,000
7,688,000
Share earns
.37
.31
Yr sales
573,520,000
531,640,000
Net inc
33,265,000
37,818,000
Share earns
1.35
1.53


Summer Homeless
LEAD: To the Editor:


PHILIPS INDUSTRIES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILIPS INDUSTRIES LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
173,337,000
152,882,000
Net inc
14,280,000
10,409,000
Share earns
.50
.37


Lady Rama Rau Dies at 94; Led Family Planning in India
LEAD: Lady Rama Rau, a pioneer of family planning in India and a leader of the world family planning movement, died of kidney failure Sunday in a hospital in Bombay, India, her daughter said.
She was 94 years old.


Mattingly And Yanks Thwarted
LEAD: Don Mattingly had the most unsatisfying 2-for-4 game of his career tonight.


Immigration Amnesty Won't Alter America
LEAD: To the Editor:


PROGRAMMING &amp; SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROGRAMMING &amp; SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,301,675
3,386,212
Net inc
819,646
652,484
Share earns
.46
.37


A Pit Bull Attacks An Off-Duty Officer
LEAD: An off-duty police officer was attacked by a pit bull early yesterday morning in the basement of a Bronx apartment building.


FLOODS AND LANDSLIDES KILL 14 IN ITALY
LEAD: Torrential rains unleashed floods and landslides across a swath of northern Italy this weekend, killing at least 14 people and isolating dozens of Alpine villages, civil defense authorities said today.


FAMILY MUTUAL SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAMILY MUTUAL SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,115,000
1,024,000
Per share
.30
-
6mo net inc
2,461,000
1,918,000
Per share
.66
-
The bank converted to stock ownership in November.


Stage: Ayckbourn's 'Bedroom Farce'
LEAD: ONE of the pleasures of an Alan Ayckbourn play is watching a peculiar situation grow inexorably and often hilariously out of control.
In ''Bedroom Farce,'' for example, now enlivening the Interart Theater, a young, unclothed hostess finds herself trapped under a mound of her guests' overcoats.
A man, immobilized with a bad back, has to reach a book that has fallen to the floor.


AIDS DRAMA TRIES TO REACH YOUNG
LEAD: When CBS-TV began production of ''An Enemy Among Us,'' a drama about a teen-ager who contracts AIDS from a blood transfusion, it was intended as an afternoon ''Schoolbreak Special.''


FIDELITY FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN OF TENNESSEE reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIDELITY FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN OF TENNESSEE (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,867,000
b2,537,000
Share earns
.53
-
b-Includes a credit of $685,000 from tax loss carryforwards.
Year-ago share earnings aren't available because the company went public Sept.


CARPENTER UNION OFFICIAL IS LINKED TO EXTORTION PLOT
LEAD: Allegations that a high-level carpenters' union official extorted more than $200,000 from contractors have been presented to a New York State grand jury that is hearing evidence about widespread corruption in Manhattan's construction industry, according to law-enforcement investigators.


Food for Thought
LEAD: ''Murderburgers'': That's what students called the chopped beef, half-frozen or charred, routinely served up in New York City school cafeterias.
And the cafeterias' reputation for inedible food - students' names for fish and various stews are unfit to print - drove youngsters to patronize junk-food outlets near schools.


MUSIC: TCHAIKOVSKY NIGHT
LEAD: Tchaikovsky's gifts to music are great, though we have been less kind to him in return.
The beautifully played evening of his music Saturday night at the Caramoor Festival witnessed both our gratitude for his generosity and, perhaps, our abuse of it, as well.


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: * Anchor Hocking Co. Food Service Division to Campbell-Mithun, Chicago.


R.O.T.C., SHUNNED NO MORE, GROWS INCREASINGLY SELECTIVE
LEAD: The Army's Reserve Officer Training Corps, having recovered from its post-Vietnam enrollment slump, has become far more selective in commissioning new officers and calling them to active duty - to the dismay of some student cadets.


Advertising; D.M.B.&amp;B. Is the Choice Of California Sea World
LEAD: Sea World of California has selected D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles of Los Angeles to handle its $4 million account.


Manville Plan Clears Hurdle
LEAD: The Manville Corporation's reorganization plan cleared another important hurdle Friday when a Federal judge denied an appeal by common stockholders, who contended they were inadequately represented during bankruptcy proceedings.


Triumph for Blacks' Bakery
LEAD: When 2.15 million shares of Lebowa Bakeries Ltd. start trading here on Wednesday, it will mark the first time a black-controlled company has been listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Advanced Polymer Systems Inc., Redwood City, Calif., a maker of plastic pill capsules, has named John H. Williford president, chief executive officer and a director.


BIOSENSOR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOSENSOR CORP
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
261,241
302,079
Net loss
93,725
66,296
Yr sales
1,169,267
767,116
Net loss
244,454
534,011


KAMAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAMAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
173,337,000
143,040,000
Net inc
5,946,000
5,109,000
Share earns
.54
.47
6mo rev
342,896,000
286,310,000
Net inc
11,435,000
9,897,0000
Share earns
1.04
.91


Comsat Reorganization
LEAD: The Communications Satellite Corporation said Friday that it would dispose of its manufacturing operations and its two direct-broadcast satellites and that it would restructure the remaining operations.
The reorganization will result in a charge of $90 million against second-quarter earnings, the company said.


CENTRAL FIDELITY BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL FIDELITY BANKS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
11,814,000
10,688,000
Per share
.75
.70
6mo net inc
23,388,000
20,445,000
Per share
1.49
1.41


U.S. Debt Limit Threatens Auctions
LEAD: Because Congress has not yet raised the Federal debt ceiling, this week's Treasury bill and note auctions might be disrupted.


Bridge; Two Major Team Titles Won In Play at Summer Nationals
LEAD: Two major team titles were decided here Saturday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals, and there were three groups of winners.


LEXICON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEXICON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,121,632
3,449,458
Net loss
609,853
664,272
9mo rev
13,961,235
8,671,201
Net inc
4,189,456
b1,769,318
Share earns
.57
-


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Jack Clark of the St.
Louis Cardinals had 86 runs batted in before last week's All-Star Game.
Is that the most a player has ever had before the midseason break?


Wilander Beats Heat, Carlsson
LEAD: Mats Wilander of Sweden, breaking service four times in a shaky first set, outlasted the heat and his countryman Kent Carlsson for the second straight week and won the United States Clay Court Championships today, 7-5, 6-3.


GRAINGER, W W INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAINGER, W W INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
345,263,000
298,521,000
Net inc
24,171,000
18,823,000
Share earns
.84
.65
6mo sales
632,047,000
559,115,000
Net inc
43,169,000
b46,337,000
Share earns
1.49
1.59


GRACO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRACO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
58,849,000
61,051,000
Net inc
3,018,000
3,839,000
Share earns
.51
.63
6mo sales
112,831,000
111,383,000
Net inc
5,446,000
6,490,000
Share earns
.91
1.08


Old Roads, New Names
LEAD: The changing of the names of city streets is not always met with universal favor.
Page B2. (NYT/Don Hogan Charles)


Black Is Miss Mississippi
LEAD: A 22-year-old graduate of Mississippi University for Women has become the first black to be crowned Miss Mississippi.
Toni Seawright of Moss Point won the state pageant Saturday night and will represent Mississippi in the Miss America contest in Atlantic City in September. ''I'm glad I made history,'' Miss Seawright said after being crowned.


Postal Service Resumes Talks With 2 Unions
LEAD: Bargaining between the Postal Service and its two largest unions resumed today following a four-day impasse.


ISIDORE LEVIN
LEAD: Isidore Levine, a former Family Court judge appointed by Mayor John V. Lindsay, died of a heart attack Friday at Long Island Jewish Hospital in Queens.
He lived in Flushing, Queens, and was 75 years old.


C.I.A. Reaffirms It Will Make No Senior Personnel Shifts
LEAD: William Webster, the Director of Central Intelligence, will abide by his previously stated plans to make no decisions on personnel changes before the inquiries into the Iran-contra affair are completed, a C.I.A. spokeswoman said today.


STAGE: ROBERT WILSON'S 'DEAFMAN'
LEAD: LINCOLN CENTER'S two-week program of Serious Fun! got off to a seriously gloomy start Friday night, when Robert Wilson brought a two-night engagement of ''Overture to the Fourth Act of Deafman Glance'' to Alice Tully Hall.
Even audiences who know better than to seek levity from the apocalypse-minded Mr.


Two Charged With Assaulting Georgia Civil Rights Marcher
LEAD: Two brothers were arrested here today and charged with assaulting a civil rights marcher in January, the most serious charges to result from two violent demonstrations in this all-white community.


LOUISIANA EXECUTES MURDERER AS APPEALS ARE TURNED DOWN
LEAD: Willie Lawrence Celestine, who confessed he beat, raped and strangled an 81-year-old woman six years ago was put to death early this morning in the Louisiana electric chair.


In London, an Old Craft Keeps Heads in Fashion
LEAD: Horse riders and racegoers might have more in common than they suspect when they gather at the Goodwood racecourse in West Sussex at the end of July for ''Glorious Goodwood,'' an informally elegant meet that is prized for its lovely country setting and special English ambiance.
Notes will doubtless be compared on hunts, jumps and horse hands.


CTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CTS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
65,136,000
58,286,000
Net inc
b2,483,000
c2,686,000
Share earns
.44
-
6mo sales
127,500,000
117,875,000
Net inc
b4,454,000
d4,804,000
Share earns
.79
.85


Metro Matters; For Attendants, Poverty at Home And on the Job
LEAD: ''I had a client once, I brought her sheets from my own house,'' Odessa Powell remembered. ''She was a diabetic who collected S.S.I., and her boyfriend would take her check and buy his supply of vodka for a month and give her whatever money he wanted her to have.
She was sleeping on just a mattress.


18-Year-Old Drowns At Amusement Park
LEAD: An 18-year-old youth drowned at an amusement park attraction here yesterday, the authorities said.


SPYING AT THE MOSCOW EMBASSY: A CASE AGAINST THE ACCUSERS
LEAD: Late in the afternoon of March 20, in a motel room on the edge of California's Mojave Desert, on the third and most grueling day of his interrogation, a 21-year-old Marine corporal flanked by two Navy investigators began scrawling his signature on page after page of a confession they had placed before him.


Spouses Who Ask Too Much
LEAD: WHAT Kate Buckley, a 38-year-old New York City executive, remembers most about her 10-year marriage is the social obligations and household chores her husband expected her to handle.


AMY CARTER IS REPORTED DISMISSED FROM COLLEGE
LEAD: Amy Carter, the daughter of Jimmy Carter, has been dismissed from Brown University for failing to keep up with her course work, The Providence Journal reported Saturday.
She is a sophomore.


Caren Herman Married
LEAD: At Temple Sinai in Forest Hills, Queens, yesterday Caren Herman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Riback of Forest Hills, was married to Laurence Zucker, a son of Selma Zucker Hofher of Flushing, Queens, and the late Harry Zucker.
Rabbi Jay Rosenbaum officiated.
The bride is a broadcast traffic supervisor at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton, an advertising agency in New York.


COMMERCE UNION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCE UNION CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
11,542,213
10,073,935
Per share
.64
.59
6mo net inc
22,909,312
19,084,187
Per share
1.29
1.16


Opera: Britten's 'Midsummer Night'
LEAD: Benjamin Britten's operas are, on the whole, the best extant in the English language, and ought to be in regular repertory with all American companies.
But - being British and being difficult - they are not quite ''ours'' in the way that vintage Broadway musicals are.
The Chautauqua Opera production of ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' on


WISCONSIN POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WISCONSIN POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
555,984,000
587,284,000
Net inc
60,402,000
60,188,000
Share earns
4.28
4.25


HOUSING NEEDS WILL GET WORSE, STUDY PREDICTS
LEAD: Unless major new initiatives are begun, New York City by the year 2000 is likely to need 372,000 housing units more than it will have, a report released yesterday concludes.


15 Passengers Are Hurt In Landing in Panama
LEAD: At least 15 passengers aboard an Eastern Airlines jet suffered minor injuries after the landing gear collapsed moments after the plane arrived in Panama City, spokesmen for the carrier said yesteday.


RESERVE INDUSTRIES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RESERVE INDUSTRIES CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
729,620
1,361,427
Net loss
856,847
279,393
9mo rev
3,060,621
2,674,505
Net loss
1,739,763
506,622


SOME IN CONGRESS EXPRESS SUPPORT ON PARDONS FOR EX-REAGAN AIDES
LEAD: A prominent Republican Senator on the Iran-contra committees said today that he would support a Presidential pardon for both Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter before any possible criminal prosecution was announced.


GALLAGHER, ARTHUR J &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GALLAGHER, ARTHUR J &amp; CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
29,295,000
26,688,000
Net inc
2,722,000
2,460,000
Share earns
.25
.23
6mo rev
34,150,000
32,162,000
Net inc
6,167,000
6,933,000
Share earns
.56
.63


Ex-Rep. Dominick V. Daniels; Held Jersey Seat in Congress
LEAD: Dominick Vincent Daniels, a former Representative from New Jersey who wielded much power over education and labor legislation until he retired in 1976 after 18 years in Congress, died Friday at Christ Hospital in Jersey City after a long illness.
He was 78 years old and lived in Union City, N.J.


U.S. IS IN DECLINE, NICARAGUAN SAYS
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said today that the Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair showed ''the decomposition of the so-called democracy in the United States.''


Coffin to Leave Riverside Church to Head Disarmament Group
LEAD: The Rev.
William Sloane Coffin announcing from his pulpit that he will soon leave the congregation to head a Washington-based disarmament group called SANE/Freeze. ''Leaving Riverside is like leaving home,'' he said. ''One doesn't like to leave home, but one has to.'' Page B3. (NYT/Chester Higgins


SINGAPORE DETAINS THREE MORE
LEAD: The Government of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew detained for a year without trial today three more young Singaporeans accused of being involved in a Marxist conspiracy.


HARTFORD NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARTFORD NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b25,504,000
27,903,000
Per share
.61
.70
6mo net
55,818,000
51,356,000
Per share
1.35
1.34
b-After adding an additional $8 million to its reserves for loans to developing countries, and an additional $2 million as a resreve against an investment in Allied International Corp., in which the company has a one-twelfth interest.


Tribute to Lopez, Finally
LEAD: Nancy Lopez qualified for the Ladies Professional Golf Association Hall of Fame on Feb. 8 when she won her 35th career tournament.
But her induction was put on hold.


HOME FEDERAL FLORIDA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME FEDERAL FLORIDA (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,477,000
3,218,000
Per share
.77
.71
Yr net inc
13,021,000
12,095,000
Per share
2.88
2.80


15TH PRESIDENT INSTALLED AT DARTMOUTH
LEAD: Dartmouth College yesterday inaugurated a president who used his first official speech to set a new tone for the college, which is known in the Ivy League for strong school spirit and adherence to tradition.


NOW LEADER: BORN FEMINIST - MOLLY YARD
LEAD: Molly Yard, who was elected Saturday to guide the National Organization for Women through politically critical times, described herself today as a born feminist and the spiritual descendant of Eleanor Roosevelt.


FAMILY AND FRIENDS MOURN VICTIMS OF SWOLLEN TEXAS RIVER
LEAD: A clergyman told 300 mourners squeezed into a small church today that ''God has opened his arms'' to teen-agers killed Friday by a flash flood that engulfed them while they were away at a church summer camp.


Philadelphia Hours Set
LEAD: The Philadelphia Stock Exchange said, it would begin trading currency options in the evening in mid-September.
The extra session would run from 7 P.M. to 11 P.M.
Sunday through Thursday.


GANDHI OUSTS A LEADING CRITIC, A RIVAL, FROM THE RULING PARTY
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi tonight dismissed Vishwanath Pratap Singh, the former Finance Minister who has emerged as a potential rival, from the governing Congress Party, a move that is likely to have far-reaching repercussions on Indian politics.


Faldo Wins Open
LEAD: Nick Faldo of England, who turned 30 Saturday, today received the finest gift a golfer could imagine when Paul Azinger of the United States, who led by three shots at the turn, virtually handed over the 116th British Open title.


COLONIAL AMERICAN BANKHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLONIAL AMERICAN BANKHARES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
727,000
611,000
Per share
.48
.40
6mo net inc
1,521,000
1,215,000
Per share
1.00
.80


Connecticut Wedding For Sandra Greenstein
LEAD: At Congregation Mishkan Israel in Hamden, Conn., Sandra Hope Greenstein, a daughter of Mrs.
Herbert Hershenson of Woodbridge, Conn., and George Greenstein of Hamden, was married yesterday to Dr.
David Goodkind, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Goodkind of Roslyn, L.I.


A Liberal Group Makes Waves With Its Contra Lawsuit
LEAD: In a drab row house within sight of Capitol Hill, a team of lawyers and researchers are conducting another investigation of clandestine pro-contra activities that is attracting its own share of publicity.


DATAPRODUCTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATAPRODUCTS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Revenue
77,424,000
84,448,000
Net inc
335,000
2,513,000
Share earns
.02
.12
The company said because of a temporary decrease in line printer shipments and the termination of the discontinued accounts receivable programs, which previously had been classified as revenue.


Storer May Sell Cable TV Unit
LEAD: Storer Communications Inc., which is controlled by the New York investment firm Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, said Friday that it was considering the sale of its cable television operation, the nation's fourth largest.


Fellini Film Wins Prize At Moscow Festival
LEAD: ''The Interview,'' a film by Federico Fellini about a day in the life of a movie studio, won the grand prize Friday at the 15th Moscow Film Festival.


Clark's Homers Power Cards to Victory
LEAD: Jack Clark hit two home runs today, including a tie-breaking shot in the top of the 10th, to lead the St.
Louis Cardinals to a 5-4 victory over the San Diego Padres.


Birdie on 18th Gives Geddes a Victory
LEAD: Jane Geddes, the defending champion, sank a 4-foot birdie putt on the 18th hole today to beat Donna White and Judy Rosenthal by one stroke in the $300,000 Boston Five Classic.


DIEBOLD INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIEBOLD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
106,287,000
98,809,000
Net inc
8,131,000
7,557,000
Share earns
.62
.58
6mo sales
210,216,000
203,370,000
Net inc
14,670,000
17,707,000
Share earns
1.11
1.35


Jacob Kaplan, Philanthropist, Is Dead
LEAD: Jacob Merrill Kaplan, a merchant and self-made financier who shared his wealth to become one of New York's foremost philanthropists, with beneficiaries ranging the gamut of worthy causes, died Saturday at his Manhattan home.
He was 95 years old and also kept a home in East Hampton, L.I.


SAFEGUARD HEALTH ENTERRISES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAFEGUARD HEALTH ENTERRISES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,421,000
15,867,000
Net inc
740,000
569,000
Share earns
.10
.07
6mo rev
33,930,000
30,449,000
Net inc
1,299,000
936,000
Share earns
.17
.12


VARCO INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VARCO INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,590,000
11,902,000
Net loss
2,532,000
2,910,000
6mo rev
15,418,000
26,959,000
Net loss
4,655,000
2,842,000


Barbara C. Todd Is Married to David A. Heiner Jr.
LEAD: Barbara Carrie Todd, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Todd of Sarasota, Fla., was married yesterday to David Allen Heiner Jr., a son of Nancy Ann Heiner of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., and Mr.
Heiner of Greenwood Lake, N.Y.
Msgr.
Edward T. Kavin performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Gabriel the Archangel in Saddle River, N


Assessing the Odds of AIDS Infection
LEAD: To the Editor:


Twins Defeat Jays Behind Schatzeder
LEAD: Dan Schatzeder pitched three and two-thirds innings of shutout relief and Tom Brunansky hit a homer and singled to drive in three runs today to lead the Minnesota Twins to a 7-6 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays.


NEW ENGLAND SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW ENGLAND SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,314,080
1,465,518
Share earns
.29
-
6mo net
5,813,012
3,760,372
Share earns
.73
-
The bank converted to stock ownership last August.


Red Square, Just Off Wall St.
LEAD: ''When you live among wolves, you must howl like a wolf,'' Lenin wrote in 1921, justifying business partnerships with the ''imperialist bandits'' of the West as indispensable to Russia's economic resurrection from the ravages of revolution and war.


New HBO Pressure On No. 2 Showtime
LEAD: When Home Box Office announced last week that it had won the coveted rights to 85 films from Paramount Pictures, the big question was not whether the deal would hurt Showtime, HBO's archrival in pay-television movies, but how badly.


Motivation Keys Pitino Game Plan
LEAD: RICK PITINO is no different from most other headstrong young coaches intent upon changing the world.
Like many of them, he draws his inspiration, his motivation and even some of his techniques from some successful predecessor.


Horse Racing; WISLA EXTENDS HER STREAK
LEAD: A sensational favorite and an implausible long shot won stakes races for sprinting fillies yesterday at Belmont Park.


FRISCH'S RESTAURANTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRISCH'S RESTAURANTS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
33,240,097
31,608,822
Net inc
999,809
1,592,058
Share earns
.20
.34
Yr sales
139,822,651
131,157,555
Net inc
2,823,705
3,322,770
Share earns
.58
.68


NBD BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NBD BANCORP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b15,422,000
41,865,000
Per share
.33
.96
6mo net
63,552,000
84,631,000
Per share
1.34
1.93
b-After an after-tax reduction of $32.4 million, or 69 cents per share, due to the company's increase of $54 million in its provision for possible credit losses.


INSIDE
LEAD:  France-Iran Tensions Rise


City Opera: 'La Rondine' Is Revived
LEAD: THE New York City Opera revival of ''La Rondine'' is worth a visit, but be prepared for frustration if by chance you know and love this bittersweet, subtly fragile sister of the more familiar Puccini operas.


FLORIDA STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA STEEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
104,274,193
91,273,218
Net inc
5,113,017
5,726,262
Share earns
.85
.95
9mo sales
267,296,159
232,253,100
Net inc
12,058,811
b9,613,639
Share earns
2.00
1.60


South Africa Crash Kills 10
LEAD: Ten people died in a collision between a small bus and a truck carrying gasoline, the South African Broadcasting Corporation reported today.
The radio said the bus, carrying 14 people, crashed into the truck in Kwamashu, near Durban on the southeastern coast Saturday.


YANKEES SEND RASMUSSEN DOWN
LEAD: Dennis Rasmussen, whose 18 victories for the Yankees last season was tied for the fourth-highest total in the American League, was sent to the Columbus farm club today.
His spot on the roster was taken by Dan Pasqua, who was scheduled to be in the starting lineup tonight against Texas before his flight was delayed.


Reagan and His Ranch
LEAD: President Reagan is planning his annual summer visit to his California ranch, in the Santa Ynez mountains overlooking the Pacific Ocean.
Last summer the President spent three weeks there.
This time he will extend that a bit, leaving Washington Aug. 13 and returning 24 days later, on Sept. 6.
Mr.
Reagan last visited his ranch at Easter, and White House officials say that in itself more than justifies the ''extended'' break this summer.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Boxing  Ramirez Regains Lightweight Title: Jose-Luis Ramirez of Mexico regained the World Boxing Council lightweight title last night in Saint-Tropez, France, winning a unanimous 12-round decision over Terrence Alli of Guyana.
The victory gave Ramirez the title that he held from November 1984 to August 1985, but lost to Hector (Macho) Camacho.


The Anti-Drug Drive
LEAD: Meanwhile, the Reagan Administration, aided by private industry, is linking its anti-drug campaign to the start of school in the fall.
On Wednesday its chief spokesman against drug use, Nancy Reagan, will lead a White House forum that starts a campaign to persuade 10 million schoolchildren to sign ''just say no'' pledge cards before school starts.


McCrory Chief Said to Weigh Quitting Over Rift
LEAD: Stephen L. Pistner, whose annual remuneration of $2.5 million makes him one of the highest-paid retailers in the nation, may soon resign as chairman and chief executive of the McCrory Corporation, the giant variety-store chain, according to executives close to the company.


DOMINION RESOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOMINION RESOURCES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
745,000,000
685,000,000
Net inc
76,000,000
65,000,000
Share earns
.80
.71


Saxophones Speak in Hemphill's 'Long Tongues'
LEAD: The Bohemian Caverns, a club in Washington, heard a good stretch of black American music - from the 40's, when it was the Crystal Caverns, the capital's equivalent of the Cotton Club, to the 60's.


Advertising; Honors for Dailey Head In Anti-Drug Effort
LEAD: Philip Joanou, the chairman and chief executive of Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, will be recognized for developing the concept for the advertising industry's anti-drug campaign.
On Thursday he will accept one of the 1987 Awards for Private Sector Initiatives from President Reagan.


CANCER SOCIETY RECONSIDERS PLAN TO LEAVE NEW YORK TO CUT RENT
LEAD: The American Cancer Society is reconsidering its decision to move its headquarters from New York City and, in search of cheaper rents, is looking at buildings in the city, as well as Westchester and New Jersey.


Defeat of Curry Changes the Picture
LEAD: Forget Mike Tyson.
If Mike McCallum's lightning-stroke victory over Donald Curry here Saturday for the World Boxing Association junior middleweight title was any indication, the real action in boxing over the next year is likely to be in the middle-range weight classes.


BAIRNCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAIRNCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
156,447,000
147,285,000
Net inc
7,461,000
5,563,000
Share earns
.71
.54
Shares outst
10,563,000
10,220,000
6mo sales
312,007,000
282,164,000
Net inc
13,212,000
9,303,000
Share earns
1.26
.91
Shares outst
10,471,000
10,191,000


Outdoors; The Case for Handlines
LEAD: THE handline is to the saltwater angler as the cane pole is to his freshwater counterpart, an utterly simple item of equipage that for certain kinds of fishing is as efficient and as much fun to use as the most expensive rod and reel.


ADAMS-MILLIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADAMS-MILLIS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
46,010,000
39,609,000
Net inc
1,142,000
1,191,000
Share earns
.24
.26
6mo sales
89,710,000
66,474,000
Net inc
2,180,000
1,941,000
Share earns
.46
.42


Advertising; Xerox Billings Given to Lowe
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation is switching about $25 million in billings to Lowe Marschalk, from Ted Bates Advertising, which last week became Backer Spielvogel Bates.
A Xerox spokesman said that the switch was on the fire before the merger.


COFFIN RESIGNS TO PRAISE AND CRITICISM
LEAD: There were tears and tributes - and one or two hurrahs - yesterday as the Rev.
William Sloane Coffin stepped up to the pulpit of the Riverside Church and announced his resignation as the senior minister.
Dr.
Coffin said he would work full time for nuclear disarmament.


LSB BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LSB BANCSHARES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
919,000
878,000
Per share
.57
.54
6mo net
1,822,000
1,730,000
Per share
1.12
1.07
Per share figures have been restated to reflect a 10 percent stock dividend paid in June.


SUMMER DOLDRUMS MIGHT END
LEAD: The languor that has characterized interest rate movements for the last month might be shaken from credit markets this week, if only momentarily.


LO-JACK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LO-JACK CORP
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
598,443
-
Net loss
31,114
764,817
Year-ago revenue figures are not available because the company did not have products on the market at that time.


Making Layoffs Less Harsh
LEAD: Should employers be required to give advance notice of mass layoffs?
This innocent-sounding question put Big Labor and Big Business at each other's throats in the Senate; the wrestling continues in the House.
If the two sides would only shed their ideological rigidity, they'd see a workable compromise in Senator Metzenbaum's modified proposal.


Jerseyans Can Adopt Streams
LEAD: To improve water quality, the state of New Jersey has instituted a program allowing residents to ''adopt'' lakes, streams, rivers - and even sections of the Atlantic Ocean.


JEFFERIES GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERIES GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
34,285,000
40,162,000
Net inc
1,646,000
3,744,000
Share earns
.21
.46
6mo rev
75,937,000
77,647,000
Net inc
5,209,000
6,616,000
Share earns
.66
.80


Advertising; Dairy Accounts Shuffled
LEAD: THE National Dairy Board in Arlington, Va., will move its cheese-promotion account to DDB Needham Worldwide of Chicago, from D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles of Chicago, and its children's milk-promotion account to Scali, McCabe, Sloves of New York, from McCann-Erickson of San Francisco.


UNITED CAROLINA BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED CAROLINA BANCSHARES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,935,000
4,635,000
Per share
.71
.67
6mo net inc
9,974,000
9,521,000
Per share
1.44
1.37
Prior year figures are restated.


Carol J. Weil Wed To David Medine
LEAD: Carol Juliet Weil, an associate in the Indianapolis law firm of Baker &amp; Daniels, and David Medine, an associate professor of law at Indiana University, were married yesterday at the Beverly Hills, Calif., home of the bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Max Harry Weil.
Professor Medine's parents are Ruth Medine of New York and the late Dr.


Toshiba Caught Between Tokyo and Washington
LEAD: To the Editor:


ASSEMBLY SPEAKER IS SUSPENDING FIGHT WITH CUOMO
LEAD: Assembly Speaker Mel Miller, whose efforts to bypass Governor Cuomo and assert the State Legislature's dominance set off a bitter six-month power struggle, indicated yesterday that he had suspended the fight, saying he would reach out more to the Governor.


DIVERSCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIVERSCO INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,757,612
7,336,842
Net inc
229,944
b184,408
Share earns
.20
.24
b-Includes a $1,000 loss from discontinued operations and a tax credit of $9,531.


Man, Struck in Head In a Park Fight, Dies
LEAD: A Bronx man died yesterday after he was struck on the head, apparently with a pipe, during a dispute with four men in Bronx Park, the police said.


STANDARD FEDERAL BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD FEDERAL BANK (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b15,848,000
c29,438,000
Per share
.52
-
6mo net inc
b39,497,000
c70,083,000
Per share
1.35
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $241,000 and $10,964,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, and for the 6 months also includes a prepayment penalty of $358,000.


DENNISON MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DENNISON MANUFACTURING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
174,739,000
173,837,000
Net inc
7,821,000
7,039,000
Share earns
.50
.45
6mo sales
349,761,000
337,210,000
Net inc
b15,326,000
11,050,000
Share earns
.97
.71


Rainier's Chief Resigns Posts
LEAD: G. Robert Truex Jr. has resigned as chairman and chief executive of the Rainier Bancorporation.
The company's president, John D. Mangels, will take over those posts, while Jon Christoffersen, president of the Rainier Bank subsidiary, will become president of the holding company as well.


Schoenberg Scorings Set for Viennese Series
LEAD: Several American premieres of chamber works transcribed in the early 1900's by the composer Arnold Schoenberg will be included in the programs of a four-part Viennese series beginning Sept. 12 at 8 P.M. in Alice Tully Hall.


U.S. Seen Easing Stance on Toshiba
LEAD: Despite strong sentiment in Congress to punish the Toshiba Corporation for illegal sales of high technology to the Soviet Union, key lawmakers are now convinced that a ban on Toshiba imports approved last month by the Senate will be softened considerably before it reaches the President's desk.


NEW YORKERS LEARN TO PROTECT THEMSELVES AT GUN SCHOOL
LEAD: David Scott says he is ''not into macho stuff.'' He became a vegetarian 12 years ago because ''I don't believe in killing animals.'' He practices yoga.
He spends several months every year at a retreat in upstate New York where he does nothing but meditate.


DOLE AND HER HUSBAND GAIN FAVOR IN ALABAMA
LEAD: Elizabeth Hanford Dole and her husband came to Huntsville over the weekend.


COASTAL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COASTAL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,836,000
c2,070,000
Share earns
.71
.51
6mo net inc
b5,457,000
c4,170,000
Share earns
1.36
1.03
b-Includes tax credits of $900,000 for the quarter and $1,900,000 for the 6 months.


Dianne and David Zolotow Remarry in Massachusetts
LEAD: Dianne Walsh Zolotow and David Mitchell Zolotow were remarried yesterday at City Hall in Newton, Mass., by Edward English, the City Clerk.
The couple, who were divorced in 1983, were attended by their daughter Clea and their son Jason.


Nekoosa Chief Busy With New Strategy
LEAD: William R. Laidig, chairman and chief executive of the Great Northern Nekoosa Paper Company, says he has a lot of woodworking machinery in his basement that he doesn't get much of a chance to use.


URBAN LEAGUE CHIEF TELLS '88 HOPEFULS NOT TO IGNORE BLACKS
LEAD: The president of the National Urban League warned 1988 Presidential candidates tonight that they could not afford to ''neglect or ignore'' black voters.


New N.A.S.D. Chairman
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers said Friday that James M. Davin had been elected chairman, succeeding Joseph R. Hardiman, who will become president of the association on Sept. 1.
Mr.
Davin, managing director of the international equity department at the First Boston Corporation, has been vice chairman of finance for the association.


TV Review; ARTHUR RUBINSTEIN IS REMEMBERED
LEAD: ARTHUR RUBINSTEIN, who would have been 100 years old in January, embodies a paradox of the century.
He cultivated an image of Old European opulence, dressing in fedoras and smoking jackets and puffing expensive cigars.
We imagine him in Paris, perhaps, dining with Cocteau or fending off the affections of an admiring countess.


Bolshoi Ballet: 'Giselle'
LEAD: THE Bolshoi Ballet, ending a triumphant season Saturday night amid collective curtain calls at the Metropolitan Opera House, managed to slip in a few more surprises in its three final performances of ''Giselle'' over the weekend.


HEALTH CARE PROPERTY INVESTMENT reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTH CARE PROPERTY INVESTMENT (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,549,000
6,418,000
Net inc
3,437,000
3,444,000
Share earns
.42
.44
6mo rev
19,056,000
11,932,000
Net inc
6,845,000
5,450,000
Share earns
.84
.86
Shares outst
8,149,669
6,341,840


Tickets, Parking for Open
LEAD: Tickets will be available at the gate for all seven days of the United States Women's Open.
Practice-round tickets (July 20-22) are $8 each; tickets for the championship rounds (July 23-26) are $16 each.


America as a Safe Haven, From Politics
LEAD: It sounds like a sensible and humane use of discretionary power: Attorney General Edwin Meese has directed the Immigration and Naturalization Service to be more generous in considering the claims of undocumented Nicaraguans for political asylum in this country.


Kohlberg, Kravis Plans Place for Walter Officers
LEAD: The story is a familiar one in entrepreneurial annals: James L. Walter got out of the Navy, went back to his hometown of Tampa, Fla., and with his savings and money borrowed from his father bought a shell house for $895.
He put it up on a lot owned by his father and sold it at a profit.


U.S. AND KUWAITIS CLEAR GULF MINES LINKED TO TEHERAN
LEAD: Naval experts from the United States, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait finished clearing mines today that Iran was thought to have laid in a deep-water channel to Kuwait's main oil terminal, the Kuwaiti Defense Ministry said.


GUNDLE ENVIRONMENTAL SYSEMS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GUNDLE ENVIRONMENTAL SYSEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,741,000
-
Net inc
751,000
-
Share earns
.15
-
6mo rev
18,945,000
-
Net inc
877,000
-
Share earns
.16
-
The company went public in December.


Not Protectionism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bidding for the Stars
LEAD: After years of dreams, delays and heavy investments of money and manpower, a high-stakes competition among aerospace companies to build the nation's first permanent outpost in space is coming down to the wire.


Beirut Report On Economy
LEAD: A committee appointed last week by the Government to undertake a thorough examination of the country's worsening economic crisis is due to present its recommendations on Monday.


Frenchman Climbs Into Lead
LEAD: The Tour de France entered its final week today by shaking out the leadership during a time trial up Mont Ventoux in Provence.


SPY CASE: TRACING COLLAPSE
LEAD: The charges evoked the specter of treason among the elite Marine Corps guard in Moscow: two marines escorting K.G.B. spies through recesses of the United States Embassy, silencing alarms as they went.


Jersey Woman, 82, Is Fatally Stabbed
LEAD: An elderly New Jersey woman was found fatally stabbed in an upper Manhattan apartment.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''Baseball is the younger brother of lapta.
This old, spirited game was taken to America by the first Russian settlers, and has now returned to us in a different form and with a strange, foreign name.''  - Sergei Shachin, Izvestia sports writer.  [ A1:2. ]


Determined Pro Career
LEAD: Medically, Mark Sobel never had a chance for a professional football career.
As a 165-pound walk-on at the University of Maryland in 1978, he was lucky to survive his tryouts, let alone make the team.
Even after he bulked his 5-foot-10-inch frame up to 210 (by working himself up to four training-table steaks a sitting) the Matawan, N


EUROPEANS ATTACK TRADE BILLS
LEAD: Leading officials of the European Community attacked the House and Senate trade bills this weekend calling the measures protectionist and saying Europeans could retaliate.


Business and the Law; More Potency For Poison Pills
LEAD: Amid rumors that MCA Inc. might be ripe for a takeover, the directors of that entertainment conglomerate last Thursday adopted a new type of poison pill designed by the same lawyer who invented the original version four years ago.


Advertising; Ammirati &amp; Puris Gets All of Chiquita's Work
LEAD: Chiquita Brands, part of United Brands, has consolidated all of its advertising at Ammirati &amp; Puris, which began handling Chiquita Pops in December 1985.


MERIDIAN BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERIDIAN BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
16,102,000
18,867,000
Per share
.56
.69
6mo net inc
33,203,000
31,444,000
Per share
1.15
1.14
The company said that year-ago results have been adjusted to include those of First National Bank of Pike County which it acquired in the 1986 fourth quarter.


Advertising; Ogilvy Gives Reasons For Action in Its Stock
LEAD: The rumor mills of Madison Avenue and Wall Street were working overtime during the last couple of weeks about the sudden increase in volume in Ogilvy Group stock.
Another takeover in the wind?
Ogilvy management, among the more interested parties, said it resulted from its decision not to buy the JWT Group, its winning of a sizable piece of Ford business overseas and its strengthening of management, which has led a number of analysts to issue buy recommendations.


Mattingly Is a Bargain
LEAD: EVEN in the glow of his home-run streak, Don Mattingly has displayed his usual devotion to duty.
He's talked about how ''it would be selfish'' to try for the record at the expense of the Yankees' ambition to finish in first place.
He's explained his home runs by saying: ''I've found a swing that gets the ball in the air.


EASTERN GAS &amp; FUEL ASSOCITES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTERN GAS &amp; FUEL ASSOCITES (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
155,643,000
151,714,000
Net inc
b10,498,000
10,469,000
Share earns
.45
.45
6mo rev
376,611,000
407,419,000
Net inc
33,628,000
34,968,000
Share earns
1.45
1.51


FORTUNE FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORTUNE FINANCIAL GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,524,000
c2,563,000
Per share
.72
.79
Shares outst
4,923,625
3,228,921
9mo net inc
b10,502,000
c9,597,000
Per share
2.21
2.95
Shares outst
4,749,599
3,248,231


NOW BRACING TO STOP BORK
LEAD: The buttons worn by dozens of representatives to the National Organization for Women convention said simply, ''Shred Bork.''


IN THE TOILS OF A BUREAUCRACY THAT SCARCELY TOILS
LEAD: The Mugamma, a grim, gray hulk of a building, looms by Tahrir Square's chaotic traffic in downtown Cairo, a symbol of the sprawling, indolent bureaucracy that clogs Egyptian life.


City Opera: 'Boheme'
LEAD: THERE may be no sure things in life, but in opera, we know, the world is a different place.


The Prado to Lend Velazquez Works To the Met in '90
LEAD: As part of a continuing and accelerating collaboration between the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Prado in Madrid, a remarkably large and important group of paintings by Diego Velazquez is to be lent by the Prado to the Met.


The U.N. Today: July 20, 1987
LEAD:  SECURITY COUNCIL


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Consumer Prices  June  Treasury Statement  June  Thursday  Durable Goods


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, JULY 20, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


GLEASON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GLEASON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
59,276,000
64,943,000
Net inc
b208,000
759,000
Share earns
.04
.13
6mo sales
111,703,000
122,611,000
Net loss
686,000
c1,123,000
Share earns
-
.20
b-Includes an after-tax restructuring and disposal charge of $952,000.


WHAT'S IN A STREET RENAME? DISORDER
LEAD: Herbert L. Sedler, president of Paper Enterprises Inc. at 271 Walnut Avenue, looked out his window one day and found that Walnut was no longer Walnut.
Not only that, it wasn't even an avenue.


BANK OF BOSTON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF BOSTON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b83,700,000
c53,300,000
Per share
-
.84
6mo net loss
13,000,000
c105,700,000
Per share
-
1.67
b-After the effect of a $300 million increase in the reserve for possible credit losses from less developed countries' debt.


Queens Man Slain at Home
LEAD: A 37-year-old man was fatally shot last night while sitting on the front steps of his home in South Jamaica, Queens, the police said.
The shooting occurred about 6:45 P.M. at 170-110 118th Road, a police spokesman, Sgt.
Raymond O'Donnell, said.
The victim, James Green, was approached by a man who got out of a black van.


PAYCHEX INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAYCHEX INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,011,000
13,766,000
Net inc
1,354,000
1,319,000
Share earns
.16
.16
Yr sales
63,891,000
50,704,000
Net inc
5,124,000
4,170,000
Share earns
.60
.49


A HOMOSEXUAL IS CONSIDERED FOR AIDS PANEL
LEAD: President Reagan tentatively plans to name a homosexual to a Federal advisory committee that will investigate the AIDS epidemic, Administration officials said today.


HUBBELL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUBBELL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
147,511,000
141,785,000
Net inc
16,229,000
14,043,000
Share earns
.62
.55
6mo sales
288,314,000
280,628,000
Net inc
30,636,000
26,461,000
Share earns
1.17
1.04


LOUISIANA-PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOUISIANA-PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
488,800,000
394,100,000
Net inc
34,800,000
24,500,000
Share earns
.91
.65
6mo sales
911,700,000
716,600,000
Net inc
51,100,000
25,900,000
Share earns
1.34
.68


Inventories Of Autos Are Rising
LEAD: Rising inventories of unsold new cars will probably lead to more sales incentives this fall and to lower rates of production next year, according to auto industry analysts.


FIRST WISCONSIN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST WISCONSIN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b55,382,000
c13,074,000
Per share
-
.61
6mo net loss
b41,051,000
c25,823,000
Per share
-
1.21
b-Includes a charge related to the $96 million addition to loan loss reserves for both the quarter and 6 months.


NATIONAL EDUCATION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL EDUCATION CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
69,618,000
58,563,000
Net inc
2,898,000
2,233,000
Share earns
.19
.15
6mo rev
138,380,000
103,195,000
Net inc
5,670,000
4,562,000
Share earns
.38
.31


On New York Civil Service: The City Can't Afford Bigger Pensions
LEAD: To the Editor:


How Pigeons Think
LEAD: Amid continuing debate over how animals perceive, remember and act upon things they see, researchers at Michigan State University have come up with a new kind of experiment that suggests, they say, that pigeons think in terms of images.


St Germain Study Widens
LEAD: An investigation by the Justice Department into possible financial reporting violations by Representative Fernand J. St Germain, Democrat of Rhode Island, has grown to include lobbying by the American Bankers Association.


MCI COMMUNICATIONS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCI COMMUNICATIONS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
952,000,000
943,000,000
Net inc
b8,000,000
16,000,000
Share earns
.03
.06
6mo rev
1,907,000,000
1,762,000,000
Net inc
b33,000,000
36,000,000
Share earns
.12
.14
Shares outst
286,000,000
267,000,000


INSIDE THE OPERATING ROOM: A DAY OF BOLD SURGERY
LEAD: For 14 long and increasingly difficult years, Nelson Martinez, a 51-year-old real estate agent from suburban Los Angeles, has suffered from Parkinson's disease.
But when he awoke from anesthesia in a hospital room here on Friday at dusk, he felt, he said to his wife amid tears of joy, ''as if I have been halfway dead and now have come back to life.


SLAYER OF AGED WOMAN EXECUTED IN LOUISIANA AFTER APPEALS FAIL
LEAD: Willie Celestine went to his death in Louisiana's electric chair today after apologizing to the family of Marceliane Richard, the 81-year-old woman he raped, beat and strangled six years ago.


Soviet Fur Auction
LEAD: The annual auction of millions of fur and lamb pelts began in Leningrad today with the purchase of mink pelts by an American company, the official Tass press agency said.
The Soviet Foreign Trade Association is selling 2 million pelts during this year's four-day sale, including 76,000 sable pelts, the highest number ever offered in the auction's 106 years.


ABINGTON SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABINGTON SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
320,000
388,000
Per share
.14
-
6mo net inc
937,000
938,000
Per share
.40
-
The bank converted to stock form of ownership in June 1986.


TV Review; An Enemy Among Us,' IDS and Teen-Agers
LEAD: ''AN ENEMY AMONG US'' wants to be nice; it is nice.


To Keep Prisons Pure
LEAD: To the Editor:


TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INCORPORATED reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INCORPORATED (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,371,600,000
1,244,100,000
Net inc
b61,900,000
12,300,000
Share earns
.73
.12
6mo sales
2,643,500,000
2,389,400,000
Net inc
b145,700,000
c11,500,000
Share earns
1.77
-


TEXACO CANADA LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXACO CANADA LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
684,000,000
680,000,000
Net inc
68,000,000
54,000,000
Share earns
.57
.44
6mo rev
1,360,000,000
1,540,000,000
Net inc
142,000,000
138,000,000
Share earns
1.18
1.14


De Laurentiis
LEAD: The De Laurentiis Entertainment Group Inc., an independent film maker, said it was exploring financing alternatives that include a restructuring or combination with a third party.
The company, headed by the Italian-born producer Dino De Laurentiis, said it had also amended its credit agreement with lender banks to avoid a possible default on its $52 million of bank debt.


TEXAS EASTERN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS EASTERN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
789,500,000
874,400,000
Net inc
14,200,000
b80,400,000
Share earns
.20
-
6mo rev
1,970,000,000
2,220,000,000
Net inc
70,400,000
b34,600,000
Share earns
1.18
-


AMCORE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMCORE FINANCIAL
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,398,000
1,441,000
Per share
.27
.32
6mo net inc
5,527,000
4,796,000
Per share
1.07
1.13
The company attributed the decline in earnings in the latest second quarter to a $278,000 increase in income taxes.


TALK OF PARDONS CALLED PREMATURE
LEAD: The White House said today that it was ''not appropriate'' at this time to discuss the possibility of a Presidential pardon for Administration officials involved in the Iran-contra affair.


Where They Vote With Their Bats
LEAD: ''On this right elbow,'' Representative Mel Levine proclaimed as he flexed his arm, ''rests the honor of the Democratic Party.''


In Summer, Exercise Takes to the Outdoors
LEAD: Visitor using a Central Park bench to help with his workout.
In spite of the heat and humidity, he did 100 push-ups. (The New York Times/Chester Higgins Jr.)


MANVILLE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANVILLE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
517,821,000
480,663,000
Net inc
41,128,000
28,434,000
Share earns
1.45
.92
6mo sales
992,852,000
925,936,000
Net inc
b83,978,000
45,971,000
Share earns
2.98
1.39


COMMERCE BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCE BANCORP INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
833,000
696,000
Per share
.34
.31
6mo net inc
1,610,000
1,406,000
Per share
.65
.63
Shares outst
2,461,799
2,222,522


Computer-Phone Rate Rise Hurts Science
LEAD: To the Editor:


W.G. Williams Is Dead at 74; Owner of a Hotel in Catskills
LEAD: Walter G. Williams, owner of the family-operated Williams Lake Hotel at Rosendale, N.Y., in the Catskills, died of cancer Saturday at Kingston (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 74 years old and lived in Rosendale.


Advertising; Behind Saatchi's Strategy
LEAD: FOR the moment, at least, the organization of the marketing companies within the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company is as its top managers want it.


PENN CENTRAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENN CENTRAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
338,500,000
462,500,000
Net inc
13,300,000
34,100,000
Share earns
.34
.84
6mo sales
658,400,000
979,500,000
Net inc
27,300,000
59,500,000
Share earns
.70
1.47


Holmes a Court Backs Texaco Filing
LEAD: Robert Holmes a Court, the Australian investor who has acquired 9.6 percent of Texaco Inc.'s stock and is seeking more, said yesterday he fully supported Texaco's management in its bankruptcy filing.


A Cardboard Crowd
LEAD: Members of Congress are finding their offices crowded with beleaguered workers from the textile and apparel industries.


BALL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
288,300,000
301,900,000
Net inc
b22,800,000
18,700,000
Share earns
.96
.79
6mo sales
571,900,000
547,700,000
Net inc
34,700,000
c31,100,000
Share earns
1.46
1.32


Becoming the Thing We Fear the Most
LEAD: To the Editor:


Man Slain and Woman Shot By Two on Bikes in Brooklyn
LEAD: Two men riding bicycles rode up to a man and a woman sitting outside a Brooklyn apartment last night and opened fire with handguns, fatally wounding the man and seriously injuring the woman, the police said.


Senator Simon
LEAD: David Carle, press secretary for Senator Paul Simon of Illinois, is calling reporters' attention to an article in M magazine, which describes itself as a publication for ''the civilized man.''


BLACK &amp; DECKER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLACK &amp; DECKER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 28
1987
1986
Sales
465,000,000
416,518,000
Net inc
9,000,000
b604,000
Share earns
.15
.01
9mo sales
1,432,700,000
1,353,346,000
Net inc
40,600,000
b23,107,000
Share earns
.69
.42


APOLLO COMPUTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APOLLO COMPUTER INC (OTC)
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Sales
132,214,000
88,382,000
Net inc
7,604,000
1,041,000
Share earns
.21
.03
6mo sales
255,634,000
170,403,000
Net inc
14,034,000
1,580,000
Share earns
.39
.05


Cuomo Sets Rules to Guard Subsidized Housing's Status
LEAD: Governor Cuomo acted today to slow the transfer to the open market of subsidized apartments built under the Mitchell-Lama program by imposing a set of emergency regulations on their conversion.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  SPYCATCHER.
The Candid Autobiography of a Senior Intelligence Officer.
By Peter Wright.
Illustrated. 392 pages.


Congress To Take a Look at TV Ministries
LEAD: The Rev.
Jerry Falwell, left, and the Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart, right, meeting yesterday in Washington with Representative J. J. Pickle.
Mr.
Pickle reportedly plans to hold hearings sometine in the near future to determine how Federal tax regulations apply to television ministries. (AP)


SPRINGS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPRINGS INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
399,567,000
349,533,000
Net inc
12,642,000
4,532,000
Share earns
.71
.26
6mo sales
779,858,000
719,722,000
Net inc
21,718,000
9,225,000
Share earns
1.22
.52


ADMIRAL DISPUTES NORTH OVER MEMOS ON FUND DIVERSION
LEAD: Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter today disputed Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's testimony that he had sent the admiral five different memorandums discussing the use of proceeds from Iran arms sales to support Nicaraguan rebels.


Union Pacific Cuts
LEAD: The Union Pacific Railroad said it would close eight train-dispatching centers and centralize their functions in Omaha in a major restructuring that would eliminate 600 jobs.
Two-thirds of the jobs are management, with the remainder being union personnel.
The jobs will be eliminated in Kansas City, Mo.; Salt Lake City, and Spring, Tex., near Houston, and those terminated will receive severance arrangements to be announced Aug.


AFFILIATED PUBLICATIONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AFFILIATED PUBLICATIONS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
125,932,000
100,584,000
Net inc
b74,316,000
c10,752,000
Share earns
2.11
.30
6mo rev
228,725,000
192,075,000
Net inc
b83,084,000
c16,845,000
Share earns
2.36
.47


Books: Culture Clash
LEAD:  THE OLD CAPITAL.
By Yasunari Kawabata.
Translated by J. Martin Holman. 164 pages.
North Point Press. $15.95.


SUNWEST FINANCIAL SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNWEST FINANCIAL SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
8,600,000
7,800,000
Per share
.87
.78
6mo net inc
18,700,000
14,800,000
Per share
1.90
1.49


Postal Unions Reduce Pay Demands in Talks
LEAD: Postal unions reduced their wage demands today in response to an offer from the Postal Service tying pay increases to how much the unions will let it use cheaper, nonunion workers.


Business and Health; Retiree Benefits Cast a Shadow
LEAD: MOST large employers offer retirees continued health insurance benefits - but few have put aside funds to pay for them.


RENT-A-WRECK OF AMERICA reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RENT-A-WRECK OF AMERICA
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,211,854
3,407,240
Net loss
393,828
19,096


Market Place; New Strategies On New Issues
LEAD: IF the bull market keeps rolling along, selected companies going public for the first time are also likely to prosper, according to Standard &amp; Poor's Outlook. ''New issues as a group,'' it said, ''tend to exaggerate the underlying trend of the overall market.''


S.I.A. Looks At Europe
LEAD: The Securities Industry Association, a trade group representing more than 500 securities firms in the United States and Canada, said yesterday that it would expand its membership services to Britain and the rest of Europe.


Merrill's Bond Loss: $377 Million
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company yesterday reported the full extent of the mammoth bond trading losses it suffered last April, saying the gross loss totaled $377 million, $102 million more than previously disclosed.
The brokerage firm announced, though, that, as a result of several large, one-time gains, it produced an overall profit in the second quarter.


SOUTHWESTERN BELL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWESTERN BELL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,886,500,000
2,006,000,000
Net inc
248,800,000
279,200,000
Share earns
.83
.93
6mo rev
3,762,500,000
3,924,700,000
Net inc
486,500,000
525,300,000
Share earns
1.62
1.76


Lee Gaines, 73, a Jazz Singer
LEAD: Lee Gaines, a singer and founder of the Delta Rhythm Boys, a jazz and pop vocal group, died Wednesday in Helsinki, Charles Horner, his biographer, said here today.
He was 73 years old.


Uecker Gets Serious
LEAD: Bob Uecker, the major league catcher turned comedian, said he might have enjoyed a better baseball career had he applied the same effort to the game as he has to getting laughs.


DELUXE CHECK PRINTERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELUXE CHECK PRINTERS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
232,599,604
213,678,494
Net inc
33,495,669
28,703,855
Share earns
.39
.34
6mo sales
465,970,718
424,369,326
Net inc
63,175,579
57,100,761
Share earns
.74
.67


NOVA, AN ALBERTA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOVA, AN ALBERTA CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
528,300,000
639,400,000
Net inc
45,000,000
37,000,000
Share earns
.19
.12
6mo rev
1,070,300,000
1,428,300,000
Net inc
78,600,000
63,300,000
Share earns
.28
.16
Shares outst
162,700,000
132,200,000


EXPOS TOP ASTROS FOR 8TH IN A ROW
LEAD: Dennis Martinez pitched a five-hitter and Mitch Webster hit a two-run homer tonight as the Montreal Expos defeated the Houston Astros, 4-1, for their eighth straight victory.


BANKEAST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKEAST CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
72,000
3,927,000
Per share
.01
.37
6mo net inc
3,804,000
7,058,000
Per share
.35
.66
The company said it had significant losses in the latest second quarter in its Bankeast Mortgage Corp.


ADAMS-RUSSELL ELECTRONICS reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADAMS-RUSSELL ELECTRONICS (AMEX)
Qtr to June 28
1987
1986
Sales
32,447,000
30,626,000
Net inc
273,000
2,017,000
Share earns
.04
.32
9mo sales
95,442,000
83,937,000
Net inc
2,752,000
5,939,000
Share earns
.43
.94


EX-AMBASSADOR FLIES WORLD WAR II ROUTE
LEAD: Thomas J. Watson Jr., a former United States Ambassador to Moscow, flew into Washington this morning on the final leg of an around-the-world commemorative flight that took him over the old Alaska-Siberia route he flew 45 years ago as an Army Air Corps captain ferrying planes to the Red Army.


TRANSAMERICA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSAMERICA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,950,000,000
1,560,000,000
Net inc
b105,955,000
c69,029,000
Share earns
1.37
.88
6mo rev
3,759,952,000
2,999,254,000
Net inc
b216,976,000
113,314,000
Share earns
2.80
1.45


FIDELCOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIDELCOR INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,207,000
24,764,000
Per share
.08
1.03
6mo net inc
31,319,000
44,062,000
Per share
1.16
1.97
b-After a $30 million special provision for possible losses on loans to developing countries.


DE LAURENTIIS ENTERTAINENT reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DE LAURENTIIS ENTERTAINENT (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,598,000
6,103,000
Net loss
15,538,000
2,128,000
The latest quarter loss includes writedowns of $1,421,000 from certain previously released films and a writedown of $5,421,000 from the ''disappointing'' box office performance of the movie ''Million Dollar Mystery.


MICRO BIO-MEDICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICRO BIO-MEDICS INC
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,498,673
6,552,251
Net loss
b15,354
c61,808
6mo sales
13,763,010
12,625,492
Net loss
b69,722
c91,925
b-Includes tax credits of $14,000 and $59,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Greenspan Autonomy Is an Issue
LEAD: When Alan Greenspan appears before the Senate Banking Committee for his confirmation hearing on Tuesday, his independence as the next chairman of the Federal Reserve Board from White House politics will be one of the primary focuses of questioning, Congressional aides said today.


FREEWHEELING TEL AVIV IS MAGNET FOR YOUNG
LEAD: Longtime residents of this city like to say that the best thing about Jerusalem is the road to Tel Aviv.


Phillips-Van Heusen Rejects Rosewood Offer
LEAD: The board of the Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation today rejected as inadequate a merger offer for $22 a share, or a total of $333 million, from Rosewood Financial Inc.


Woman, 31, Is Moved In Life-Support Case
LEAD: A 31-year-old comatose woman, whose family gained court permission to remove feeding tubes that are keeping her alive, has been moved to a hospital from the nursing home where she had been a patient seven years.


CORESTATES FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORESTATES FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
40,675,000
37,012,000
Per share
.98
.89
6mo net inc
78,239,000
74,171,000
Per share
1.88
1.79
The year-ago figures adjusted to include the consolidated accounts of New Jersey National Corp., acquired in October 1986 and accounted for as a pooling of interest.


HANNA, M A &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANNA, M A &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
63,709,000
56,580,000
Net inc
b8,939,000
c7,483,000
Share earns
.65
-
6mo rev
122,598,000
97,127,000
Net inc
b16,522,000
c3,059,000
Share earns
1.18
-


Don't Even Think of Pardons Now
LEAD: Count on Patrick Buchanan, the former White House aide, and other overeager supporters of Rear Adm.
John Poindexter and Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North, to re-invent a discredited tool of justice - the pre-emptive Presidential pardon.
Its stated purpose is to forgive officers who are presumed innocent and who haven't been found guilty or even indicted.


FEDERAL-MOGUL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL-MOGUL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
277,446,000
251,585,000
Net inc
11,489,000
11,290,000
Share earns
.90
.87
6mo sales
538,805,000
490,144,000
Net inc
19,678,000
20,326,000
Share earns
1.54
1.57


On Semantic Somersaults
LEAD: At one point during yesterday'shearings, Senator William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine, gave Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter a lecture about semantics.


Correction
LEAD: The credits yesterday with a review of Alan Ayckbourn's ''Bedroom Farce'' at the Interart Theater misidentified the lighting designer.
He is Bob McBroom.


State Planning to Bid On Barge for Prison
LEAD: A British troop barge has passed an inspection by state Correction Commissioner Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, who wants to use the vessel as a state prison, and New York will make a bid to buy the barge next month, a state prison spokesman said yesterday.


Designer Named for Philadelphia Hall
LEAD: The Philadelphia Orchestra announced yesterday that it had named Venturi, Rauch &amp; Scott Brown, a Philadelphia-based architectural firm, and Russell Johnson of Artec Consultants, a New York-based acoustics firm, to design of a new concert hall.


A Soviet Fix for NASA's Blunder
LEAD: With the space shuttle grounded, so are many American space cargoes.
Into the vacuum created by NASA's mismanagement the Soviet Union has now stepped with an offer to launch American communications satellites at cut-rate prices.
Can the United States afford to accept it?


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tour de France  Roche Takes Lead: Stephen Roche of Ireland captured the overall leader's yellow jersey yesterday after finishing second in the 19th stage of the Tour de France cycling race.
Pedro Delgado of Spain won the 115-mile mountain leg from Valreas to Villard de Lans, sprinting away on the final ascent within a half-mile of the finish.


NEW MILFORD SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW MILFORD SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,306,000
2,066,000
Share earns
.62
.56
Yr net
9,055,000
4,972,000
Share earns
2.44
1.34


KUWAIT WARNS U.S. BEARS RISK IF CLASH OCCURS
LEAD: Kuwait's Prime Minister sought today to dissociate his country from any hostilities in which the United States might become involved while protecting Kuwaiti tankers in the Persian Gulf.


NORWICH SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORWICH SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,548,000
795,000
Per share
.27
-
6mo net inc
2,868,000
1,881,000
Per share
.50
-
The bank went public in November.


Pop: Manu Dibango
LEAD: MUSICIANS from French-speaking Africa, blending the rhythms and song forms of diverse tribal cultures in the recording studios of Paris, have created some of the freshest pop sounds of the last decade.
But some 15 years ago, long before performers like Youssou N'Dour and Kassav were heard in the United States, a musician from French-speaking western Africa, based in Paris, was already affecting the sound and rhythmic direction of American dance music.


8,000 Doctors Strike in India
LEAD: Health services in the capital and other Indian cities were crippled today as 8,000 state-employed doctors went on strike to demand better salaries and benefits.
New doctors get about $160 a month.
The demand for a starting salary is $240.


INLAND STEEL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INLAND STEEL INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
845,064,000
815,826,000
Net inc
b17,485,000
15,739,000
Share earns
.44
.48
Shares outst
30,968,000
29,013,000
6mo sales
1,687,712,000
1,569,922,000
Net inc
b79,941,000
c6,292,000
Share earns
2.32
-


Ex-Leader in Gay Group Chosen For AIDS Panel
LEAD: President Reagan plans to appoint Dr.
Frank Lilly, a former member of the board of the Gay Men's Health Crisis organization in New York, to serve on his advisory panel on the AIDS epidemic, Government officials said today.


AHMANSON, H F &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AHMANSON, H F &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b32,273,000
c76,591,000
Share earns
.33
.80
6mo net inc
114,689,000
144,410,000
Share earns
1.17
1.60
Shares outst
98,359,539
90,348,222
b-Reflects a charge of $13,400,000 for the writeoff of the company's $24,020,000 investment in the secondary reserve of the Federal Savings &amp; Loan Insurance


ROHM &amp; HAAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROHM &amp; HAAS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
597,300,000
569,000,000
Net inc
62,100,000
b33,100,000
Share earns
.90
.48
6mo sales
1,130,400,000
1,109,800,000
Net inc
119,500,000
71,400,000
Share earns
1.73
1.04


MEASURING MATTINGLY'S ACHIEVEMENT
LEAD: Now that Don Mattingly's home-run streak has ended, where does the record he shares with Dale Long rank among other batting accomplishments of its type?


CRITICS OF GANDHI REPORTEDLY UNITING
LEAD: Amid reports that Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi is preparing sweeping changes in his party and administration, his sharpest critics were reported today to be planning a series of rallies across India to press for his resignation.


AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER CO INC reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER CO INC (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,837,000,000
4,909,000,000
Net inc
548,988,000
b403,424,000
Share earns
2.84
2.09
b-After a charge of $79,055,000 for losses on the Poston Plant and Zimmer Plant disallowance.


A Fork in the Road For Phillips Family
LEAD: As the fourth generation of his family to head the Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation, Lawrence S. Phillips might understandably be harder to persuade than most corporate chairmen that a takeover was in the best interest of the company and its shareholders.


Link Brazil's Forests to Debt Relief
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, JULY 21, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-11


UNISYS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNISYS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,275,000,000
1,337,600,000
Net inc
121,200,000
b76,200,000
Share earns
.64
.54
6mo rev
4,690,800,000
2,473,600,000
Net inc
231,400,000
92,200,000
Share earns
1.21
.66


BELLSOUTH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELLSOUTH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,030,000,000
2,930,000,000
Net inc
382,300,000
408,500,000
Share earns
.80
.87
Shares outst
481,300,000
469,100,000
6mo rev
5,980,000,000
5,740,000,000
Net inc
834,700,000
828,500,000
Share earns
1.74
1.78
Shares outst
481,100,000
464,300,000


AMERICAN MOTORS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MOTORS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,178,817,000
800,822,000
Net inc
b30,200,000
c52,000,000
Share earns
.17
-
6mo sales
2,280,460,000
1,718,993,000
Net inc
b53,652,000
c70,954,000
Share earns
.29
-


Forbes Column Ended As Research Is Doubted
LEAD: Forbes magazine announced yesterday that its longtime business psychology columnist, Srully Blotnick, had discontinued his column, a feature that frequently cited research findings based on what Mr.
Blotnick said were extensive interviews and surveys.


New York City Owes LeFrak Back Rents
LEAD: The LeFrak Organization moved in court yesterday to evict New York City for nonpayment of rent.


New Japan-Soviet Illegal Sale
LEAD: A Tokyo businessman illegally sold aircraft computer technology to Soviet officials, the Tokyo police charged today.


PAINE WEBBER GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAINE WEBBER GROUP INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
637,570,000
607,536,000
Net inc
17,599,000
7,140,000
Share earns
.53
.20
6mo rev
1,267,014,000
1,201,224,000
Net inc
b50,196,000
36,299,000
Share earns
1.58
1.22


Carnation Recalls Ice Cream
LEAD: The Carnation Company voluntarily recalled 1,700 cases of ice cream nuggets distributed in the East because of possible contamination by a bacteria that can cause flu-like symptoms, the company said yesterday.
Carnation said containers of 35 Vanilla Bon Bons ice cream nuggets may contain the organism Listeria monocytogenes.


EASTERN BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTERN BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b854,000
1,002,000
Per share
.31
.76
Shares outst
2,766,099
1,322,023
6mo net inc
3,471,000
1,554,000
Per share
1.25
1.19
Shares outst
2,767,879
1,303,591


BELL ATLANTIC CORPORATION BELLWETHER EXPLORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELL ATLANTIC CORPORATION BELLWETHER EXPLORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,640,300,000
2,472,900,000
Net inc
326,100,000
307,400,000
Share earns
1.64
1.54
6mo rev
5,105,100,000
4,831,700,000
Net inc
633,600,000
597,300,000
Share earns
3.18
2.99


FAMILY FULFILLS QUEST IN RING
LEAD: On June 27 in the Montreal Forum, Matthew Hilton became the new International Boxing Federation junior middleweight champion when, at the age of 21, he won a 15-round decision over Buster Drayton.


Pentagon Says Missile Can Foil Soviet Tanks
LEAD: The Pentagon, reacting to criticism of its ability to attack Soviet tanks, said yesterday that a hitherto secret modified missile capable of defeating the tank's defenses would begin reaching United States forces in Europe late this summer.


LOTUS DEVELOPMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOTUS DEVELOPMENT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
93,973,000
66,195,000
Net inc
16,281,000
11,820,000
Share earns
.36
.25
6mo sales
178,761,000
135,465,000
Net inc
29,988,000
23,191,000
Share earns
.66
.48


TRW INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRW INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,690,000,000
1,560,000,000
Net inc
63,200,000
b70,300,000
Share earns
1.03
1.15
6mo sales
3,380,000,000
3,050,000,000
Net inc
113,300,000
b132,200,000
Share earns
1.84
2.16


THE CEASE-FIRE RESOLUTION
LEAD: Following is the text of a resolution adopted unanimously by the Security Council today urging Iran and Iraq to call an immediate cease-fire in their war:  THE SECURITY COUNCIL, REAFFIRMING its resolution 582 (1986) DEEPLY CONCERNED that, despite its calls for a cease-fire, the conflict between Iran and Iraq continues unabated, with further heavy loss of human life and material destruction, DEPLORING the initiation and continuation of the conflict, DEPLORI


JOHNSON CONTROLS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSON CONTROLS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
652,900,000
602,600,000
Net inc
17,500,000
15,200,000
Share earns
.42
.36
9mo sales
1,858,700,000
1,935,900,000
Net inc
52,400,000
61,600,000
Share earns
1.25
1.50


Burlington Cuts 525 Jobs
LEAD: Burlington Industries, in its first major action since undertaking a $2.9 billion leveraged buyout to prevent a hostile takeover, said today it would lay off 525 employees.


DANCE: FIRST BALLETS AT MOSTLY MOZART
LEAD: THE Mostly Mozart Festival at Lincoln Center can now be appropriately called a mostly music series.
The popular summer series presented dance for the first time with ''Mostly Mozart and the Dance,'' a program shared by the New York Baroque Dance Company and the Lar Lubovitch Dance Company, which was performed Sunday and will be repeated Thursday.


Ford Defends Doctoring
LEAD: Whitey Ford, the Yankees' career leader in victories with 236, says he doesn't object to present-day pitchers doctoring baseballs in their ongoing battles against major league batters.


BSD BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BSD BANCORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
705,000
203,000
Per share
.20
.07
6mo net inc
945,000
339,000
Per share
.28
.11


Lifetime Buys Unit
LEAD: The Lifetime Corporation said it had agreed to acquire Quality Care, a subsidiary of Grandmet USA Inc., for $95 million in cash, plus an additional $6.5 million for tax liabilities.
Lifetime, through its Kimberly Services subsidiary, supplies home health-care personnel, institutional nursing services and testing services to companies in North America.


Monticchiello Journal; Defending the Environment Turns Into a Drama
LEAD: Nature and history have been generous to this little Tuscan village, leaving it well protected against many foes.
A strategic hilltop, thick walls and crenelated turrets have all helped win some battles, but when Monticchiello was threatened with becoming a dump for toxic wastes, the villagers resorted to their favorite form of self-defense.


WARREN P. SMITH
LEAD: Warren P. Smith, the vice president-counsel in the law department of the Home Life Insurance Company, died of complications resulting from AIDS on Saturday at his home in Union City, N.J.
He was 35 years old.


Women as Surgeons
LEAD: To the Editor:


CITY SAVINGS BANK OF MERIEN reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITY SAVINGS BANK OF MERIEN
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
472,144
159,568
Per share
.32
-
6mo net inc
979,639
412,708
Per share
.66
-
The year-ago per share earnings not available; the bank converted to stock from mutual form of ownership in September 1986.


FLORIDA COMMERCIAL BANKS INC (MIAMI) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA COMMERCIAL BANKS INC (MIAMI) (O)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,585,777
2,235,673
Per share
.67
.59
6mo net inc
5,103,211
4,327,717
Per share
1.33
1.15


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, whose role in the Iran-contra affair has spawned T-shirts, bumper stickers and instant books, now has a horse named after him.
A trainer, Sally Bailie, couldn't think of a name for a 2-year-old filly.
Then one day, she said, ''I saw a headline where Fawn Hall said, 'I did it all for Ollie.


MARRIOTT CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 19
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARRIOTT CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 19
1987
1986
Sales
1,495,500,000
1,089,500,000
Net inc
63,900,000
52,100,000
Share earns
.47
.38
6mo sales
2,907,100,000
2,121,000,000
Net inc
104,600,000
86,300,000
Share earns
.77
.63


NEW KIND OF AIRCRAFT IS ON HORIZON AS DESIGNERS TRY MICROWAVE POWER
LEAD: SCIENTISTS are devising a new class of flying machines, powered by beams of pure energy.


Dr. Karl Slotta, a Developer Of Birth Control Pills, Dies
LEAD: Karl Slotta, a biochemist whose work in the 1930s helped research that led to the development of birth control pills, died Friday at Doctor's Hospital here.
He was 92 years old.


Art of Voice-Overs: Selling With Sound
LEAD: Chip Bolcik is the voice of a talking toilet on television.


SMITHKLINE BECKMAN CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SMITHKLINE BECKMAN CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,024,600,000
882,600,000
Net inc
132,100,000
123,400,000
Share earns
1.03
.80
Shares outst
127,700,000
154,800,000
6mo sales
2,028,000,000
1,745,700,000
Net inc
278,600,000
b239,800,000
Share earns
2.18
1.55
Shares outst
127,700,000
154,800,000


RUSSELL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RUSSELL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
98,776,000
95,298,000
Net inc
7,170,000
8,265,000
Share earns
.18
.20
6mo sales
208,166,000
193,134,000
Net inc
16,858,000
18,298,000
Share earns
.42
.45


Jazz: Solomonic Quartet
LEAD: THE Solomonic Quartet plays a kind of postmodern hard bop.
The tunes are rooted in blues and gospel modes, with a vocalized, crying quality; the rhythms dance and strut.
The group, which appeared last weekend at Carlos 1, 432 Avenue of the Americas, at Ninth Street, has a deep, throaty sound even when Ahmed Abdullah, the group's trumpeter, and Chico Freeman, its tenor saxophonist, are playing in their higher registers.


INSILCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSILCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
172,868,000
197,136,000
Net inc
10,595,000
11,555,000
Share earns
.50
.55
6mo sales
348,567,000
377,438,000
Net inc
18,374,000
18,309,000
Share earns
.87
.87


BENJAMIN F. LEVENTHAL
LEAD: Benjamin F. Leventhal, a businessman and economic analyst, died Friday at Norwalk (Conn.) Hospital, where he had been since suffering a heart attack July 4.
He was 62 years old and lived in Westport, Conn.


Graceful Images Of Summers Past
LEAD: You can count on it.
When the temperature and humidity soar, the parasols of yesteryear blossom once more.
Coolly, elegantly, these century-old accessories turn back the clock to a gentler time as they sail again along the city's streets.


Wrong on Rents
LEAD: New York City's Rent Guidelines Board recently raised the allowable increase in rent of any vacant stabilized apartment from 7.5 to 10 percent.
That showed integrity, in contrast to the tactics of Governor Cuomo.


VIA SATELLITE, CANDIDATES MAKE THEIR OWN NEWS
LEAD: The letters, about 1,000 of them, went out to local television stations with the same message: Representatives Jack F. Kemp and Richard A. Gephardt would be available today on K2, transponder 8A, audio 5.8, downlink 11.924.


MOORE FINANCIAL GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOORE FINANCIAL GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,626,000
b16,919,000
Per share
.49
-
6mo net inc
7,187,000
b13,403,000
Per share
.99
-
b-Net loss  The company said the provision for credit losses decreased to $5 million in the latest second quarter from $30.4 million in the year-ago quarter, which included a $22 million addition in Idaho First National Bank, one of its subsidiaries.


When a Barn Was a Barn
LEAD: Many Americans still alive can remember when barns housed hay.
And tractors.
Not to mention empty oil cans, tool boxes, sawhorses, worn pitchforks and worn-out cars, porch furniture, the kind of magazines mothers didn't allow in the house (or at all), rolled-up rugs, spare tires, feed bags and, nailed neatly to studs and crossbeams, long lines of old license plates.


ELECTRO-BIOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTRO-BIOLOGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,577,000
9,398,000
Net inc
119,000
b1,186,000
Share earns
.02
.20
6mo rev
17,840,000
18,671,000
Net inc
667,000
b2,331,000
Share earns
.12
.39


NBC to Sell Its Radio Networks
LEAD: The NBC radio networks, founded 61 years ago as the first national network but undercut by the age of television, will be sold for $50 million, NBC said today.


Transactions
LEAD:  AUTO RACING


BRANFORD SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRANFORD SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
535,000
315,000
Per share
.34
-
6mo net inc
1,046,000
674,000
Per share
.67
-
The per share earnings for the year- ago periods are not available; the bank converted to stock form in November 1986.


Holy Guns
LEAD: John M. Snyder, the chief lobbyist for the Citizens Committee for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms, normally spends his time lobbying members of Congress on various issues relating to guns and gun owners.
But lately he has turned his efforts toward Rome.


American Debut for a 10-Year-Old Violinist
LEAD: Stefan Milenkovic rehearsing at Avery Fisher Hall.
The Yugoslav prodigy is to perform at the Mostly Mozart preconcert recital tonight.
He will be accompanied on the piano by his mother, Lidija Kajnaco. (The New York Times/Jack Manning)


GETTY-CLARK OIL TALKS SUSPENDED
LEAD: The Getty Petroleum Corporation said it had been unable to reach an agreement to acquire the assets of the Clark Oil and Refining Corporation, and that negotiations between the companies had been suspended.
Stephen P. Salzman, Getty's vice president for finance, declined to specify the areas of disagreement, adding that no date for resuming talks has been set.


HEILEMAN, G BREWING CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEILEMAN, G BREWING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
374,285,000
386,038,000
Net inc
18,571,000
20,244,000
Share earns
.70
.77
6mo sales
661,074,000
684,444,000
Net inc
26,105,000
27,299,000
Share earns
.98
1.04


SHULTZ'S STATEMENT AT U.N.
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an address to the Security Council today by Secretary of State George P. Shultz, as provided by the United States Mission:


Merchant Bank Focus Likely at First Boston
LEAD: After an emotionally charged debate last week, senior executives of the First Boston Corporation decided to undertake a strategy review that is likely to put greater emphasis on its merchant banking activities than on securities trading, according to a number of people familiar with the situation.


Special Night for Lopez
LEAD: Nancy Lopez got a framed certificate and a surprise visit from her husband, Ray Knight, to mark her induction last night as the 11th member of the Ladies Professional Golf Association Hall of Fame.


COORS, ADOLPH CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 14
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COORS, ADOLPH CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 14
1987
1986
Sales
357,947,000
360,632,000
Net inc
17,455,000
29,273,000
Share earns
.48
.82
6mo sales
624,826,000
624,012,000
Net inc
24,434,000
36,527,000
Share earns
.67
1.02


MICROCOM INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROCOM INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,374,000
5,279,000
Net inc
b1,095,000
b564,000
Share earns
.32
.18
Shares outst
3,468,000
3,170,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $209,000 and $260,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


ANOTHER MET FILL-IN EARNS A VICTORY
LEAD: The Mets reached the ultimate stage in their pitching shortage last night: Terry Leach, the undefeated all-purpose replacement on a staff riddled with injuries, was himself disabled by torn cartilage in his right knee.


Bail for Ex-Olympian
LEAD: A Federal judge set bail at $1 million yesterday for a former British Olympian who has been held without bond since his arrest in April in a steroid smuggling and distribution case.


DOW CHEMICAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOW CHEMICAL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,408,000,000
2,844,000,000
Net inc
b312,000,000
c222,000,000
Share earns
1.62
1.16
6mo sales
6,423,000,000
5,579,000,000
Net inc
b558,000,000
c397,000,000
Share earns
2.90
2.08


NEW YORK STATE ELECTRIC &amp; GAS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW YORK STATE ELECTRIC &amp; GAS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
311,416,000
305,177,000
Net inc
50,421,000
55,269,000
Share earns
.85
.93
6mo rev
699,387,000
686,498,000
Net loss
167,306,000
b134,862,000
Share earns
-
2.29


COURT ORDERS CHANGES IN NUCLEAR WASTE RULES
LEAD: The Federal Environmental Protection Agency must change some of its standards regulating emissions from high-level radioactive waste from nuclear plants, a Federal appeals court has ruled.


New York Granted Federal Money for AIDS Drug
LEAD: More than 1,000 AIDS victims in New York will receive the life-prolonging drug AZT at no cost, under an $8.5 million Federal grant announced yesterday by the State Health Department.


ADVANTAGE COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANTAGE COMPANIES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,966,000
1,008,000
Net inc
104,000
b18,000
Share earns
.04
-
6mo rev
6,588,000
1,898,000
Net inc
157,000
b127,000
Share earns
.06
-
b-Net loss


ALCOHOL-RELATED DEATHS SEEN UNDERREPORTED
LEAD: Researchers studying the deaths of 450 young Army veterans found that almost a third were alcohol-related, six times as many as were reflected on death certificates.


Benjamin Bogin, Executive Of Conde Nast Publications
LEAD: Benjamin Bogin, vice president and director of the executive committee of Conde Nast publications, died last Thursday at Stamford (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in Stamford.


GEPHARDT TRADES BARBS WITH KEMP
LEAD: Representative Richard A. Gephardt, a Democratic candidate for President, vigorously defended himself today against charges that he was a ''protectionist.'' In a debate with a Republican Presidential aspirant, he declared that tough action against unfair trade practices was essential to defend the ''standard of living of the American middle class.


ABITIBI-PRICE INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABITIBI-PRICE INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
756,400,000
701,700,000
Net inc
36,200,000
28,500,000
Share earns
.49
.39
6mo sales
1,452,100,000
1,349,100,000
Net inc
58,100,000
50,200,000
Share earns
.78
.69


Unisys, Lotus and Wang Up
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation said yesterday that its profits rose 59.1 percent in the second quarter, to $121.2 million, or 64 cents a share, from $76.2 million, or 54 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue rose 70 percent, to $2.28 billion, from $1.34 billion a year earlier.


SUMMCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUMMCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,834,000
b3,534,000
Per share
.41
.41
Shares outst
8,693,953
8,035,174
6mo net inc
7,339,000
b7,005,000
Per share
.79
.86
Shares outst
8,690,898
7,537,024


COLORADO NATIONAL BANKSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLORADO NATIONAL BANKSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b824,000
c1,894,000
Per share
.08
.17
6mo net inc
b1,131,000
c4,223,000
Per share
.11
.39
b-After tax credits of $516,000 for the quarter and $1.5 million for the 6 months.


EXPLAINING A MOON'S IMPROBABLE GEOLOGY
LEAD: ASTRONOMERS trying to explain the peculiar geology of Miranda, a moon of Uranus, believe they have found an answer: it must have spent millions of years in a chaotic orbit, tumbling and lurching erratically instead of rotating at predictable intervals.


Income Up 13% At Polaroid
LEAD: The Polaroid Corporation said today that it earned $27.3 million, or 44 cents a share, in the second quarter, a 13 percent jump from $24.2 million, or 39 cents a share, a year ago.


SAVIN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAVIN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
87,327,000
95,140,000
Net inc
b2,002,000
c3,161,000
Share earns
.06
-
6mo rev
176,156,000
189,941,000
Net inc
b3,512,000
c8,494,000
Share earns
.12
-


SCHLUMBERGER LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCHLUMBERGER LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,107,785,000
1,274,166,000
Net inc
30,150,000
b55,176,000
Share earns
.11
.19
6mo rev
2,206,177,000
2,734,629,000
Net inc
35,143,000
b203,393,000
Share earns
.13
.70


EGYPTIAN OFFICIAL URGES TALKS AS SHARON ACTS IN WEST BANK
LEAD: The Egyptian Foreign Minister, making the first visit to Jerusalem by any Egyptian leader since the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982, appealed today for Israel to take part in an international Middle East peace conference.


LAKE SUNAPEE SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAKE SUNAPEE SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
516,194
436,217
Per share
.23
.19
6mo net inc
936,961
597,672
Per share
.42
.28
The per share earnings reflect a 2-for-1 stock split paid in June.


Poindexter Questioned on Conflicts With North's Testimony
LEAD: Senator George J. Mitchell, a Maine Democrat, questioned Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter yesterday over the admiral's testimony and that of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.
Following are excerpts of that exchange:


AIDS Clinic Being Weighed By Chicago Dental Society
LEAD: The Chicago Dental Society is considering setting up a clinic for AIDS patients because so many dentists refuse to treat them, society officials have said.


APPETITES OF MAN AND SEA OTTER MAY PROVE FATAL TO PLAN TO SAVE SPECIES
LEAD: Federal officials are preparing to airlift a vanguard of sea otters more than 300 miles down the California coast in a colonization effort that they describe as essential to protecting the species from extinction.


ONE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONE BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,384,000
c6,197,000
Per share
.54
.74
Shares outst
8,188,160
7,454,741
6mo net inc
b10,336,000
c10,571,000
Per share
1.29
1.25
Shares outst
8,013,858
7,450,751


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Key PBS Station Lags In Fund-Raising Efforts
LEAD: Contributions to WGBH, the public-television station here whose productions are a mainstay of public stations nationwide, lagged badly in fund-raising efforts in March, leading a national trend.


Admiral Says O'Neill Stalled Contra Funds
LEAD: Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter, in testimony today at the Iran-contra hearings, accused Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the former Speaker of the House, of personally holding up $100 million in aid for the Nicaraguan contras last year.


TWO-TIER WAGE SYSTEM: FOR MANY IT LEADS TO A SECOND-CLASS STATUS
LEAD: In 1983, when American Airlines instituted a wage scale for newly hired workers that was lower than that for other employees, executives at other airlines and in other industries thought it was a great idea.
They reasoned that by taking the same approach they would be able to reduce their labor costs significantly without having to fight for major concessions from longer-term workers and their unions.


RHNB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RHNB CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
689,786
658,606
Per share
.60
.58
6mo net inc
1,385,038
1,291,934
Per share
1.21
1.13


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.63
6.56
6.48
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.55
5.57
5.72
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.63
5.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.21
8.18
7.05
30-YR.


GREAT LAKES CHEMICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT LAKES CHEMICAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
119,071,000
80,120,000
Net inc
11,957,000
7,021,000
Share earns
.72
.47
Shares outst
16,625,495
14,995,066
6mo rev
236,642,000
152,448,000
Net inc
23,708,000
12,235,000
Share earns
1.50
.82
Shares outst
15,836,829
14,988,785


Advertising; Columbia Pictures To McCann-Erickson
LEAD: Anyone who knows about the long, loving relationship between the Coca-Cola Company and the agencies in the Interpublic Group of Companies must have thought that Columbia Pictures would end up with one of them once it was acquired by Coke.


GATEWAY COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GATEWAY COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,368,562
2,745,794
Net inc
203,248
321,575
Share earns
.04
.07
6mo rev
7,511,618
4,945,032
Net inc
856,809
573,530
Share earns
.18
.13


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ARCO, Los Angeles, said its separately incorporated unit, the Arco Chemical Co., had authorized the filing with the S.E.C. for an initial public offering of less than 20 percent of ARCO Chemical stock.


The Talk of Queens Boulevard; The Boulevard Loses a Large Measure of Homeyness
LEAD: After the disastrous fire in 1977 that nearly put him out of business, Nick Jutis reopened Luigi's Continental Restaurant on Queens Boulevard in Kew Gardens.
With a classic sense of pessimism, he renamed it Poor Nick's.


HUNGARY RAISES CONSUMER PRICES
LEAD: The Government of Hungary's new Prime Minister, Karoly Grosz, today implemented a far-reaching set of price increases on consumer commodities and services.


A Ship on His Shoulder
LEAD: The United States is going to reflag oil tankers belonging to Kuwait.
This is a boon to Kuwait, which gets the U.S.
Navy for its very own, and for Scrabble players, who can now make ''reflag,'' ''reflags,'' ''reflagged,'' ''reflagging'' and ''reflaggings'' without being put out of the game at gunpoint.


DUKE POWER CO reports earnings for 12mo to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DUKE POWER CO (NYSE)
12mo to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,553,840,000
3,086,553,000
Net inc
487,052,000
432,120,000
Share earns
4.26
3.66


Tudor Warming Up
LEAD: John Tudor, the St.
Louis Cardinals left-hander who has been idle since April 19 with a broken leg, has the go-ahead to begin working out.
Tudor will report tomorrow to Louisville of the American Association, where he will face Omaha.
He is tentatively scheduled to pitch Sunday against Iowa in Des


Leader of Anglican Church Believes Waite Is Still Alive
LEAD: The Archbishop of Canterbury said today that he had heard ''nothing whatever'' from the abductors of his Middle East envoy, Terry Waite, but that he remained convinced that Mr.
Waite was alive.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.Which will burn more calories, a 20-minute walk immediately after dinner or a 20-minute walk three hours later?


Queens Parolee Held in Murder of Parole Officer
LEAD: A man described by a prosecutor as a ''drug kingpin'' in Queens was charged yesterday with contracting for the murder of a New York State parole officer.


Dow Off 22.32; Stock Drop Is Wide
LEAD: The stock market retreated yesterday, losing the momentum that caused the Dow Jones industrial average on Friday to close above 2,500 for the first time.


STAGE: FIGHT IN 'ARATOOGA'
LEAD: THE most exciting episode in ''The Invasion of Aratooga'' is intermission.
During the break, there is always a chance of running into urban drama on the stretch of East 13th Street in front of the CSC Repertory Theater, especially on weekends when squads of rock commandos peel off from the lines outside a nearby club and try to outfox the brace of Sylvester


CONSOLIDATED FREIGHTWAYS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED FREIGHTWAYS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
559,045,000
533,506,000
Net inc
20,004,000
26,401,000
Share earns
.51
.69
6mo rev
1,089,211,000
1,026,486,000
Net inc
37,649,000
42,266,000
Share earns
.97
1.10


SHEARSON LEHMAN BROTHERS HOLDINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHEARSON LEHMAN BROTHERS HOLDINGS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,314,800,000
1,067,500,000
Net inc
61,400,000
60,400,000
Share earns
.66
-
6mo rev
2,575,000,000
2,181,800,000
Net inc
137,500,000
b150,500,000
Share earns
1.60
-


Charges Dismissed In Toxic Waste Case
LEAD: A judge yesterday dismissed charges against a company and four of its employees who were accused of illegally discharging 55,000 drums of hazardous and toxic wastes into the Atlantic Ocean and landfills in Toms River.


MERRILL LYNCH &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERRILL LYNCH &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,442,000,000
2,334,000,000
Net inc
83,300,000
91,100,000
Share earns
.76
.86
6mo rev
5,137,000,000
4,508,000,000
Net inc
192,000,000
177,900,000
Share earns
1.75
1.71


TRUSTCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRUSTCORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
10,324,000
9,865,000
Per share
.75
.71
6mo net inc
19,600,000
17,700,000
Per share
1.42
1.34
The net for the year-ago periods is prior to an accounting change recorded for the first half of 1986.


Lopez Inducted into L.P.G.A. Hall of Fame
LEAD: Nancy Lopez, and her husband, Ray Knight of the Baltimore Orioles, holding their daughter, Ashley Marie, at ceremony in New York.
Page A20. (NYT/Ruby Washington)


'Hollywood Squares,' On ABC, Signs Rivers
LEAD: Joan Rivers, who left the Fox Network last May, after eight months as host of a late-night talk show, will join ''Hollywood Squares'' next fall on ABC-TV.


FIRST ALABAMA BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST ALABAMA BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
13,734,000
13,336,000
Per share
.42
.41
6mo net inc
27,387,000
26,756,000
Per share
.84
.83


Elderly Man Shoots An Intruder in Head
LEAD: An 71-year-old man who found a knife-wielding intruder in his Bronx home yesterday shot and critically wounded the man, the police said.


FASHION NOTES
LEAD: ''USUALLY everyone hides here,'' Giorgio Sant'Angelo said in Bellport, L.I., a town on the Great South Bay that has been a semisecret summer getaway for Manhattan's fashion set.
But Sunday afternoon, both summer and year-round residents went public when a grass-roots group called People Taking Action Against AIDS raised more than $100,000 at an afternoon lawn party and auction for the People With AIDS Coalition and the Long Island Association for AIDS


Benefits of Mother's Touch
LEAD: Premature infants whose mothers massaged, rocked and talked to them at regular intervals gained weight faster and left the hospital sooner than those who did not receive such attention, according to a study.


EATON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EATON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,031,200,000
1,003,300,000
Net inc
66,100,000
52,500,000
Share earns
2.31
1.61
Shares outst
28,528,000
32,547,000
6mo sales
2,050,700,000
1,885,700,000
Net inc
126,300,000
102,600,000
Share earns
4.33
3.13
Shares outst
29,105,000
32,670,000


White Bears and Other Forbidden Thoughts
LEAD: WHAT happens when a person is ordered not to think about a white bear?


UNION NATIONAL CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION NATIONAL CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
8,019,000
6,428,000
Per share
.81
.65
6mo net inc
15,163,000
13,013,000
Per share
1.53
1.31


Giles Wanamaker Dies at 79; Headed Hertz Corporation
LEAD: Giles A. Wanamaker, former president and chief operating officer of the Hertz Corporation, died Sunday in Punta Gorda, Fla., where he had lived for the past 14 years.
He was 79 years old.


GREECE UNVAILS U.S. LETTER ENDING RIFT OVER TERROR
LEAD: The Greek Government made public a letter from the United States Government today that was intended to end the friction over accusations that Greek officials had contacts with representatives of an Arab terrorist group.


UPJOHN CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UPJOHN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
665,000,000
594,000,000
Net inc
79,000,000
65,000,000
Share earns
.42
.34
6mo sales
1,300,000,000
1,100,000,000
Net inc
159,000,000
128,000,000
Share earns
.85
.68


Austere Plan For Argentina
LEAD: The Government announced tough new economic measures today, including price increases and the sale of eight state companies, to repair what it called ''decades of economic damage.''


Sale at Waterford
LEAD: The Waterford Glass Group P.L.C. said it had agreed to sell part of its Josiah Wedgwood &amp; Sons Ltd. unit to Shires Ltd. for $:23.75 million, or about $38 million.
The division to be sold is Trent Sanitaryware, makers of ceramic sanitary ware.
Waterford said Trent did not fit the group's long-term strategic plan.


GRANITE STATE BANKSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRANITE STATE BANKSHARES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
5,000
b333,000
6mo net inc
726,000
894,000
Per share
.35
-
b-Net income  Granite became publicly held in August 1986.


WHEELING-PITTSBURGH STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WHEELING-PITTSBURGH STEEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
258,790,000
245,338,000
Net inc
b39,321,000
c60,276,000
Share earns
7.25
-
6mo sales
513,849,000
464,967,000
Net inc
b73,278,000
c56,270,000
Share earns
13.45
-


2-Sport Advice
LEAD: Jackie Joyner-Kersee, the world record-holder in the women's heptathlon, was available to give expert advice to participants at the Mobil Big Apple summer recreation program last week at Madison Square Garden's Felt Forum.


Seahawks Sign Woods
LEAD: The Seattle Seahawks signed their first-round draft choice, Tony Woods, a 245-pound linebacker from the University of Pittsburgh, yesterday, one day before the opening of their camp for rookies and selected veterans in Kirkland, Wash.


SIGNET BANKING reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIGNET BANKING (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b40,199,000
c21,201,000
Per share
-
.87
6mo net loss
b18,022,000
c40,070,000
Per share
-
1.67
b-Includes a $75 million addition to the loan loss reserve for loans to less developed countries which represents about 40 percent of its exposure in that area.


GREAT NORTHERN NEKOOSA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT NORTHERN NEKOOSA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
575,100,000
502,100,000
Net inc
44,900,000
bc300,000
Share earns
.82
-
6mo sales
1,141,800,000
989,900,000
Net inc
88,200,000
c13,600,000
Share earns
1.62
.26


Import-Reliant Port Wary of Trade Bill
LEAD: Forty miles from the halls of Congress and the speechmaking about trade imbalances and lost competitiveness, this proud city of ships and steel mills is torn between protecting its manufacturers and protecting imports.


In Italy, the Staid Is Now Stylish
LEAD: Classics staged a comeback and the fashion avant-garde was in retreat at Pitti Uomo Italia, the first presentation of men's clothes for next spring.
The three-day trade show, held this month in the massive Fortezza da Basso complex in Florence, attracted many buyers from such American stores as Macy's and Bergdorf Goodman.


BADGER METER INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BADGER METER INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,910,000
16,513,000
Net inc
418,000
454,000
Share earns
.28
.31
6mo sales
33,489,000
31,309,000
Net inc
866,000
784,000
Share earns
.58
.53


STONE &amp; WEBSTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STONE &amp; WEBSTER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
81,012,000
81,119,000
Net inc
b15,154,000
9,586,000
Share earns
2.05
1.31
6mo rev
157,258,000
155,190,000
Net inc
b25,773,000
14,092,000
Share earns
3.48
1.92


Shouldn't the Night Sky Be Light?
LEAD: WHILE some astrophysicists work on high-velocity field dwarfs or magnetohydrodynamic solitons, others have been brooding lately about an older problem: Why is the night sky dark?


Warner's Earnings More Than Double
LEAD: Warner Communications Inc. reported yesterday that its second-quarter net income more than doubled to $104.3 million, from $51.6 million a year earlier.
Earnings per share rose to 68 cents, from 37 cents.


Networks Now Rotate Coverage of Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 9 A.M. on the NBC television network under the network rotation system.
The hearings will also be televised on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New


Charles J. Hasbrouck, A Landmarks Expert
LEAD: Charles J. Hasbrouck, who directed the city's landmarks survey and was preparing guidelines for the Landmarks Preservation Commission, died July 14 at Lenox Hill Hospital after a brief illness.
He was 35 years old and lived in Manhattan.


A Title Lost in The Fog
LEAD: Golf is such a lonely game and the pain of defeat so personal.
There are no teammates to share it.
Usually only a spouse or fellow competitor is allowed inside that facade that must be built so a golfer can make it to the first tee the next time.


Dow Says Profit Rose By 40.5%
LEAD: The Dow Chemical Company, the nation's second-largest chemical company, yesterday reported a 40.5 percent rise in its second-quarter profit.


The Stage: 'Psycho Beach Party'
LEAD: CHARLES BUSCH's ''Psycho Beach Party'' is a comic trash compactor of a play that takes an already silly genre - early 1960's surf and beach blanket movies - and sends it to camp heaven.


Kennedy Sees Project as Forerunner of U.S. 'Literacy Corps'
LEAD: College students in Boston will teach children and adults to read as part of a privately financed program announced today by Senator Edward M. Kennedy, who called it the beginning of a ''national literacy corps.''


WEDTECH FILES $3.3 MILLION SUIT AGAINST LAWYERS
LEAD: The Wedtech Corporation's new management filed a $3.3 million suit against E. Robert Wallach yesterday, charging that the San Francisco lawyer and confidant of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d conspired to defraud the company of ''at least $300,000.''


CINCINNATI BELL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINCINNATI BELL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
131,495,000
107,031,000
Net inc
16,565,000
13,292,000
Share earns
.52
.41
6mo rev
260,087,000
231,169,000
Net inc
32,824,000
28,064,000
Share earns
1.02
.86


E-SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*E-SYSTEMS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
292,452,000
301,423,000
Net inc
10,313,000
15,884,000
Share earns
.34
.52
6mo sales
608,758,000
550,283,000
Net inc
26,872,000
30,224,000
Share earns
.87
.99


Help With WordStar
LEAD: Just as some people will always love Corvairs and vote for Harold Stassen, some people will always love WordStar, the word-processing software standard against which all other word processors beg to be measured.


FUQUA INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FUQUA INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
191,672,000
173,689,000
Net inc
17,609,000
b13,209,000
Share earns
.81
.62
6mo sales
384,579,000
361,142,000
Net inc
34,771,000
b31,328,000
Share earns
1.64
1.48


Our Towns; Loving Care For Nasty Yaks And Ill Emus
LEAD: Every zoo needs a Sue Mitschke, 20 years an animal keeper. ''I'm a swing keeper,'' she said, filling a bucket of delicious high fiber pellets for the llama. ''What a love, what a love if this llama's upset - she'll spit in your face.
Good girl!
Good girl!''


BANCTEXAS GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANCTEXAS GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
22,579,000
8,628,000
6mo net loss
46,620,000
8,254,000


The Testimony: Dialogue With 'Pragmatic Elements' in Iran
LEAD: Members of Congress questioned Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter further yesterday, in his fourth day of testimony, about his role in the Iran-contra affair.
Here are excerpts from his testimony, as recorded by The New York Times.


Newark Hospitals Seek Unit for AIDS Treatment
LEAD: Hospitals here in New Jersey's largest city are so strained by the number of AIDS patients that they are trying to establish the state's first hospital for people with the deadly disease.


KOPPERS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KOPPERS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
389,100,000
370,900,000
Net inc
b34,800,000
c27,000,000
Share earns
1.21
.90
6mo sales
660,800,000
627,900,000
Net inc
b31,700,000
c26,400,000
Share earns
1.09
.84


BANK OF NEW ENGLAND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF NEW ENGLAND CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,900,000
48,400,000
Per share
.06
.73
6mo net inc
b65,302,000
97,534,000
Per share
.95
1.48
b-After a special after-tax provision for loans to refinancing countries of $56.1 million for the quarter and 6 months.


Youth on Death Row Is Granted New Trial
LEAD: The state Supreme Court reversed the capital murder conviction today of a teen-ager found guilty of stabbing three people to death.


ALLEGHENY LUDLUM reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEGHENY LUDLUM (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
217,351,000
-
Net inc
14,210,000
-
Share earns
.71
-
6mo sales
422,969,000
-
Net inc
25,884,000
-
Share earns
1.43
-
The company went public in May.


CHICAGO PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHICAGO PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
317,957,000
184,113,000
Net inc
b4,072,000
3,268,000
Share earns
.42
.41
6mo sales
633,502,000
360,720,000
Net inc
b11,455,000
c11,788,000
Share earns
1.18
1.47


Jersey Construction Worker Is Killed by 5-Ton Steel Slab
LEAD: A New Jersey construction worker was killed when a five-ton slab of steel fell on him at the site of a Long Island water tower where he was working, the police said.


SCANDALS POINT TO WEAKNESS IN REVIEW PROCESS
LEAD: IN an ideal world, a study of children and cholesterol by Dr.
Charles J. Glueck would never have seen the light of day.
The system for preventing questionable findings from being published would have seen to that.


New York Fed Official To Join Nikko Securities
LEAD: Mary R. Clarkin, vice president of open market activities at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, is resigning from her post to join the Nikko Securities Company International Inc. as senior vice president and sales manager of the fixed-income division, Nikko announced yesterday.


SECURITY COUNCIL DEMANDS A TRUCE IN IRAN-IRAQ WAR
LEAD: The United Nations Security Council voted unanimously today to order a cease-fire in the war between Iraq and Iran.


VICTORIA BANKSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VICTORIA BANKSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
151,000
b2,696,000
Per share
.02
-
6mo net inc
1,150,000
b1,269,000
Per share
.17
-
b-Net loss


Advertising; New Group Publisher At Hearst Magazines
LEAD: D. Claeys Bahrenburg, 40, has replaced K. Robert Brink, 48, as one of two group publishers at Hearst Magazines.
Mr.
Brink went on ''an extended leave of absence'' two weeks ago without any internal or external corporate announcement.
There is also no official word on when he is expected back, and the company has no comment on the change.


Precious Metals Climb On Mideast Tensions
LEAD: Precious metals futures advanced yesterday amid concern over increased tensions in the Middle East.


Issue in Nicaragua Isn't Communism
LEAD: To the Editor:


HAWKEYE BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAWKEYE BANCORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,608,000
c13,888,000
Per share
.15
-
6mo net inc
b10,431,000
c22,096,000
Per share
.97
-
b-After a tax credit of $394,000 for the quarter and 6 months; the 6 months also includes a gain of $8.1 million from the extinguishment of debt.


CENTERRE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTERRE BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
6,886,000
b8,073,000
Per share
-
1.04
6mo net inc
3,842,000
15,929,000
Per share
.50
2.06
b-Net income  The latest second quarter includes a $20 million provision to loan loss reserves for Latin American debt.


Chrysler Details Pact With Chinese
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said it would sell technology and capital equipment for the production of 150,000 to 300,000 engines a year to First Automobile Works, a Government-owned corporation in Changchun, China.
As previously reported, Chrysler said it had beaten competing bids from Europe, Japan and the United


Manville Profit Increases 44.7%
LEAD: The Manville Corporation today reported a 44.7 percent increase in second-quarter earnings and said it had accumulated enough cash to meet the initial obligations of its bankruptcy reorganization plan.


Crazy Salad
LEAD: Mesclun is a collection of very young greens, leaves and flower petals that, dressed with a light vinaigrette, makes for this summer's trendiest salad.
It is also a word that makes for some confusion.
Witness the case of the woman who bought a quarter of a pound the other day.


CONVICTIONS REVERSED IN ISLAND SLAYING
LEAD: An appeals court has ordered acquittals for three young men convicted of murder in the 1985 assassination of the President of Palau, an American-administered trust territory in the Western Pacific.


EQUITABLE BANCORPORATION (BALTIMORE, MD)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EQUITABLE BANCORPORATION (BALTIMORE, MD)(O)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
7,163,000
9,482,000
Per share
.37
.58
6mo net inc
17,068,000
18,161,000
Per share
.94
1.10
The per share earnings reflect a 5 percent stock dividend paid in March.


Yanks Win, 7-1; Mattingly Ailing
LEAD: Twenty-four hours after the third most one-sided defeat in Yankee history, Tommy John tonight restored some credibility to a battered pitching staff by creating enough ground balls for Don Mattingly to earn a record for the third time in as many days.


LANCE INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 13
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANCE INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 13
1987
1986
Sales
91,298,000
88,183,000
Net inc
9,880,000
8,508,000
Share earns
.61
.51
6mo sales
178,120,000
171,165,000
Net inc
18,969,000
16,093,000
Share earns
1.16
.97


Chess: Mednis Turns Back Gambit On Way to a First Place Tie
LEAD: The Fifth Andorra International Open Tournament at Andorra La Vella in the Pyrenees ended in a tie for first place among the grandmasters John Fedorowicz of New York and Edmar Mednis of Queens and the international master Miodrag Todorcevic, formerly of Yugoslavia who now lives in Monaco.


TAUNTON SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TAUNTON SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,099,000
655,000
Per share
.30
-
6mo net inc
2,194,000
1,493,000
Per share
.68
-
Taunton converted to stock form of ownership in June 1986.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Trinity's Independence


WARNER COMMUNICATIONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARNER COMMUNICATIONS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
766,324,000
644,338,000
Net inc
b104,323,000
51,558,000
Share earns
.68
.37
6mo rev
1,554,622,000
1,332,950,000
Net inc
b169,914,000
82,021,000
Share earns
1.09
.59


Met Files Motion to Retain Artifacts
LEAD: The Metropolitan Museum filed a motion in Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday to dismiss a suit by Turkey that demands the return of a group of gold and silver artifacts that Ankara contends were illegally exported from that country in the 1960's.


Southland, JT Revise Accord
LEAD: The Southland Corporation and the JT Acquisition Corporation, the concern formed to acquire Southland, said today that they had slightly revised their previously announced $5.1 billion merger agreement.
JT Acquisition is an affiliate of the Thompson Company, a private investment firm owned by the Thompson family, the descendants of Southland's founder, Joe C.


Treasury Cancels Its Auction
LEAD: The credit markets were somewhat disturbed yesterday after the Treasury canceled its regular Monday bill auctions, and the price of the bellwether 30-year Government bond dropped more than half a point in light trading.


UNION CAMP CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION CAMP CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
577,567,000
499,400,000
Net inc
47,812,000
28,602,000
Share earns
.65
.39
6mo sales
1,114,585,000
994,428,000
Net inc
92,009,000
50,641,000
Share earns
1.25
.69


POUGHKEEPSIE SAVINGS BANK FSB reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POUGHKEEPSIE SAVINGS BANK FSB
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,337,000
1,932,000
Per share
.60
.49
6mo net inc
4,427,000
3,777,000
Per share
1.13
.96


Staging 'La Strada' In a Vermont Field Requires Invention
LEAD: The theatergoers begin their evening by tramping across a field to a gaily striped circus tent surrounded by performers relaxing before the show.
Jugglers practice tossing their pins and balls; a tiny ballerina in a pink tutu twirls across the grass blowing soap bubbles; a clown plays cards with a woman wearing a live boa constrictor coiled around her neck, its forked tongue flicking soundlessly at her hand of cards.


KEYCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEYCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
18,989,000
19,859,000
Per share
.63
.72
Shares outst
28,491,303
26,088,576
6mo net inc
41,483,000
37,787,000
Per share
1.38
1.38
Shares outst
28,514,661
25,677,452


Home-Run Hat Tricks
LEAD: When Dale Sveum of the Milwaukee Brewers hit three home runs on Friday night, he became the ninth batter this season to drive three balls out of the park in one game.
The others were Eric Davis, Tim Wallach, Cory Snyder, Joe Carter, Mike Schmidt, Mark McGwire, Bill Madlock and Brook Jacoby.
Johnny Mize, the career leader in the category, hit three homers in a game six times.


Cyanamid, Sterling And SmithKline Up
LEAD: Three drug companies - American Cyanamid, SmithKline Beckman and Sterling Drug - reported higher second-quarter profits yesterday.


War-Crimes Defendant in Israel Changes Lawyer
LEAD: John Demjanjuk, on trial here on charges that he committed war crimes as a Nazi death camp guard, formally dismissed his chief lawyer today, just one week before the defense is scheduled to start presenting its case.


Another A.M.C. Profit
LEAD: The American Motors Corporation, which returned to the black late in 1986 after several years of heavy losses, reported its third consecutive profitable quarter today.


BRUNSWICK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRUNSWICK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
819,369,000
458,654,000
Net inc
57,544,000
33,555,000
Share earns
.65
.40
Shares outst
88,960,000
83,993,000
6mo sales
1,521,519,000
855,407,000
Net inc
92,216,000
57,394,000
Share earns
1.04
.68
Shares outst
88,839,000
84,045,000


BRITISH PLAN: REDUCING LOCAL CONTROL
LEAD: Britain's schools are on the threshold of a major revolution.


AMCA INTERNATIONAL LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMCA INTERNATIONAL LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
269,281,000
299,854,000
Net loss
7,128,000
b14,957,000
Share earns
-
.26
6mo rev
510,553,000
593,519,000
Net loss
14,349,000
b11,986,000
Share earns
-
.01


Actor Found Dead at Home
LEAD: The body of Kevin Marcum, who appeared as the wise old feline, Old Deuteronomy, in the Broadway musical ''Cats,'' was found last night on the living room floor of his Manhattan apartment at 752 West End Avenue, the police said.
The death of the 31-year-old actor, who also appeared in the musical version of ''Les Miserables,'' was labeled suspicious, pending an autopsy.


WANG LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WANG LABORATORIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
824,000,000
716,800,000
Net inc
32,000,000
800,000
Share earns
.20
.01
Yr sales
2,836,700,000
2,642,500,000
Net loss
70,700,000
b50,900,000
Share earns
-
.35


Stake in Pan Am Is Sold by Resorts
LEAD: Resorts International Inc., the Atlantic City hotel and casino operator, said yesterday that it had sold its entire 12.2-million-share investment in the Pan Am Corporation.


Who Loses if Child Care Is Paid Off the Books
LEAD: To the Editor:


DIME SAVINGS BANK OF NY reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIME SAVINGS BANK OF NY (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b31,586,000
c33,917,000
Per share
1.41
-
6mo net inc
b59,702,000
c70,180,000
Per share
2.66
-
b-After tax credits of $12,020,000 for the quarter and $22,741,000 for the 6 months.


KANSAS GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for 12mo to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KANSAS GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
12mo to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
530,142,000
451,876,000
Net inc
79,074,000
69,801,000
Share earns
1.81
1.42


OCCIDENTAL HINTS AT IBP SALE
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said today that it was considering selling to the public a minority interest in IBP Inc., the nation's largest meat processor, which the oil company acquired in 1981 for $795 million.


INDEPENDENT BANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDEPENDENT BANK CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,686,000
1,558,000
Per share
.50
.47
6mo net inc
3,978,000
3,572,000
Per share
1.19
1.08


Bridge: Top-Ranked Teams Survive Knockout Title Event Cuts
LEAD: The Spingold Knockout Team Championship began here quietly Sunday at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
An original entry of 105 teams was cut to 64 teams with all the top-ranked squads surviving.


I.B.M. Computers
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said that two versions of its newest mid-range computers, the 9370, were being shipped two months earlier than planned.
The machine, the smallest of I.B.M.'s System/370 family of mainframes, is considered a key element in the company's plan to regain its position in the mid-range computer market, where I.B.M.


Man, 21, Is Killed In Apartment Blaze
LEAD: A man was killed and four people, including three firefighters, were injured in an apartment fire early yesterday morning, the authorities said.


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, JULY 21, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


MCI Down 50%, Bell Atlantic Up 6.1% in Quarter
LEAD: The MCI Communicatins Corporation, the nation's second-largest long-distance telephone company behind A.T.&amp;T., reported yesterday that its second-quarter profits dropped 50 percent.


Dollar Ends Day Mixed; Gold Up in New York
LEAD: The dollar closed mixed against major foreign currencies in moderate, uneventful domestic trading yesterday.


Massachusetts Plans To Combine Offerings
LEAD: The Massachusetts Legislature passed a bill last week to allow the state's Industrial Finance Agency to combine the bond sales of state agencies with those it arranges for local businesses.


Delta Jet Avoids Small Plane In a Landing at Sacramento
LEAD: A Delta Air Lines passenger jet making its final landing approach Sunday was forced to turn sharply to avoid a small single-engine aircraft, Federal officials said today.


Stranded AIDS Patient Reaches Ohio Hospital
LEAD: An American AIDS patient who had been stranded in China after commercial airlines refused to transport him completed a five-day trip to a hospital here Sunday.


2 British Airlines Give Merger Plan
LEAD: British Airways and its smaller rival, British Caledonian, asked the Government to approve the merger plan they announced last week.
The companies said it would create an airline large enough to compete with American carriers.


The Pope's Choice of T.W.A. Provokes Anger
LEAD: How should the Pope choose an airline?


Chip Set Aids 'Clone' Makers
LEAD: Chips and Technologies Inc. today introduced the first very-large-scale integrated circuit chip set for designing microcomputers compatible with the International Business Machines Corporation's Personal System/2 Model 30.


NBC and Union Meet With Federal Mediator
LEAD: Union and network negotiators met at the offices of a Federal mediator yesterday for the first time since 2,800 NBC employees went on strike.


BLACKMUN IS BEING TREATED FOR RECURRENCE OF PROSTATE CANCER
LEAD: Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun of the Supreme Court is undergoing treatment for a recurrence of prostate cancer at the Mayo Clinic and has an ''excellent'' prognosis, the clinic said today amid speculation about the 78-year-old justice's medical condition.


AMERICAN CYANAMID CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CYANAMID CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,087,300,000
1,027,000,000
Net inc
b87,600,000
56,500,000
Share earns
.96
.60
6mo sales
2,101,400,000
1,944,900,000
Net inc
149,100,000
105,600,000
Share earns
1.63
1.13


ARMTEK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMTEK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
316,675,000
202,328,000
Net inc
6,716,000
b44,287,000
Share earns
.68
-
9mo sales
871,188,000
590,211,000
Net inc
13,525,000
b40,346,000
Share earns
1.37
-


BUTLER MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUTLER MANUFACTURING CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
150,052,000
132,213,000
Net inc
3,395,000
3,667,000
Share earns
.69
.71
6mo sales
264,549,000
229,800,000
Net inc
2,752,000
1,179,000
Share earns
.56
.23


INSIDE
LEAD:  Pioneering Brain Surgery


Plying for Paydirt on Trade and Taxes
LEAD: ''What a time to become chairman,'' Senator Lloyd Bentsen said wryly during a break in a late-night Senate session on the omnibus trade bill.


TEMPLE-INLAND INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEMPLE-INLAND INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
395,100,000
313,500,000
Net inc
35,800,000
19,300,000
Share earns
1.17
.63
6mo sales
785,700,000
606,200,000
Net inc
69,500,000
32,900,000
Share earns
2.26
1.08


WHEN DISK MEETS PIE
LEAD: FEW people using personal computers today realize that the machines once utilized 8-inch floppies.
My first ''home computer'' was a Sol, manufactured in kit form by Processor Technology.
Even with its hand-rubbed walnut sides, the Sol was not much bigger than today's Apple II.
But its disk drive was external, and it took up as much space as a filing cabinet's drawer.


Securities Approval for Chase
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board announced today that it had granted approval for the Chase Manhattan Corporation to underwrite mortgage-backed securities through a subsidiary.


TEXAS AIR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS AIR CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,160,000,000
539,600,000
Net loss
27,000,000
66,200,000
6mo rev
4,200,000,000
1,050,000,000
Net loss
127,700,000
77,400,000


TAX BREAK TO AID NEW YORK HOUSING
LEAD: In an effort to ease New York City's severe housing shortage, the agency that is the nation's largest investor in home mortgages will make use of a new Federal tax incentive to help renovate 1,000 rental apartments for low- and moderate-income people in New York City.


'Liaisons' Closing Challenged
LEAD: Efforts are under way to prevent the American producers of the Royal Shakespeare Company production of ''Les Liaisons Dangereuses'' from closing the show Sept. 6.
But sources close to the discussions, which are expected to continue at a meeting this afternoon, expressed little hope yesterday that the decision would be reversed - despite the fact that a new American cast for the show reportedly would have been headed by the well-known actors Glenn Close, Kevin Spacey and Kelly M


Significant Hormone Found
LEAD: Scientists have discovered a long-sought hormone that transfers calcium from the bones to the bloodstream, sometimes in excessive amounts.
The substance is expected to prove valuable in studies of cancer, osteoporosis and perhaps other major health problems.


LEFT-RIGHT, YAK-YAK-YAK
LEAD: Kelcie Banks, one of the most quotable boxers in the United States Olympic Festival, is the world amateur featherweight champion, but he is discovering that his path to the 1988 Olympic Games may not be an easy one.


Chinese Relics Stolen From Museum Since '81
LEAD: Thieves have stolen more than 115 cultural relics from a museum in northeastern China since 1981 and local authorities blamed lax security, a Chinese newspaper reported today.


ALCAN ALUMINIUM LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALCAN ALUMINIUM LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,700,000,000
1,560,000,000
Net inc
95,000,000
b106,000,000
Share earns
.60
.70
6mo rev
3,220,000,000
2,990,000,000
Net inc
157,000,000
b138,000,000
Share earns
.99
.91


Geologists Turn Talents to Fighting Crime
LEAD: Armed only with microscopes, geologists have helped convict a kidnapper, locate a stolen Cadillac and send a killer to death row.
They say their methods should be used by more police departments.


The Runaway Winner in Portugal
LEAD: When he appeared at a news conference and then addressed his supporters after his election victory on Sunday, Anibal Cavaco Silva seemed to force a smile.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''My government is determined that this mandatory resolution not become an empty effort, casting doubt on the efficacy of the United Nations as an organization for peace.''  - Secretary of State George P. Shultz, on resolution for a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war.  [ A1:2. ]


Texas Air Reports Loss
LEAD: The Texas Air Corporation, struggling to consolidate People Express, Frontier Airlines, Eastern Airlines and New York Air, said yesterday that it had a loss of $27 million in the second quarter, less than half of the $66.2 million loss it had in the comparable 1986 period.


Guard Is Killed in Fire At New Orleans Hotel
LEAD: Fire forced the evacuation of about 100 guests from a newly renovated downtown hotel late Sunday and a security guard who helped the people get out collapsed and later died, the authorities said.


Langston Hurls Seattle Onto the Baseball Map
LEAD: Mark Langston, Seattle's fourth-year left-handed pitcher, has a career won-lost record of 46-47 and a 1987 record of 10-9 with an earned run average of 4.52.
Although those numbers suggest mere mediocrity, his manager, Dick Williams, calls Langston ''a franchise pitcher, the kind of guy everybody would want on their ball club.


Mental Tests Suspect In Marring of Leonardo
LEAD: A man charged with damaging a Leonardo da Vinci drawing with a shotgun blast at the National Gallery was ordered today to undergo a mental health examination.


Careers; Optimism On Women Engineers
LEAD: BRING on the women engineers!
Apparently industry is serious.
The Northrop Corporation insists that ''we have a long-term commitment as we look ahead to hire women engineers,'' according to John J. Richardson, senior vice president-human resources.


Schlumberger Net Off 45.5%
LEAD: Schlumberger Ltd., the world's largest oilfield services company, said yesterday that its second-quarter profits fell 45.5 percent, to $30.1 million, or 11 cents a share, from $55.2 million, or 19 cents a share, a year ago.


As the Inquiry Unfolds, Pitfalls for Lawmakers
LEAD: Even as the House and Senate Iran-contra committees train the spotlight on the Reagan White House, more than two months of joint hearings have at times caught the panels themselves in the glare.


CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
5,176,000
7,018,000
Per share
.36
.49
6mo net inc
12,580,000
14,395,000
Per share
.87
1.00
The year-ago per share earnings adjusted for a 2-for-1 stock split in May.


KENNAMETAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENNAMETAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
94,955,000
90,014,000
Net inc
5,545,000
bc5,258,000
Share earns
.54
-
Yr sales
354,450,000
255,277,000
Net inc
17,200,000
b571,000
Share earns
1.69
.06


For Lower-Wage Tier, the Squeeze Is Tighter
LEAD: They sleep in bunk beds and on futons.
Some use corners of rooms for storage.
There is often a line to use the one bathroom.


POLAROID CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POLAROID CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
448,200,000
396,400,000
Net inc
27,300,000
24,200,000
Share earns
.44
.39
6mo sales
829,300,000
722,400,000
Net inc
51,900,000
40,300,000
Share earns
.84
.65


PACIFIC TELESIS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFIC TELESIS GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,280,000,000
2,260,000,000
Net inc
272,300,000
283,000,000
Share earns
.63
.66
6mo rev
4,480,000,000
4,480,000,000
Net inc
538,200,000
556,900,000
Share earns
1.25
1.30


Textron Stock Up
LEAD: Shares of Textron Inc., the aerospace concern that acquired the Ex-Cell-O Corporation last year, rose sharply yesterday on rumors of a possible takeover or restructuring.
The shares, which sold for about $25 each in late May, closed up $1.625, to $38.125, on the New York Stock Exchange, with about 2.3 million shares changing hands.


Gregg Leaving Oilers
LEAD: Randy Gregg, a defenseman who helped the Edmonton Oilers to win the National Hockey League championship last season, has retired to join the Canadian Olympic team, said Dave King, coach of the Olympic team.


BAYBANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAYBANKS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b17,696,000
14,176,000
Per share
1.18
.97
6mo net inc
c38,567,000
27,002,000
Per share
2.58
1.93
b-Included net of $1.5 million from the receipt of back interest on a loan that previously had been a non-performing asset.


305,000 Aliens Are Seeking U.S. Legal Status
LEAD: About 305,000 aliens have sought legal status under the new immigration law, according to Federal officials.
They deny that applications are below what they expected and that aliens are fearful of seeking legal status.


Bennett Tribute Postponed
LEAD: A tribute to the late director-choreographer Michael Bennett, originally scheduled for Monday at the Shubert Theater, has been postponed until the fall.
A date will be set when Bob Avian, Mr.
Bennett's longtime assistant, returns from staging a London production of ''Follies.'' Mr.
Avian is to supervise the arrangements.


RULE UPHELD FOR TV REPORTERS AS CANDIDATES
LEAD: A federal appeals court, in an opinion by Judge Robert H. Bork, ruled today that television reporters who run for office obligate their stations to provide equal time to opposing candidates.


SQUIBB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SQUIBB CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
532,200,000
424,200,000
Net inc
95,200,000
b67,700,000
Share earns
.91
.62
6mo sales
1,002,600,000
810,800,000
Net inc
164,600,000
b122,700,000
Share earns
1.57
1.13


RISING CANADIAN PARTY SCORES AT POLLS
LEAD: A sweep of three by-elections in widely separated regions of Canada appears to have confirmed the rise of a Social Democratic opposition group, the New Democratic Party, from its position as a perennial third-place finisher in Canadian elections to a possible contender for power.


OSHA SEEKS $2.59 MILLION FINE FOR MEATPACKER'S INJURY REPORTS
LEAD: The Occupational Safety and Health Administration today proposed a $2.59 million fine against IBP Inc., the nation's largest meatpacking company, on charges that it failed to report more than a thousand job-related injuries and illnesses over a two-year period.


FIRST JERSEY NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST JERSEY NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
10,424,000
9,100,000
Per share
1.28
1.11
6mo net inc
20,683,000
18,232,000
Per share
2.53
2.23


Falling in Love: A Woman's Fight In Foster Care
LEAD: Nettie Richards set out to recruit volunteers to visit the boarder babies at Harlem Hospital.


'RASPUTIN,' AN ORIGINAL ON CITY OPERA SCHEDULE
LEAD: Amid the rubble of aborted projects and failed commissions, New York's major opera houses do - contrary to current opinion - occasionally try again.
It will surprise many, for example, that the New York City Opera has not only commissioned a new opera but also already received the (almost) finished project.


4 Killed in Explosion in Brooklyn
LEAD: Rescue workers searching for victims after a propane tank exploded in the Borough Park section.
Four people were killed and 11 were injured when the blast ripped through a plumbing-supply store.
Page B1. (NYT/Ricki Rosen)


Stocks Fall Broadly; Dow Off 19.77
LEAD: Stocks fell broadly yesterday amid worries about inflation and Middle Eastern hostilities.
Late selling in the credit markets also contributed to the decline.


South African Delegation Is Met by Protests
LEAD: A group of 40 South Africans were met by protesters today as they returned from talks with exiled black opposition figures in West Africa.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A report in Science Times July 6 on the discovery of dinosaur eggs in Canada referred incorrectly to previous similar discoveries.
The first such finds were made in Mongolia in 1923.


Twins Edge Yankees in 9th, 2-1
LEAD: Under the teflon-coated fiberglass roof, at the end of the rarest of evenings in the place nicknamed the Homerdome - would you believe a pitchers' duel - the Yankees tonight failed to win the type of game that a team in a pennant race cannot afford to lose.


OPPOSITION FACTIONS AT KNIVES DRAWN AS SOUTH KOREANS TALK OF DEMOCRACY
LEAD: As the Government and the opposition here prepare to negotiate a blueprint for democracy, the atmosphere is turning sour with a stream of new opposition demands.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a New Delhi dispatch Monday on the ouster of a critic of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi from the Congress Party misidentified a legislator who had resigned his seat at Mr.
Gandhi's request.
The legislator was Amitabh Bachchan, India's best-known movie actor, not Ajitabh Bachchan, his brother, who is under investigation on charges of fraud and illegal possession of funds abroad.


From Broadway to Miss Liberty, Tourism Is Rising
LEAD: They amble while many people dash.
They stand at street corners uncrinkling maps or craning their necks skyward while people scurry around them.


GTE Has 27.7% Drop; United Telecom Deficit
LEAD: The GTE Corporation, the giant telecommunications concern, reported yesterday that its second-quarter profits fell 27.7 percent, hurt mainly by continuing losses at U S Sprint Communications, the long-distance telephone company that it owns jointly with United Telecommunications Inc.


Jets Sign Top Choice
LEAD: Roger Vick, a fullback from Texas A&amp;M who was the Jets' first-round draft choice, has signed a series of one-year contracts, the team announced yesterday.
Terms of the contract were not released.


Argentina and Brazil Begin Nuclear Discussions
LEAD: The President of Brazil has visited a sensitive Argentine nuclear installation in an unusual move that American officials hope will help prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to South America.


Pilot Dies as Plane Crashes In Chicago Residential Area
LEAD: A Cessna airplane crashed in a residential neighborhood on the city's Southwest Side on Monday night.
The pilot was killed, but there were no other casualties.


THE TESTIMONY: TAKING RISKS AS AN ADVISER TO THE PRESIDENT
LEAD: Members of Congress questioned Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter further yesterday, in the concluding day of his testimony, about missiles shipped to Iran and other issues in the Iran-contra affair.
Here are excerpts from his testimony, as recorded by The New York Times.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Guinness Import Company to Ron Semler Advertising, New York, for its Kronenbourg beer.


Mozambique Says Rightist Guerrillas Massacred 380 Civilians
LEAD: Anti-Government rebels massacred 380 people at a coastal town in Inhambane province last weekend, the official news agency, A.I.M., said today.


Sallie Mae Offers $150 Million Issue
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Associaton is offering $150 million of 8 percent notes, due in 1991, at a price of 99.662, to yield 8.10 percent, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Captial Markets.


Profits Up at Amoco, Unocal
LEAD: The Amoco Corporation and the Unocal Corporation posted hefty increases in second-quarter profits yesterday.
The companies cited rising oil prices and lower exploration costs.


MCDONALD'S CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCDONALD'S CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,654,591,000
3,151,818,000
Net inc
147,434,000
129,810,000
Share earns
.77
.67
Shares outst
189,951,000
192,081,000
6mo sales
6,773,018,000
5,889,224,000
Net inc
253,460,000
223,912,000
Share earns
1.33
1.15
Shares outst
189,984,000
192,488,000


FMC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FMC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
828,500,000
807,400,000
Net inc
b122,900,000
49,200,000
Share earns
2.59
.41
Shares outst
47,200,000
120,400,000
6mo sales
1,552,800,000
1,559,700,000
Net inc
b148,200,000
74,900,000
Share earns
3.13
.56
Shares outst
47,400,000
132,100,000


Carter Petitions N.F.L.
LEAD: The National Football League has received a petition filed on behalf of Cris Carter, seeking an immediate supplemental draft for the Ohio State all-America wide receiver, who was declared ineligible because he signed with an agent two years ago.


Work Ordered Stopped at Building Awaiting Landmark Consideration
LEAD: The former New York Bank for Savings branch at Eighth Avenue and 14th Street.
City officials said a stop-work order was issued for the turn-of-century building after the owner removed stained-glass windows and bronze ornaments.
Page B3. (NYT/Dith Pran)


MARTIN MARIETTA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARTIN MARIETTA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,373,341,000
1,226,472,000
Net inc
71,581,000
57,325,000
Share earns
1.31
1.04
6mo sales
2,511,993,000
2,310,670,000
Net inc
115,641,000
105,737,000
Share earns
2.11
1.92


Mississippi Barges Stalled
LEAD: It will take until Sunday for a dredge to clear away a 3,000-foot sandbar that has stalled hundreds of loaded barges on the Mississippi River, officials of the Army Corps of Engineers said today.
A dredge was being sent from St.
Paul.
Low water in the river and shifting sand blocked the channel Sunday.


Fireman's Fund Has Large Loss
LEAD: The Fireman's Fund Corporation today reported a surprising second-quarter loss of $115.5 million after adding substantially to its loss reserves.


CHRYSLER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHRYSLER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,410,000,000
5,700,000,000
Net inc
428,700,000
b488,200,000
Share earns
2.00
2.19
6mo sales
12,441,500,000
11,479,000,000
Net inc
698,400,000
b845,100,000
Share earns
3.24
3.76


FILM: 'SEA AND POISON,' FROM JAPAN
LEAD: EARLY in ''The Sea and Poison,'' the harrowing Japanese movie now at Film Forum 1, a surgical team performs a lung operation on a young woman.
It is probably the most graphic view that most of its audience will ever have had of the scalpel and forceps doing their work, and you may find yourself joining the young intern Suguro, who confesses, ''Today in the operating room, I had to close my eyes.


Webb May Split Into 2
LEAD: The Del E. Webb Corporation, a major real estate developer and casino operator, said it was considering splitting into two public companies or selling off portions of the parent.


H.J.K. Assignment
LEAD: Henry J. Kaufman &amp; Associates, a foreign-owned, Washington-based advertising and public relations firm, will be doing the advertising for the College Student Trainee Program of the Central Intelligence Agency.
H.J.K.'s parent company is Shanwick, a publicly held London public relations company.


HART'S SUPPORTERS WIN A RULING ON HIS DEBT
LEAD: Nearly $30,000 in contributions seized at a Hollywood fund-raising gathering for Gary Hart's 1988 Presidential campaign cannot be used to help pay his 1984 campaign debts, a Federal judge has ruled.


Raider End Arrested
LEAD: Elvis Franks of the Los Angeles Raiders was arrested in Warrensville Heights, Ohio, yesterday on a charge of possession of cocaine with intent to distribute.
Franks, 30 years old, who lives in the Cleveland suburb of South Euclid, attempted to sell the drug to an undercover agent, according to the F.B.I.


JOHN QUINCY ADAMS, A DESCENDANT OF PRESIDENTS
LEAD: John Quincy Adams, a descendent of two United States Presidents, died today at his home in Dover, Mass.
He was 64 years old.


Big Board's Uncovered Short Sales Rise
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short and not yet covered in the month ended July 15 rose 17.8 million, or 3.8 percent, to a record 483.6 million shares.
The previous high of 470.6 million shares was set in the month ended April 15.
The year-earlier period totaled 368.6 million shares.


CAPITAL CITITES/ABC INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPITAL CITITES/ABC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,126,795,000
1,065,674,000
Net inc
99,732,000
67,029,000
Share earns
5.88
4.15
6mo rev
2,085,996,000
1,978,011,000
Net inc
123,658,000
b348,995,000
Share earns
7.35
21.60


ROBERT M. DORE
LEAD: Robert M. Dore, a New York advertising representative, died of colon cancer on Monday at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 78 years old.


Gunman Wounds 2, Kills Himself at Pennsylvania Store
LEAD: Steve Shaffer, a department store employee, being aided after he was shot by Harry Eckels yesterday in Indiana, Pa., east of Pittsburgh.
Officials said Mr.
Eckels also critically wounded a 20-year-old woman believed to be his stepdaughter, Cheryl Rayburn, also a store employee, and then turned the gun on himself.


MUSIC: MEHTA CONDUCTS FINAL PARK CONCERT
LEAD: ZUBIN MEHTA'S yearlong sabbatical as music director of the New York Philharmonic has hardly meant a complete rupture with the orchestra.
He has participated in administrative decisions, he led a concert last month at Avery Fisher Hall primarily for delegates to the annual American Symphony Orchestra League convention, and Monday night he conducted the final


Kenya Accused of Torture in Drive on Dissidents
LEAD: The police in Kenya have tortured hundreds of people suspected of opposing the Government during a 16-month-old crackdown on a dissident Marxist group, Amnesty International charged today.


Bills, Bills, Bills
LEAD: Politicians are sometimes said to try to solve problems by throwing money at them.
But when it comes to the United States trade problem, the preferred solution appears to be throwing legislation.


ROCKET SENDS SYRIAN AND TWO RUSSIANS ON A SPACE MISSION
LEAD: A space capsule carrying two Soviet astronauts and Syria's first space traveler rocketed into orbit from Soviet central Asia early today, the Tass press agency reported.


Publisher Is Named At Inc. Magazine
LEAD: Bernard Goldhirsh, the owner of the Goldhirsh Group, has named Wilson Harrell publisher of Inc. magazine, for which he already was a consultant and an editorial contributor.


Who's That Man Blocking the Portal?
LEAD: Mayor Koch may have found a new strategy to prevent companies from leaving New York.
He is boarding up the Holland Tunnel.


BRUNEI REGAINS $10 MILLION
LEAD: Brunei has recovered, with interest, its mislaid $10 million of contra-related aid and is saying it was meant for Central America's poor, not the Nicaraguan rebels, the Malaysian national news agency said today.


Who's on Third? Mets Finally Know
LEAD: In their season of surprises and setbacks, the Mets seem to be making one great discovery these days: Howard Johnson, the 78th man to play third base in the club's 26-year history, may also be the best.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tour de France  Delgado Takes Lead: Pedro Delgado of Spain took the overall lead after placing seventh yesterday in the 20th stage, which finished with a climb to the top of l'Alpe d'Huez, France.
Federico Echave of Spain won the 125-mile stage in 5 hours 52 minutes 11 seconds, but Delgado moved from second place to the top over all by finishing just 3 minutes 44 seconds behind.


Henley Plans to Lift Santa Fe Holdings
LEAD: The Henley Group Inc. said today that it would seek permission from Government regulators to increase its stake in the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation to 25 percent, from 5 percent.


Lesson in Pastrami
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Little Gain Reported In NBC Negotiations
LEAD: An effort to negotiate an end to the strike by 2,800 of NBC's writers, producers and technicians has failed after two days to bring the two sides closer together, and representatives from the striking union as well as the network said the prospects for agreement looked bleak.


KRAFT INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KRAFT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,677,800,000
2,117,500,000
Net inc
110,800,000
b119,000,000
Share earns
.81
.83
6mo sales
5,145,400,000
4,107,500,000
Net inc
213,300,000
b273,000,000
Share earns
1.56
1.89


AMERICAN EXPRESS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN EXPRESS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,253,200,000
3,622,100,000
Net loss
47,900,000
b358,900,000
Share earns
-
.79
6mo rev
7,954,900,000
7,023,300,000
Net inc
204,400,000
c679,900,000
Share earns
.45
1.49


Woman Is Charged With Rape
LEAD: A woman the police had been seeking for nearly a month in the rape of a 21-year-old Irishwoman surrendered yesterday, the police said.


Falling Machinery Kills Jersey Worker
LEAD: One worker was killed and another was injured at a milling company yesterday when a 3,500-pound piece of machinery they were moving toppled onto them, the police said.


MONSANTO CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONSANTO CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,025,000,000
1,869,000,000
Net inc
154,000,000
148,000,000
Share earns
1.95
1.90
6mo sales
3,891,000,000
3,614,000,000
Net inc
292,000,000
266,000,000
Share earns
3.71
3.42


Figure in 1934 Controversy Involving Huey Long Is Dead
LEAD: Jesse H. Cutrer Jr., one of seven journalism students thrown out of Louisiana State University in a censorship dispute involving Huey P. Long, died Sunday in a Jackson, Miss., hospital.
He was 72 years old.
As editor of The Daily Reveille at Louisiana State, Mr.
Cutrer was at the center of a 1934 controversy over a letter to the editor that was indirectly critical of Long, then a United States Senator.


AMERICAN BRANDS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN BRANDS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,298,654,000
1,937,104,000
Net inc
107,394,000
97,599,000
Share earns
.94
.85
6mo sales
4,828,287,000
4,048,617,000
Net inc
238,204,000
216,354,000
Share earns
2.09
1.90


U.S. Adds 99 Sites to Toxic Cleanup Program
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency today added 99 hazardous waste sites to its list of those eligible for a Federal cleanup program, including the first Federal facilities placed on the agency's priority cleanup agenda.


Planned Parenthood Doesn't Advocate Abortion
LEAD: To the Editor:


MANUFACTURERS HANOVER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANUFACTURERS HANOVER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
1,372,975,000
b93,867,000
Per share
-
1.99
6mo net loss
1,291,958,000
b195,953,000
Per share
-
4.13
b-Net income  Both latest periods reflect the impact of the company's previously announced decision to increase the reserve for possible loan losses by $1.7 billion.


On Medical Costs; Treat AIDS the Public-Private Way
LEAD: To the Editor:


N.C.A.A. Reveals Basketball Shares
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association announced today that schools and conferences, led by the Big East with $3,801,697, shared $26,189,456 from the net revenues of this year's N.C.A.A. men's basketball tournament.


CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATORS SAY WHITE HOUSE USED DECEPTION TO PAD STAFF ILLEGALLY
LEAD: An investigative agency of Congress says the Reagan Administration violated Federal laws and misled Congress by padding the White House staff with political employees officially assigned to other Government departments.


McMahon Can Train
LEAD: Jim McMahon received medical clearance yesterday to begin training camp with the Chicago Bears.
The quarterback, who underwent shoulder surgery last December, was examined by his surgeon, Dr.
Frank Jobe, in Los Angeles yesterday for a final checkup before the Bears begin camp Aug. 1 in Platteville, Wis.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, JULY 22, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-13


Mitterrand Son in Car Crash
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand of France and his wife, Danielle, flew to northeastern Spain today after a son, Gilbert, and two granddaughters were injured in a highway collision.
Mr.
Mitterrand returned to Paris by air and his wife was to fly back later with the three injured.
The Spanish driver of the other car was killed in the collision.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Award-Winning Cheese


5 From Guadeloupe Seized
LEAD: Five people suspected of membership in an outlawed insurgent movement on the French island of Guadeloupe were arrested today, the police said.


SIMON, IN NEW YORK, GOES ON A DAYLONG HUNT FOR CAMPAIGN CASH
LEAD: Senator Paul Simon took time out from campaigning for votes in Iowa and New Hampshire to campaign for money in New York and New Jersey yesterday.


Boesky Trade Data Sought
LEAD: The chairman of the House committee that oversees the securities markets has asked regulators to turn over information on Ivan F. Boesky's futures trades before and after Mr.
Boesky began cooperating with Government investigators.


Europe's Plan To Cut Steel
LEAD: The European Community commission today approved a $7 billion plan to restructure the European steel industry that could result in the loss of about 80,000 jobs.


3 Suspected In Sex Assaults In Queens
LEAD: Thirteen women have been sexually assaulted and robbed in central Queens since last April, most of them in the last month and a half, and the police believe three separate rapists are responsible.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
July 17
July 10
July 18
1987
1987
1986
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.1
Distillate production, daily
2.6
2.8
2.6
Gasoline stocks
228.1
228.9
226.3
Distillate stocks
109.2
107.2
110.5
Crude imports, daily
4.9
5.3
4.3
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.4
2.2
Crude stocks
317.8
322.7
327.8
Crude production, daily
8.3
8.3
8.7
Refinery utilization (%)
86.7
87.7
84.4


Kraft Profit Declines 6.9%
LEAD: Kraft Inc. said today that net income in the second quarter fell 6.9 percent, largely because of a previously announced restructuring in which Kraft divested itself of most of its nonfood operations.


STATUS OF WOMEN RISES BUT PAY LAGS, STUDY FINDS
LEAD: American women are achieving record earnings, political influence and participation in the labor force but, on average, are still paid far less than men, according to a comprehensive study released today by women in Congress.


Budd Has Recovered
LEAD: Zola Budd says that a Johannesburg physician who specializes in body posture problems has cured her leg injury.
The 21-year-old runner, who has been out of action for almost a year, says she is ready for a comeback.


Israel Reported to Test New, Longer-Range Missile
LEAD: A Geneva-based defense magazine reported today that Israel had successfully tested a new intermediate-range ballistic missile over a distance of 500 miles.


350 Workers to Be Idled as Dairy In Queens Orders Its Plant Closed
LEAD: A month after most of its assets were acquired by a Canadian beer and food conglomerate, Queens Farm Dairy -one of the oldest and largest milk processors in New York City - has ordered the closing of its remaining plant and the dismissal of 350 workers.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''The welfare system that was designed decades ago no longer works in a country that has produced a permanent dependent class.'' -  Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas. (A23:1.)


SCOTT PAPER CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCOTT PAPER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,029,400,000
829,500,000
Net inc
58,800,000
56,300,000
Share earns
1.54
1.50
6mo sales
1,986,800,000
1,630,900,000
Net inc
107,800,000
95,400,000
Share earns
2.82
2.55


Holmes a Court And Texaco
LEAD: THE solid support proclaimed this week by Robert Holmes a Court for the way Texaco Inc. has responded to its dispute with the Pennzoil Company underscores the Wall Street consensus that Texaco has gained the upper hand.


Lady's Secret Sets Earnings Record
LEAD: The old gray mare may not be what she used to be, but Lady's Secret today became the richest filly or mare in racing history by scoring a seven-length victory in a minor allowance race at Monmouth Park.


Loss Posted By First Boston
LEAD: The First Boston Corporation said yesterday that it lost $13.2 million in the second quarter because of trading losses it suffered during the turbulence in the bond market last April, one of the toughest months on Wall Street in years.


PAKISTAN REPORTS A NUCLEAR INQUIRY
LEAD: Pakistan announced today that it had begun an investigation into an attempt to export American material to Pakistan illegally for potential use in making nuclear weapons.


Street Heat, and Life
LEAD: To walk around New York on a hot summer day is to realize just how old-fashioned a place it is, and how noisily human.
In more modern, Sun Belt cities - Houston, perhaps, or Phoenix - serious summer heat forces windows shut to keep in the air-conditioned chill.


FIRST VIRGINIA BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST VIRGINIA BANKS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
13,846,000
12,259,000
Per share
.72
.65
6mo net inc
27,095,000
25,159,000
Per share
1.41
1.33
The year-ago second quarter and 6 months' results have been restated to include three banks acquired in pooling-of-interests transactions during 1987.


BEHIND FRENCH-IRANIAN FEUD: AN IRAQI BOND
LEAD: France's current conflict with Iran, which has led to a break in relations and differences over the repatriation of diplomats, stems at least in part from an alliance it formed with the Iraqi regime of President Saddam Hussein more than a decade ago.


WNET TO BE ON AIR AROUND THE CLOCK
LEAD: WNET, Channel 13, trying to rebound from years of financial crisis and conflicting visions of the station's purpose, plans to expand its broadcasting operations to a 24-hour schedule starting in mid-September, station officials said yesterday.


FIRST INTERSTATE BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST INTERSTATE BANCORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
469,800,000
b84,700,000
Per share
-
1.80
6mo net loss
386,300,000
b163,700,000
Per share
-
3.51
b-Net income  The latest quarter includes a $500 million increase to the company's loan loss allowance to cover possible future chargeoffs of loans to lesser developed countries, and another $250 million provision for losses anticipated from an accelerated program to sell non-performing domestic loans and foreclosed property.


Hell Hath No Conflict Like the Political Wife
LEAD: Conventional wisdom has it that the political wife is a self-sacrificing helpmate who devotes her life to raising the children and promoting her husband's career.


KROGER CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KROGER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,142,637,557
3,960,900,614
Net inc
56,532,290
b51,539,672
Share earns
.68
.59
6mo sales
8,098,560,136
7,817,890,414
Net inc
90,601,521
b83,810,604
Share earns
1.08
.96
Shares outst
81,398,181
86,891,246


BOATMEN'S BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOATMEN'S BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
20,542,000
19,647,000
Per share
1.05
1.01
6mo net inc
40,118,000
38,938,000
Per share
2.05
2.00


Dollar Down, Gold Up In Light U.S. Trading
LEAD: The dollar fell against all major currencies in slow domestic trading yesterday.


Union Cites Pan Am 'Plan'
LEAD: The aviation unit of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters has charged that the management of the Pan Am Corporation has a secret plan to sell its New York-London and Latin American routes and its Pan Am shuttle if the union fails to make major concessions.


FILE AND FORGET?
LEAD: The real danger of the present inquiry into the Administration's covert warfare operations is that, after all the painful analysis, the conclusions will be filed and forgotten.
This is what has happened in the past.
We need to refresh our memories.


INSIDE
LEAD:  U.S.-Japan 'Star Wars' Pact


An Older Archer Is Right on Target
LEAD: While most of the flock at Forsyth Friends Church have accepted Wilburn Wooten's occasional absences from Sunday services, they still can't understand, after all these years, what drives him to travel around the country with a bow and arrow.


Allen T. Klots Jr., 66, Editor at Dodd, Mead
LEAD: Allen Trafford Klots Jr., a senior editor at the publishing house of Dodd, Mead, died of complications following surgery at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan Monday.
He was 66 years old and lived in Manhattan.


CHRISTO IN JAPAN: HE'S AT IT AGAIN, AND AGAIN IT'S NEW
LEAD: Christo, the artist who wrapped Paris's Pont Neuf in golden cloth and Miami's Biscayne Bay islands in pink, now plans to dot Japan with blue umbrellas.


IRVING BANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IRVING BANK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
142,007,000
b34,070,000
Per share
-
1.83
6mo net loss
113,410,000
b64,499,000
Per share
-
3.45
b-Net income  The latest second quarter includes a provision for credit losses of $241 million, compared with a provision of $20 million in the year-ago period.


In the Senate, Once More Unto the Breach
LEAD: The trade bill that the Senate finally passed tonight, 71 to 27, has traveled a tortured legislative path.
In part this was because of the unusually high political stakes.
But the maneuvers and counterplays, the trade-offs and reversals, also reflected business as usual in a Senate that is increasingly difficult to run.


MACMILLAN WITHDRAWS BOOK ON BINGHAM FAMILY
LEAD: The first of four books under contract about the Bingham newspaper family, which sold The Courier-Journal and Louisville Times last year after a dispute among family members, has been withdrawn by Macmillan, the New York publisher, because the book's facts were challenged.


Martin Marietta Up 25%
LEAD: The Martin Marietta Corporation, the military and aerospace contractor, said its profit rose 25 percent in the second quarter with strong contributions from all its major businesses.
Martin Marietta, based in Bethesda, Md., said its profit reached $71.6 million, or $1.31 a share, up from $57.3 million, or $1.04 a share, a year earlier.


HAMILTON SCOLDS ADMIRAL ON CHECKS AND BALANCES
LEAD: At the conclusion of yesterday's session, Representative Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana, the chairman of the House committee, addressed Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter about his testimony during the hearings.


11 Partners Leave Crow
LEAD: Eleven partners of the Trammel Crow Company said today that they would leave immediately to form Spieker Partners, a new real estate development company based in Menlo Park, Calif.
Crow, based in Dallas, is the nation's biggest commercial real estate developer, with more than $13 billion in assets.


Reagan Trip to Wisconsin
LEAD: President Reagan, continuing his campaign for an ''economic bill of rights,'' will visit a kitchen products factory, a restaurant and a park in Wisconsin on Monday, it was announced today.
The White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said that the President would make stops at the Broan Manufacturing Company in Hartford, at the Old Washington House restaurant in West Bend and at Lower Lake Park in Port Washington.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: WHENEVER I offer a recipe for sauteed pork, mainly pork chops, I am besieged by letters from readers complaining that their versions turned out tough.
This might be attributed to the quality of the meat.
There is no way to determine the precise quality of a pork chop by looking at it; the truth is in the cooking.


4 Are Killed and 11 Injured in Propane Explosion in Brooklyn
LEAD: A thunderous explosion, triggered when workers dropped a propane tank down a basement stairwell, tore through three buildings in the Borough Park section of Brooklyn yesterday morning, killing 4 men, injuring 11 other people and setting off a frenzied hunt for trapped survivors.


REFUGEES FLEE LEBANON FIGHT
LEAD: Hundreds of Palestinians have fled their homes in refugee districts in Tyre in southern Lebanon after new fighting started this week between Shiite militiamen and guerrillas of the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Funeral Service for Officer Killed in a Robbery
LEAD: The coffin of Police Officer George Scheu being saluted as it was carried outside St.
Andrew Avellino Roman Catholic Church yesterday in Flushing, Queens.
Officer Scheu, 41, a 19-year veteran of the force, was shot on July 11 as he left his home in Flushing to attend a meeting of his Naval Reserve unit.


'Robocop' in First Place In Box Office Sales
LEAD: ''Robocop,'' the story of a half-man, half-robot police officer battling evil in a futuristic Detroit, earned $8 million over the weekend to take first place at the box office, spoiling the much-publicized 50th anniversary re-release of ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.''


AMOCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMOCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,629,000,000
4,997,000,000
Net inc
311,000,000
238,000,000
Share earns
1.22
.93
6mo rev
10,824,000,000
10,915,000,000
Net inc
571,000,000
569,000,000
Share earns
2.24
2.21


IRAN IS HARSH
LEAD: Iran and Iraq had sharply conflicting reactions today to a new United Nations effort to stop the war between them, and Iran accused Iraq of initiating new fighting.


ADMIRAL REAFFIRMS MAKING HIS VIEW ON SECRECY
LEAD: Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter completed five days of testimony before the Iran-contra committees today with the strongest exposition yet of his view that the President's most sensitive foreign initiatives need to be kept secret from the Congress and other government agencies.


Chrysler Profit, Off 12%, Tops Wall St. Forecasts
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation today reported second-quarter earnings of $428.7 million, or $2 a share, exceeding Wall Street's expectations.


RACIAL ROADBLOCK SEEN IN ATLANTA TRANSIT SYSTEM
LEAD: Despite the growing reach of Atlanta's rapid transit network, the system's trains and buses do not cross the county line into the booming suburbs north of the city - because the governments there have not wanted them.


SENATE APPROVES TRADE BILL, 71-27, DEFYING PRESIDENT
LEAD: The Senate approved sweeping trade legislation tonight that threatened to set off a confrontation with President Reagan.
If a compromise is not reached, the bill could become an important campaign issue next year.


JWT Deal Concluded
LEAD: Britain's WPP Group announced yesterday that it had completed the acquisition of the JWT Group, parent of the J. Walter Thompson agency, having completed its tender offer and receiving 97 percent of the shares outstanding for $55.50 a share.


New York Halts Removal Work At Former Bank
LEAD: A turn-of-the-century building on the northern edge of Greenwich Village, under consideration as a landmark, has been stripped of some stained-glass windows and ornamental bronze work by its owner, preservationists and New York City officials said yesterday.


At the Scene: Screams And a Beckoning Hand
LEAD: Police Officer Robert Kearns, one of the first rescuers to arrive at the explosion in Borough Park, described a scene of devastation, tumult and desperation.


REALISM OF THE COURTROOM CAPTIVATES TV AUDIENCES
LEAD: JEROME BECKER - veteran of New York City's Criminal Court, distinguished alumnus of the Family Court, respected partner in a respected law firm - has a confession to make.
He watches ''The People's Court.''


Fairfield Voters Nominate Two For House Seat
LEAD: Christine M. Niedermeier, a Democrat, and Christopher Shays, a Republican, won primary contests in light turnouts tonight and will compete for the vacant Congressional seat in Connecticut's Fourth District.


Kodak to Sell Fox Photo Assets
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company said it plans to sell the retail division of its Fox Photo Inc. unit, which it acquired last December.
Kodak agreed to sell to the current Fox Photo president, Carl D. Newton 3d, whose grandfather founded Fox in 1905.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
The retail divison includes 211 one-hour labs and 256 kiosks and camera shops in 23 states.


LEGISLATORS IN AN INDIAN STATE CONTEST ROLE OF GANDHI PARTY
LEAD: Dozens of local legislators from Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's ruling party in Uttar Pradesh, the country's most populous and politically important state, have pledged support to a Gandhi rival, threatening a loyalist government there.


Lemon Candy
LEAD: To The Living Section:


BRISTOL-MYERS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRISTOL-MYERS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,314,283,000
1,171,768,000
Net inc
161,508,000
119,309,000
Share earns
.56
.42
6mo sales
2,662,173,000
2,366,290,000
Net inc
335,388,000
263,871,000
Share earns
1.17
.93


Memorial for Peter Gimbel
LEAD: A memorial tribute for Peter R. Gimbel, a film maker and underwater photojournalist who died on July 12, will be held at 11:30 A.M. on Monday at the Kaufmann Auditorium of the American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 77th Street.


OLD SHAKERS, NEW PLATES
LEAD:  A Victorian Touch


AT EMBASSY PARTY, CHILI AND LETTERS ARE A GOOD MIX
LEAD: It was a gathering for chili on one of the hottest nights of the summer.
A clutch of novelists, journalists, writers and lawyers, along with a sprinkling of politicians, got together Monday in the terraced garden of the Canadian Embassy residence after a benefit performance of the play ''Chili Queen.


Genentech Net Rises by 89%
LEAD: Genentech Inc., a leading biotechnology company based in South San Francisco, today reported second-quarter earnings of $5.3 million, or 6 cents a share, up 89 percent from $2.8 million, or 4 cents a share in the comparable period a year ago.


Singer to Marquart
LEAD: Marquart &amp; Roche of Stamford, Conn., has become the corporate agency for its neighbor, the Singer Company, which is no longer in sewing machines but is the largest independent aerospace electronics company.
The billings will be more than $1 million.
The previous agency was HCM in New York.


Net Up 49% Up Capital Cities
LEAD: Capital Cities/ABC Inc. yesterday reported a 49 percent rise in second-quarter net income, reflecting its success in holding down costs, largely in its entertainment programming activities.


Tribble Admits Mistake
LEAD: Brian Tribble, who was acquitted last month on drug charges in connection with the June 1986 cocaine-induced death of Len Bias, said he used drugs with the Maryland basketball star on the morning Bias died.


University Finances Criticized by Regan
LEAD: New York State Comptroller Edward V. Regan charged yesterday that the state university mishandled $17 million by putting it in special campus-run accounts instead of accounts that Mr.
Regan could have supervised.


REAL ESTATE
LEAD: A LEASE signed by the brokerage firm of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, announced two weeks ago, has given a lift to one of the largest office projects undertaken in the postwar period in downtown Jersey City.


13 Seized in Brooklyn In Waterfront Inquiry
LEAD: Law-enforcement officials yesterday announced the arrests of 13 dockworkers in Brooklyn, including several members of the International Longshoremen's Association, on charges that included loan sharking, gambling, drug selling, grand larceny and bribe receiving.


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: I WAS a Paul girl.
Still am, I suppose, at the core.
It was one of four choices you had in 1964, when I was on the cusp of adolescence: a Paul girl, a John girl, a George girl or a Ringo girl, with all the attendant Beatle buttons, glossy color pictures and daydreams.
Little did we know that in some broad way we were defining the sort of people we were on our way to becoming.


WALSH SEEKING ALL IRAN RECORDS OF JUSTICE DEPT.
LEAD: The special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair has asked Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d to turn over thousands of documents related to the Justice Department's inquiry last fall into the sale of American arms to Iran, Federal law-enforcement officials said today.


FILM: 'SUMMER SCHOOL'
LEAD: CARL REINER, as a school official who gets lucky with the lottery, disappears at the very beginning of ''Summer School,'' and in doing so he has the right idea.
However, Mr.
Reiner also directed this strained, rambling teen-age comedy, so he can hardly be thought of as getting away scot-free. ''Summer School'' opens today at the Criterion


London Expels a Bulgarian, Apparently for Spy Activities
LEAD: Britain ordered today that the Bulgarian military attache be expelled for activities ''incompatible with his status,'' the usual diplomatic code for espionage.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:  DEAR DIARY:


UNITED TELECOMMUNICATIONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED TELECOMMUNICATIONS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
731,037,000
818,894,000
Net loss
b118,275,000
c56,245,000
Share earns
-
.57
6mo rev
1,434,561,000
1,612,484,000
Net loss
b104,783,000
c102,662,000
Share earns
-
1.04


A Loss at American Express
LEAD: The American Express Company said yesterday that it lost $47.9 million in the second quarter, a performance that largely reflected a $600 million addition to its banking unit's reserves against troubled Latin American loans.


Standard Paint Gets $28 Offer
LEAD: The Standard Brands Paint Company, one of the nation's largest paint makers, said yesterday that it had received a $308 million takeover bid from an affiliate of the Chase Corporation Ltd., a New Zealand development company.


NATIONAL STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL STEEL CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
615,700,000
531,000,000
Net inc
18,400,000
b4,600,000
6mo sales
1,153,100,000
1,003,500,000
Net inc
12,800,000
b44,000,000
b-Net loss  National Steel, formerly a division of National Intergroup, is a joint venture between National Intergroup Inc.


WELFARE IN FOCUS AT URBAN LEAGUE
LEAD: Talk of overhauling the welfare system, once rarely heard among such groups as the National Urban League, is dominating the organization's 77th annual convention here this week.


JAPANESE ROLE IN 'STAR WARS' MAY BE SMALL
LEAD: Now that Japanese companies are free to participate in the Reagan Administration's space-based antimissile program, the question is how many companies will do so.


STORAGE TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STORAGE TECHNOLOGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
175,275,000
171,726,000
Net inc
b8,775,000
c13,807,000
Share earns
.04
.06
6mo rev
355,877,000
333,178,000
Net inc
b23,075,000
c18,830,000
Share earns
.10
.08


FAKE ART PRINTS: BIG BUSINESS GETTING BIGGER
LEAD: A network of art publishers and dealers in the United States and Europe is selling millions of dollars worth of fake lithographs, engravings and other fine-art prints each year to would-be collectors around the country, according to leading auction houses, legitimate print dealers and law-enforcement officials.


Afghan Leader Visits the Soviet Union
LEAD: Najib, the Afghan leader, at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Moscow after a wreath-laying ceremony.
On Monday, Najib, who is on a four-day visit, met with the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and other officials.
At a news conference yesterday, Najib said his Government's reconciliation policy has prompted 15,000 rebels to lay down their arms.


Alexander Outpitches Gooden
LEAD: This is how costly it was for the Mets in Shea Stadium last night: Dwight Gooden was outpitched by Doyle Alexander, who had lost five straight games, and the Mets were mauled by the Atlanta Braves, who had lost five straight games.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.56
6.66
6.39
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.55
5.73
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.79
5.64
5.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.29
8.21
7.11
30-YR.


SMOKING A PRIZE CATCH: NOT A TASK FOR THE TIMID
LEAD: MOST fishermen know that no fish tastes finer than the one you have caught yourself, whether it's a trout from a mountain stream, mackerel off a dock in Maine or a fighting bluefish like those John Hersey catches off Martha's Vineyard and describes in his fine new book ''Blues.''


Banks Wins Again In Festival Boxing
LEAD: Kelcie Banks and Kenneth Gould, two of the country's top amateur fighters, earned gold medals tonight with impressive victories in the finals of the United States Olympic Festival competition.


Japan Rate Rise Is Called Likely
LEAD: Japan's long-term credit banks are likely to raise their long-term prime rate by three-tenths to four-tenths of a percentage point later this week from the current record low of 4.9 percent, bankers said today.


U.S. and Japan in Accord on 'Star Wars' Research
LEAD: The United States and Japan signed an agreement today that will allow Japanese companies and research centers to take part in the Reagan Administration's program to design defenses against nuclear missiles.


Roll-Call on Trade Bill
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote by which the Senate today approved sweeping trade legislation:  FOR THE MEASURE - 71  Democrats - 52  dams, Wash.
Baucus, Mont.
Bentsen, Tex.
Biden, Del.
Bingaman, N.M.
Boren, Okla.
Bradley, N.J.
Breaux, La.
Bumpers, Ark.
Burdick, N.D.


COCA-COLA ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COCA-COLA ENTERPRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
929,130,000
436,244,000
Net inc
35,058,000
11,163,000
Share earns
.25
.16
Shares outst
140,050,000
68,600,000
6mo rev
1,673,773,000
765,400,000
Net inc
42,154,000
13,248,000
Share earns
.30
.19


Pitchers Do Get Lonely
LEAD: With the Yankees losing, 18-3, in the bottom of the eighth in Texas - even after a few days, the score still reads like a typographical error - Lou Piniella did the unusual, though not the unreasonable.
Rather than waste one of his regular relief pitchers in that forlorn enterprise, he saved his sirloin and served the


Searing Heat Brings Record for Electricity
LEAD: A record demand for electricity was set in New York City yesterday, as the temperature reached 95 degrees.


LeMond Quitting Team
LEAD: Greg LeMond, the 1986 Tour de France cycling champion, said yesterday he was planning to resume competition this winter and is quitting the French La Vie Claire team.
LeMond said he has had offers from several teams and plans to sign with one this week.
He said that members of the half-dozen Dutch, Italian or Belgian teams he is considering would be more apt to sacrifice, ''to give up their prospects of winning if I'm leading'' than would members of a French team.


SCHERING-PLOUGH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCHERING-PLOUGH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
685,300,000
585,300,000
Net inc
82,500,000
71,800,000
Share earns
.71
.58
6mo sales
1,370,000,000
1,200,000,000
Net inc
167,400,000
143,600,000
Share earns
1.43
1.17


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The British Petroleum Company said yesterday that it planned to raise $:1.5 billion ($2.4 billion) by the sale of new stock.
It will use the proceeds to reduce its debt.


Now a Gentleman
LEAD: The boxing promoter Bob Arum is a partner with, among others, Gil Clancy, the CBS boxing commentator, in a race horse named Merchant of Baghdad, who is scheduled to run Friday at Belmont.
Last week in Las Vegas, Nev., Arum was showing boxing people a stable area pass that had this designation on it: Owner-Gentleman.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: HOW do you select the right pair of athletic shoes and how do you care for your investment?
And what about the objects that go inside the shoes: inserts, socks and, last but hardly least, your feet?


Omnicom's Approach To Buying
LEAD: APPARENTLY almost everyone in advertising with adequate buying power is anxious to test the limits of their clout.
Not all in the same way, however.


Channel Tunnel Gets Legislative Go-Ahead
LEAD: Parliament approved the Channel Tunnel Bill today, clearing the way for an $8 billion project to build a rail tunnel between Britain and France.


Interest Rates Rise Sharply
LEAD: Short- and long-term interest rates rose sharply yesterday in response to statements by the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Paul A. Volcker, that monetary policy had not been eased recently and to lingering fears of higher inflation.


Don't Count on Ollie
LEAD: Has Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North -the Greater Communicator -swung Congress and the country behind aid for the contras in Nicaragua?
President Reagan may well be counting his chickens before they're hatched if he thinks so.


W.G. Williams Is Dead at 74; Owner of a Hotel in Catskills
LEAD: Walter G. Williams, owner of the family-operated Williams Lake Hotel at Rosendale, N.Y., in the Catskills, died of cancer Saturday at Kingston (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 74 years old and lived in Rosendale.


A Face on a Poster
LEAD: What is apparently the first political poster inspired by the Iran-contra hearings features not Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North but Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the Nicaraguan leader.
Citizens for Reagan, a lobbying group that favors aid to the Nicaraguan contras in their effort to oust Mr.
Ortega, has printed 5,000 ''Wanted'' handbills carrying his picture and yesterday began distributing them to


We Can't Dictate the Future of the Persian Gulf
LEAD: To the Editor:


Volcker Sees Price Danger
LEAD: In one of his last appearances before Congress as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Paul A. Volcker today again sounded the alarm on a theme that has made him famous - the possibility of renewed inflation in the United States economy.


Goetz Verdict Spreads False Notion About White-on-Black Crime
LEAD: To the Editor:


ON WEEPING PRAIRIE, WILL A SHOWER OF CASH HELP?
LEAD: They call this Issan, the vast, flat northeast of Thailand where few crops but all manner of problems grow.


Two Unalike Cases
LEAD: To the Editor:


UNOCAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNOCAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,418,300,000
2,103,300,000
Net inc
62,000,000
34,600,000
Share earns
.53
.30
6mo rev
4,483,200,000
4,382,900,000
Net inc
122,700,000
104,800,000
Share earns
1.05
.90


ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,021,000,000
3,126,000,000
Net inc
bc170,100,000
c163,300,000
Share earns
.61
.55
9mo sales
9,057,000,000
8,970,000,000
Net inc
bc495,100,000
c449,400,000
Share earns
1.76
1.51


Ex-Defense Official Joins a Contractor
LEAD: Donald C. Latham, an assistant secretary of defense until last week, has become vice president of the Computer Sciences Corporation.


Venezuela Oil Find
LEAD: A huge oilfield with reserves of 819 million barrels of light crude was found in the western Lake Maracaibo region, where most of the country's reserves are situated, the state oil company Petroleos de Venezuela confirmed in a press bulletin.
Maraven, a Petroleos affiliate operating in Lake Maracaibo, said that the new field has a potential production of 75,000 barrels a day, or almost 5 percent of the nation's current average output of 1.6 million barrels a day.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Chairmen of the Board


New York Names First 10 Sites As Special Development Zones
LEAD: Governor Cuomo today announced the selection of 10 economically depressed communities around the state, including three sections of New York City, to receive business incentives as the state's first Economic Development Zones.


'Les Miserables' Star-to-Be Dies, and Cause Is a Mystery
LEAD: A 31-year-old actor who was scheduled to take over the lead in the Broadway production of ''Les Miserables'' in October was found dead in his Upper West Side apartment Monday night, and the authorities said yesterday they had not determined the cause of death.


Portugal's Passage
LEAD: The democratic revolution now shaking up much of the world announced itself first in Portugal in April 1974.
Not until this week, however, long after the consolidation of newer democratic regimes in Greece, Spain and Latin America, did Western Europe's poorest, least developed country reach a key democratic milestone: the election of a stable majority Government.


WASTE MANAGEMENT INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASTE MANAGEMENT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
657,834,000
491,140,000
Net inc
82,513,000
54,377,000
Share earns
.37
.26
Shares outst
222,992,000
209,433,000
6mo rev
1,241,834,000
924,019,000
Net inc
150,022,000
98,936,000
Share earns
.68
.47
Shares outst
221,391,000
208,731,000


Trade Theory From Harvard
LEAD: FREE trade has been a venerated economic principle in the United States going back 200 years.
But there have been challengers.
The first was Alexander Hamilton, who in 1791 argued for government policies that would encourage native manufacturing while protecting it from British exports.


Chief at Continental Yields to Lorenzo
LEAD: The resignation of Thomas G. Plaskett, an experienced executive hired last November as president and chief executive of Continental Airlines, was announced today, one day after the carrier reported a larger-than-expected quarterly loss.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
Percent
Net Income
April-June
Change
1987
1986
Allied Signal Inc.
$148,000,000
-20.4
American Brands Inc.
107,400,000
+10.0
American Express Co.
(47,900,000)
-
Amoco Corp.
311,000,000
+30.7
Armco Inc.


CARTERET SAVINGS BANK FA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARTERET SAVINGS BANK FA (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
7,163,000
b13,469,000
Per share
.54
1.07
9mo net inc
23,083,000
b35,424,000
Per share
1.73
3.02
Shares outst
12,442,990
11,217,279
b-After extraordinary tax credits of $6,529,000 for the quarter and $16,031,000 for the 9 months; the 9 months also had a charge of $407,000 for the early extinguishment of debt.


MUSIC: BEAUX ARTS TRIO
LEAD: THE Beaux Arts Trio moved into Avery Fisher Hall Monday evening as part of the Mostly Mozart Festival and delivered a performance of uncommon grace.
Menahem Pressler, pianist; Isidore Cohen, violinist, and Bernard Greenhouse, cellist, have been together for 32 years and by now they virtually blink together.


MELVILLE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MELVILLE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,448,984,860
1,244,744,730
Net inc
63,785,856
46,581,634
Share earns
1.17
.86
6mo sales
2,522,853,311
2,272,767,116
Net inc
71,824,453
57,311,382
Share earns
1.32
1.06


Dr. Bruce S. Schoenberg, 44, Expert in the Nervous System
LEAD: Dr.
Bruce Stuart Schoenberg, a specialist in the prevention and control of neurological disorders, died of cancer July 14 at the Bethesda Naval Hospital.
He was 44 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.


BANKERS TRUST NEW YORK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKERS TRUST NEW YORK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
554,000,000
b104,200,000
Per share
-
1.45
6mo net loss
429,700,000
b220,200,000
Per share
-
3.09
b-Net income  The latest quarter and 6 months' losses reflect the special provision of $700 million, or $670 million after-tax, to the allowance for loan losses in light of recent developments related to the debt of


Farm on a Beach
LEAD: On his way back to being a productive member of a major league rotation, Tommy John became reacquainted with life in the minor leagues.
After he was released by the California Angels in 1985, he pitched for Oakland A's farm clubs at Modesto, Calif., and Madison, Wis.
Last season, he pitched for the Class A Fort Lauderdale Yankees while recovering from a strained Achilles' tendon.


An Electronics Pioneer Hunts for Profits
LEAD: STANFORD R. OVSHINSKY'S moment of truth as a business man is at hand.
It has been almost 20 years since he startled physicists by making an electronic switch out of a glass-like amorphous material, thus drawing worldwide attention to his claim that such materials had valuable energy-handling properties they had overlooked during the crystal-based electronics revolution.


How Many Watch What
LEAD: As part of its annual study of media and markets, the Simmons Market Research Bureau surveyed television sports viewing habits of adults for 1986 and found professional football scored a narrow victory over major-league baseball.
The poll, which asked for televised sports programs that viewers watch ''frequently or almost always,'' was conducted through questionnaires returned by 19,146 people, whose replies were used to project nationwide totals.


Strawberry Guides Children
LEAD: Judging from Darryl Strawberry's comments yesterday morning at a clinic for youngsters at Shea Stadium, the recent turmoil between the Mets' right fielder and a few of his teammates is still fresh in his mind.


Corning Not Eager To Be Acquired
LEAD: The Corning Glass Works, whose stock has risen sharply, said it was not interested in being acquired.
In reponse to questions about the stock's activity, a spokesman for Corning said there had been rumors in the market that the General Electric Company was interested in the specialty materials company.


CITIZENS &amp; SOUTHERN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS &amp; SOUTHERN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
35,326,000
38,124,000
Per share
.57
.64
Shares outst
60,033,730
57,399,583
6mo net inc
77,978,000
74,916,000
Per share
1.26
1.28
Shares outst
59,746,341
56,295,696


Some Blue Cross Rates to Rise 25% in Jersey
LEAD: About 1.7 individual and small-group subscribers of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey will have their premiums increased by 25 percent starting Sept. 1, the State Insurance Commissioner, Kenneth D. Merin, said today.


Anthony Casamento Is Dead; Received the Medal of Honor
LEAD: Anthony Casamento, a former United States Marine corporal in World War II whose persistent efforts to win the Medal of Honor were finally rewarded in 1980, died of cancer Saturday at Veterans Medical Center in Northport, N.Y.
He was 66 years old and lived in West Islip, L.I.


Oil Contract Prices Fall, But a Recovery Is Seen
LEAD: Oil futures prices dropped sharply in heavy trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday, but some analysts think they are likely to resume their climb soon.


PANEL PUTS ELLIOTT ABRAMS UNDER OATH TO TESTIFY
LEAD: Elliott Abrams, the Assistant Secretary of State in charge of Latin American affairs, appeared before a Congressional committee today to discuss loans for the Chilean Government.
His appearance prompted one Congressman to walk out and several others to insist he be put under oath.


Greenspan's Inflation Vow
LEAD: Alan Greenspan pledged today to carry on the muscular anti-inflation policies of Paul A. Volcker when, as widely expected, he is installed as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board within the next few weeks.


United Jersey Deal
LEAD: United Jersey Banks of Princeton, N.J., said it would acquire the First Valley Corporation of Bethlehem, Pa., in an exchange of stock.
Under an agreement signed by the two bank companies, United Jersey will issue 1.45 common shares for each First Valley common share.
First Valley has 6.3 million shares outstanding.


Top Ranger Draftee Injured in Game
LEAD: Brian Leetch, a defenseman who was the Rangers' No. 1 selection in the 1986 National Hockey League draft, was knocked out of action early in the opening game of the hockey tournament of the Olympic Sports Festival.


SANTA FE SOUTHERN PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANTA FE SOUTHERN PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,436,800,000
1,368,300,000
Net inc
90,400,000
b81,800,000
Share earns
.57
.49
6mo rev
2,771,800,000
2,750,400,000
Net inc
136,300,000
b115,500,000
Share earns
.86
.66


DOMINION BANKSHARES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOMINION BANKSHARES CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
17,770,000
13,396,000
Per share
.54
.43
6mo net inc
32,978,000
26,996,000
Per share
1.01
.86


WINE TALK
LEAD: THE Great Western Winery's 1985 vidal ice wine, an ambrosial dessert wine from the Finger Lakes region, won the New York Wine Classic on Sunday.
The wine was made by Patricia Herron, one of the few women who are wine makers in America, and Matthew Cookson, an assistant wine maker.


People
LEAD: * Thomas E. Beach has been promoted to senior vice president, McCann-Erickson.


Corrections
LEAD: The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about companies that recently sold stock to the public for the first time, incorrectly listed the share price of one of them, the Timberland Company.
Its shares fell 12.5 cents on Monday, to $15.50, on the American Stock Exchange.


Storage of Propane in Blast May Have Broken the Law
LEAD: The propane that exploded yesterday in a basement in Brooklyn, causing the collapse of several buildings and the loss of four lives, was apparently stored illegally, fire and gas officials said.


US WEST INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*US WEST INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,110,000,000
2,050,000,000
Net inc
268,800,000
270,200,000
Share earns
1.42
1.42
Shares outst
189,900,000
190,300,000
6mo rev
4,150,000,000
4,080,000,000
Net inc
473,000,000
450,100,000
Share earns
2.49
2.36
Shares outst
189,900,000
190,400,000


TEXAS LEGISLATURE APPROVES TAX INCREASE OF $5.7 BILLION
LEAD: The Texas Legislature today approved a $5.7 billion increase in taxes, ending a year of fiscal turmoil brought on by the devastating downturn in the oil industry.


IN SOVIET: RUBLES, COUPONS AND 'REAL MONEY'
LEAD: Muscovites with ''check coupons,'' a special currency available to Soviet citizens who work abroad, had a choice Monday morning of the latest Toshiba and Panasonic color television sets at the electronics store on Astrakhansky Pereulok.


Few on Iran-Contra Committees Believe That Admiral Told Them the Whole Truth
LEAD: From interviews with most of the senators, representatives and top staff members on the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair, it is clear that few believe Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter's account is the whole truth.


LAND-USE FIGHT SHIFTS TO CALIFORNIA'S DESERT
LEAD: Legislation introduced today to protect large swaths of California desert is touching off another battle in the long land war between conservationists and the Reagan Administration.


6 Major Banks Post Big Losses
LEAD: Four more New York-based money-center banking companies - Citicorp, Manufacturers Hanover, Bankers Trust and Irving Bank - reported yesterday that they had huge second-quarter losses following their previously announced decisions to set aside additional reserves for losses on Latin American loans.


Royals Drop McRae
LEAD: Hal McRae, one of the best hitters never to win a batting title, has collected his final hit as a member of the Kansas City Royals.
The 42-year-old McRae, a career .290 hitter for his 19 major league seasons, was dropped after seeing limited action this action as a pinch-hitter.


Regan in Japan
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, the former White House chief of staff who is said to have helped select Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter as the national security adviser, takes his turn behind the Iran-contra witness table next week.
But this week he is in Japan, delivering speeches, seminars and interviews and playing a bit of golf.


Astro's 4-2 Victory Ends Expo Streak
LEAD: Danny Darwin threw a five-hitter over eight-plus innings, Alan Ashby hit a run-scoring double and Jose Cruz added a run-scoring single tonight, leading the Houston Astros to a 4-2 victory that ended the eight-game winning streak of the Montreal Expos.


STAGE: ORWELL'S '1984'
LEAD: AT the second-act climax of ''1984,'' the images, sounds and lights that play so large a part in the staging of George Orwell's novel at the Joyce Theater come together for terrific impact.
Winston Smith is in Room 101 of Oceania's Love Ministry, where ''the worst thing in the world'' happens to those who have been thinking the wrong thoughts.


Postal Service and Unions Reach Tentative Pact
LEAD: The Postal Service and the two largest unions representing its workers reached a tentative contract settlement today that provides raises of between $1,700 and $1,866 over the next 40 months.


DiGiorgio Rejects Gabelli Proposal
LEAD: The DiGiorgio Corporation said its board had voted to reject as inadequate a recapitalization proposal made June 29 by an investment group led by Mario Gabelli of New York.
The Gabelli group, which holds 28.6 percent of DiGiorgio, had proposed a plan under which shareholders would receive $20 in cash plus $8 in securities including new common stock.


U.S. WARSHIPS SET TO BEGIN ESCORTS OF GULF TANKERS
LEAD: A convoy of three Navy warships and two Kuwaiti tankers stood ready today to enter the Strait of Hormuz and traverse the Persian Gulf, inaugurating an expanded and more active American military presence.


SLAVA H. LEVI
LEAD: Slava H. Levi, a volunteer reader for the visually impaired, died of cancer of the pancreas Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 67 years old.


More Than Band-Aids for Air Delays
LEAD: The Senate Commerce Committee is mad as hell about inaccurate airline schedules and won't take it anymore.
The committee would require airlines to publish detailed performance information, including the frequency of delayed arrivals, canceled flights and lost-baggage claims.


Facing the Ayatollah
LEAD: To the Editor:


Plea for a Philosopher
LEAD: To the Editor:


FIRST BOSTON INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST BOSTON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
202,609,000
240,609,000
Net loss
b13,211,000
cd21,599,000
Share earns
-
.64
6mo rev
685,916,000
634,526,000
Net inc
b62,991,000
d91,848,000
Share earns
1.79
2.71


Bridge: World Champions Defeated In Vanderbilt Knockout Play
LEAD: A stunning upset marked the second day of Vanderbilt Knockout Team play at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here Monday.
Four reigning world champions, top-seeded in the event, lost to the 64th-seeded team by a margin of 22 international match points.


CHILEAN ARMS MAKER HELPS FILL A WORLD DEMAND
LEAD: The Iran-Iraq war and Washington's prohibition on arms sales to Chile have combined to help what was once a small explosives company become a significant manufacturer and exporter of armaments.


NEW SENSE OF WANDERLUST SENDS JAPANESE ABROAD
LEAD: The Japanese, with more money to spend and a newly discovered wanderlust to propel them, are going abroad this year for their summer vacations in record numbers, and about a third of them are likely to visit the United States for sightseeing and shopping.


School Coaches Commit a Foul
LEAD: Two assistant basketball coaches who resorted to extreme measures to teach unruly players a lesson were indefinitely suspended from their jobs at Sunny Hills High School in Fullerton, Calif., yesterday.


Delores Martin, 72, Is Dead; Broadway Actress and Singer
LEAD: Delores Martin, an actress and singer, died Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 72 years old.


A Nation Incredibly Hooked on Hyperbole
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE POP LIFE
LEAD:  An Apollo Homecoming


PHELPS DODGE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHELPS DODGE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
355,300,000
220,800,000
Net inc
b25,200,000
c16,000,000
Share earns
.77
.47
6mo rev
728,200,000
451,700,000
Net inc
b42,100,000
c31,200,000
Share earns
1.28
.91


RICHARD EGAN, FILM ACTOR, DIES AT 65
LEAD: Richard Egan, known for his roles as a tough leading man in action films and westerns, died of prostate cancer Monday at St.
John's Cancer Center in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 65 years old.


Talks About Sri Lanka Held in Southern India
LEAD: Indian officials held talks in the southern Indian city of Madras today with Tamil leaders on new proposals to resolve the ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka, Indian and Sri Lankan officials said.


'WHAT'S GOING ON' WITH TEEN-AGERS
LEAD: ''WHAT'S GOING ON'' is earnest and raises real problems, but its own sympathies do it in.
The one-hour documentary seems like two.
We know it's tough to be a teen-ager, but how many times can we be told that? ''What's Going On,'' a WCBS-TV production, on Channel 2 at 10 P.M., tells us again and again.


Enhanced Image Is Aim Of New World Group
LEAD: The troika that heads New World Pictures Ltd. - two entertainment lawyers and a career studio executive - is working to shake its reputation as makers of such grade-B movies as ''Reform School Girls'' and ''Godzilla 1985.''


ARMCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
719,500,000
657,700,000
Net inc
b36,200,000
c384,700,000
Share earns
.46
-
6mo sales
1,447,300,000
1,339,100,000
Net inc
b88,700,000
c447,600,000
Share earns
1.18
-


MARSH &amp; MCLENNAN COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARSH &amp; MCLENNAN COMPANIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
539,100,000
453,400,000
Net inc
78,900,000
64,600,000
Share earns
1.06
.87
6mo rev
1,099,100,000
897,600,000
Net inc
171,800,000
129,700,000
Share earns
2.31
1.76


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: DANILOV THE VIOLIST, by Vladimir Orlov.
Translated by Antonina W. Bouis. 307 pages.
William Morrow. $18.95.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Calvin Hill, the former pro football running back, has been appointed to the Baltimore Orioles' board of directors.
Hill works as a financial consultant for athletes and entertainers. . . .
Mike McEwen, the veteran National Hockey League defenseman, has signed a contract to play next season in Switzerland.


REAGAN THREATENS A MEDICARE VETO
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he would veto a bill on Medicare insurance against catastrophic illness that is being pushed by House Democrats if it reached his desk in its present form.
But his spokesman raised the possibility of a compromise.


Inquiry Is Ordered In a Hospital Death
LEAD: An investigation into the death of a 52-year-old patient at Harlem Hospital was ordered yesterday by the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation, the police said.


AIDES SAY BUSH EFFORT HAS RAISED $10 MILLION
LEAD: Aides to Vice President Bush said today that their boss, the leading Republican Presidential candidate, had already raised more than $10 million and that this revenue provided a clear financial and tactical advantage over potential rivals.


KNIGHT-RIDDER INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KNIGHT-RIDDER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
526,886,000
487,948,000
Net inc
43,026,000
38,286,000
Share earns
.73
.66
6mo rev
1,015,781,000
935,295,000
Net inc
71,666,000
64,861,000
Share earns
1.22
1.12


ALLIED-SIGNAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIED-SIGNAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,846,000,000
2,479,000,000
Net inc
b148,000,000
c186,000,000
Share earns
.85
.99
6mo sales
5,483,000,000
4,923,000,000
Net inc
b346,000,000
c372,000,000
Share earns
1.98
1.97


BANC ONE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANC ONE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
18,680,000
51,676,000
Per share
.20
.55
6mo net inc
78,130,000
100,357,000
Per share
.83
1.07


CITICORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITICORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b2,585,000,000
c235,000,000
Per share
-
1.60
6mo net loss
2,321,000,000
c505,000,000
Per share
-
3.47
b-Included a $3 billion addition to the company's reserve for possible credit losses.


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, JULY 22, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


JAZZ: 'OPERA' STAGED FOR SAXAPHONES
LEAD: JULIUS HEMPHILL calls ''Long Tongues,'' a work in progress presented Monday night at Alice Tully Hall in Lincoln Center's ''Serious Fun!'' concert series, a saxophone opera.
His six main characters do not sing or speak, they play various saxophones, and while Mr.
Hemphill plans to include dance, visual projections and dramatic vignettes in the completed work,


Resorts' Pan Am Stake
LEAD: Resorts International Inc., which on Monday said that it had sold the common shares it owns in the Pan Am Corporation, said that at the end of trading Monday it still held the equivalent of a 3.1 percent stake in Pan Am.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Resorts said it held $37.9 million worth of Pan Am debentures and less than 1 percent of Pan Am's common shares.


First Boston Buys a Firm
LEAD: The First Boston Corporation announced yesterday that it had bought Kaplan, Smith &amp; Associates, a consulting firm that specializes in the savings and loan industry.
The purchase price was not disclosed.
The acquisition was part of


GUESS WHO'S COMING TO DINNER?
LEAD: THE proposition was intriguing.
Put a French chef smack in the middle of a typically minuscule New York kitchen.
Deprive him of his Wolf stove and copper pots, fresh herbs ready for snipping and fish plucked wide-eyed from Long Island Sound.
Could he produce?
What would he produce?


WELLS FARGO &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WELLS FARGO &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
293,700,000
b66,100,000
Per share
-
1.17
6mo net loss
215,400,000
b117,700,000
Per share
-
2.29
b-Net income  Both latest periods' results include a $550 million special addition to Wells Fargo's allowance for loan losses, because of the developments in the international debt situation.


DR. THOMAS C. McGINNIS
LEAD: Dr.
Thomas C. McGinnis, a psychotherapist, writer and radio commentator, died of lung cancer Monday at his home in Fair Lawn, N.J.
He was 62 years old.


U.S. Premier Of Shostakovich Work
LEAD: The United States premiere of a work by Dmitri Shostakovich will be on the program for the opening concert of the American Symphony Orchestra's 25th season, Oct. 18 at Carnegie Hall.


GTE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GTE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,846,034,000
3,778,388,000
Net inc
b223,153,000
308,648,000
Share earns
.66
.92
Shares outst
328,572,000
324,434,000
6mo rev
7,539,767,000
7,334,911,000
Net inc
b487,885,000
591,462,000
Share earns
1.44
1.78
Shares outst
329,310,000
322,226,000


A Police Force Is Dismissed From Suit in Arrest of Texan
LEAD: A Federal district judge has dismissed the Plano Police Department as a defendant in an $8 million suit stemming from the erroneous arrest and conviction of Lenell Geter for armed robbery five years ago.


Swiss Clean Up Storm Ruins
LEAD: More than 400 soldiers were called in today to help clean up the muddy aftermath of torrential rainstorms that took the lives of four people in southern Switzerland, the police said.


ROBINS, A H CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROBINS, A H CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
182,153,000
172,640,000
Net inc
b7,736,000
8,318,000
Share earns
.32
.34
6mo sales
391,987,000
364,065,000
Net inc
33,746,000
30,676,000
Share earns
1.40
1.27


Harris Pleads Guilty
LEAD: The Harris Corporation pleaded guilty in Federal court today to overcharging the Army for satellite antenna equipment and agreed to pay more than $4 million in restitution, penalties and fines.
The plea-bargain agreement, negotiated for the company by former United States Attorney General Griffin B.


Contractors and Schools Agency Trade Blame for Poor Conditions
LEAD: Dilapidated conditions in most of New York City's schools are due to the Board of Education's poorly paid building inspectors, late payments to contractors and long legal proceedings needed to dismiss unsatisfactory contractors, a State Senate committee was told yesterday.


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
LEAD:  ''What they're doing is scaring the public to death, and we've got to do something about it.''  - Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward, on restricting bicycle traffic in New York City.  [ A1:6. ]


INSIDE
LEAD:  Next Witness: Shultz


TWO PORTRAITS OF SHULTZ: CHALLENGE FOR IRAN PANEL
LEAD: Two contrasting pictures of Secretary of State George P. Shultz have emerged from the Iran-contra hearings.


NBC's All-Star Baseball In 3d Place in Ratings
LEAD: NBC's telecast of baseball's All-Star Game achieved third place in the Nielsen television ratings during a week of summer doldrums and reruns.


PEPSICO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 13
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEPSICO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 13
1987
1986
Sales
2,787,500,000
2,039,200,000
Net inc
b189,000,000
c120,700,000
Share earns
.72
.47
6mo sales
5,080,000,000
3,750,500,000
Net inc
b257,900,000
c189,400,000
Share earns
.98
.72


TRIANGLE INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRIANGLE INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,189,192,000
694,193,000
Net inc
b35,301,000
c17,389,000
Share earns
1.20
1.19
Shares outst
28,943,000
12,764,000
6mo sales
2,101,420,000
1,178,209,000
Net inc
b41,555,000
c20,559,000
Share earns
1.40
1.38
Shares outst
28,957,000
11,818,000


GERBER PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GERBER PRODUCTS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
232,635,000
195,164,000
Net inc
8,053,000
6,569,000
Share earns
.41
.32
Shares outst
19,687,000
20,589,000


Net at Morgan Stanley Rises
LEAD: Morgan Stanley &amp; Company said yesterday that it earned $62.4 million in the second quarter, up 37.1 percent from $45.5 million the year earlier, impressive results given the huge bond trading losses that hit some of the firm's competitors in April.


2 ANTI-APARTHEID LEADERS ARE ARRESTED
LEAD: Two key officials of the anti-apartheid United Democratic Front, the biggest internal grouping resisting white rule, were arrested by the South African police early today in a pre-dawn sweep.


LEWIS R. EISNER
LEAD: Lewis R. Eisner, president and chief executive officer of Lewis R. Eisner &amp; Company, a private investment banking and management resources company, died of a ruptured aorta Tuesday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 62 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Up a Spiral Staircase
LEAD: ''OUR SALES keep on going crazy each year,'' said Ron Cohen, vice president and sales manager of the Iron Shop, which manufactures and sells kits for spiral staircases.
Why the increased interest? ''Because people are much more conscious of space, and conventional stairs eat up a lot of square footage,'' he said.


Profits Up At G.M. Units
LEAD: Three operating units of the General Motors Corporation today reported higher second-quarter earnings.
Analysts have predicted lower profits for the parent company, which is expected to report Thursday.


SOVIET ANSWER ON ARMS PLAN IS WELCOMED IN WASHINGTON
LEAD: The White House today welcomed Mikhail S. Gorbachev's statement that Moscow was prepared to agree to a worldwide ban on American and Soviet medium-range and short-range missiles.


GREAT WESTERN FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT WESTERN FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
80,047,000
76,029,000
Share earns
.65
.74
Shares outst
126,262,394
108,283,673
6mo net inc
163,588,000
148,069,000
Share earns
1.39
1.45


Kenner Rejects Bid; Asks S.E.C. Inquiry
LEAD: Kenner Parker Toys Inc. rejected today a $41-a-share buyout proposal from New World Pictures Inc. and called for investigations into possible manipulation of its stock price before the bid was made.


Dow, Rebounding a Little, Gains 2.23
LEAD: Stocks ended little changed yesterday, curtailed by weakness in the bond market and the potential for unrest in the Middle East.


AMERICAN PETROFINA INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN PETROFINA INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
610,445,000
469,837,000
Net inc
28,680,000
4,432,000
Share earns
2.18
.37
6mo rev
1,149,899,000
974,284,000
Net inc
48,509,000
b35,264,000
Share earns
3.68
-


Leon B. Poullada, Ex-Envoy And Afghan Expert, Is Dead
LEAD: Leon B. Poullada, a career Foreign Service officer who served as Ambassador to Togo during the Kennedy Administration and specialized in Afghan history, died of prostate cancer last Friday at his home in St.
Paul, Minn.
He was 74 years old.
In his 17-year diplomatic career, Mr.
Poullada, the son of a Mexican immigrant doctor, served in Ceylon, Pakistan and Afghanistan before President Kennedy named him Ambassador to the African coastal nation of Togo in 1961.


VULCAN MATERIALS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VULCAN MATERIALS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
284,938,000
256,558,000
Net inc
38,666,000
32,824,000
Share earns
3.63
2.94
6mo sales
497,732,000
457,155,000
Net inc
50,113,000
40,834,000
Share earns
4.71
3.65


DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Revenue
2,669,064,000
2,175,650,000
Net inc
377,250,000
238,633,000
Share earns
2.85
1.81
Yr rev
9,389,444,000
7,590,357,000
Net inc
1,137,435,000
617,420,000
Share earns
8.53
4.81


McGWIRE CLOUTS 36TH HOMER
LEAD: Mark McGwire had four hits, including his major league-leading 36th home run, and Dennis Lamp raised his career record against Detroit to 9-0 tonight as the Oakland Athletics beat the Tigers, 10-1.


S.E.C. Files a Brief in Texaco Case
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission, as expected, filed a brief with the Supreme Court of Texas today urging review of the bitter court case between Texaco Inc. and the Pennzoil Company.


Transamerica Active Again
LEAD: TAKEOVER rumors are again circulating around the Transamerica Corporation, with shares in the big insurance company jumping $3.625 yesterday to close at $44.25 in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


ENGELHARD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENGELHARD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
600,900,000
492,900,000
Net inc
18,000,000
15,400,000
Share earns
.41
.38
6mo sales
1,140,000,000
1,020,000,000
Net inc
b42,400,000
26,800,000
Share earns
1.00
.66


United Iran-Contra Report Expected From the 2 Panels
LEAD: With the Iran-contra hearings nearing a conclusion, the chairman and vice chairman of the Senate select committee said today that they expected the Senate and House committees to be able to present a united report this fall with a statement of facts that is acceptable to all members.


FIRST FEDERAL OF MICHIGAN reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL OF MICHIGAN (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b12,601,000
c14,776,000
Per share
1.13
1.33
6mo net inc
b49,670,000
c51,678,000
Per share
4.47
4.66
b-After a gain of $1,311,000 for the quarter and a gain of $1,727,000 from retirement of Federal Home Loan Bank advances for the 6 months.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Aouita Sets New Mark: Said Aouita of Morocco ran the 5,000 meters in 12 minutes 58.39 seconds at the Golden Gala meet in Rome yesterday, breaking his world record and the 13-minute barrier for the distance.
The time bettered Aouita's record of 13:00.40 set in 1985. ''I knew I was doing well,'' Aouita said after the race, ''but had I realized I was in such good form, I'd have tried to run in 12:50.


THE PROOF OF A PAINT JOB IS IN THE PAINTER
LEAD: MODERN exterior paints are more durable and more mistake-proof than ever, but even the best paint will not stand up if the surface is not properly prepared first, or if the paint is carelessly applied.
Most failures are not the fault of the paint - usually, the manufacturer's directions have not been followed in the application, and sometimes the wrong type of paint was used.


RYDER SYSTEM INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RYDER SYSTEM INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,154,976,000
918,564,000
Net inc
54,398,000
45,405,000
Share earns
.67
.60
6mo rev
2,231,141,000
1,771,317,000
Net inc
88,660,000
70,239,000
Share earns
1.08
.91


WEYERHAEUSER CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEYERHAEUSER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,769,114,000
1,497,396,000
Net inc
89,183,000
68,380,000
Share earns
.63
.46
6mo sales
3,386,457,000
2,804,139,000
Net inc
191,100,000
118,364,000
Share earns
1.38
.77


AGENCY AND CONGRESS FACE CLASH OVER PATENTING OF ANIMALS
LEAD: Congress is heading toward a confrontation with the United States Patent and Trademark Office over a decision to allow inventors to patent animals produced by genetic manipulation.


Hill Gets Oriole Post
LEAD: Calvin Hill, the former Yale University and National Football League running back who was raised in Baltimore, has become the first black to be named to a high position in the Baltimore Orioles organization.
The team owner, Edward Bennett Williams, appointed Hill, a Washington businessman, to the team's board of directors to fill the vacancy created by the death of Jack


Women Gain Little In Academic Jobs
LEAD: Women who teach in colleges still suffer from discrimination, according to a study by the University of California.


TANDEM COMPUTERS INC(M) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TANDEM COMPUTERS INC(M)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
263,978,000
200,853,000
Net inc
25,617,000
18,124,000
Share earns
.26
.20
Shares outst
99,652,000
90,006,000
9mo rev
744,381,000
547,241,000
Net inc
75,158,000
42,182,000
Share earns
.77
.48
Shares outst
97,098,000
87,044,000


GORBACHEV AGREES TO U.S. SUGGESTION FOR A MISSILE BAN
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev said in an interview published today that the Soviet Union was prepared to accept a worldwide ban on medium-range and short-range missiles.


SOVIET MAY BALK ON GULF ARMS BAN, AN OFFICIAL HINTS
LEAD: Soviet support for a United Nations effort to end the Iran-Iraq war does not necessarily extend to a possible international embargo on arms shipments to the combatants, a Soviet official and Middle East diplomats said today.


BANGLADESH IS TORN BY VIOLENT DEMANDS THAT PRESIDENT QUIT
LEAD: Protesters demanding the resignation of the President, Lieut.
Gen.
H.
M.
Ershad, battled in the streets today with riot police at the start of a two-day general strike called by opposition parties.


CHARLES EBLE, FORMER CON EDISON CHAIRMAN
LEAD: Charles E. Eble, a retired chairman and chief executive officer of the Consolidated Edison Company, died of complications of diabetes Tuesday at Saratoga Hospital in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
He was 86 years old and lived in Greenfield Center, N.Y.


Where the Art Is Selling
LEAD: By all outward appearances, the gallery's credentials seemed impeccable.
It had a prestigious Madison Avenue address, near Museum Row.
Its literature said it sold the works of some of the world's most celebrated artists.
It guaranteed in writing the authenticity of every lithograph and engraving that it sold.


North Upsets South, 88-73
LEAD: The South, undefeated in three games and favored to win a second straight United States Olympic Festival gold medal, was upset tonight in the title game by the North, 88-73, before a crowd of 21,203 at the Dean Smith Student Activity Center.


AIR PRODUCTS &amp; CHEMICAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIR PRODUCTS &amp; CHEMICAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
527,768,000
488,300,000
Net inc
b40,065,000
c78,639,000
Share earns
.71
-
9mo sales
1,588,599,000
1,451,892,000
Net inc
b116,512,000
c5,130,000
Share earns
2.06
-


Modest Homes, Cinderella Transformations
LEAD: IT is a curious fact of our inflationary times that the typical two-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath house that cost $22,500 in the 1950's now often has a $225,000 price tag.
While homeowners might be delighted in the decimal point's new position, the basic house - with small rooms, limited charm and cheap materials - often still looks like a $22,500 model.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: One day after signing their number one pick, Roger Vick, a running back from Texas A&amp;M, the Jets announced yesterday the signing of their second-round pick, Alex Gordon, a linebacker out of Cincinnati. . . .
The Philadelphia Flyers have traded Jeff Brubaker, a left wing acquired from the Edmonton Oilers last season, to the Rangers for future consideration.


Oil and Metals Climb On Persian Gulf Rumors
LEAD: Oil and precious metals futures were jarred yesterday by rumors that one of the two Kuwaiti tankers under the American flag had been attacked.


Ex-Louisiana Leader To Be Named a Judge
LEAD: President Reagan will nominate David C. Treen, the former Governor of Louisiana, to be a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, the White House said today.


In Tunisia, A Rare Visit To a Palace And Its Owner
LEAD: AS the stuff of romance, Edwina Prue's story was hard to beat.
There she was, a poor girl from America in a railroad station in London in the 1920's when a nobleman saw her and fell in love with her.
He did not introduce himself, but later traced her to her home in the United States, sent her orchids and a letter, and eventually married her.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, JULY 23, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


Times Co.'s Net Up 19.8%
LEAD: The New York Times Company reported yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose 19.8 percent, to $44.1 million, or 54 cents a share, from $36.8 million, or 45 cents a share, in the second quarter of 1986.


Suspension Is Asked on Military Aid to Pakistan
LEAD: The chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee today asked President Reagan to suspend military aid to Pakistan until the two countries resolve issues raised by charges that Pakistan has tried to acquire material for nuclear weapons.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE FORBIDDEN ZONE.
By Michael Lesy. 250 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $16.95.  ''THERE is a forbidden zone marked on the map of twentieth-century American culture, a place every citizen knows but fears to enter,'' Michael Lesy announces somewhat portentously at the opening of his latest book.


LONDONERS LOOK AT THEMSELVES THROUGH THE AGES
LEAD: One of the great successes of this summer in London is the exhibition called simply ''Londoners'' at the London Museum.
Sponsored by the Chase Manhattan Bank on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the founding of its branch in London, the show is built up with the widest possible variety of prints, paintings and drawings, ranging in date from the Middle


PANHANDLE EASTERN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PANHANDLE EASTERN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
325,139,000
472,382,000
Net inc
b21,062,000
c515,089,000
Shares outst
52,933,000
47,211,000
6mo net inc
b62,929,000
c475,635,000
Shares outst
52,771,000
46,061,000


Perpetual-Note Holders Offered Swap in London
LEAD: Investors in the beleaguered market for perpetual floating-rate notes in London may exchange their holdings for new securities, according to a proposal announced yesterday by a group of securities dealers and an insurance concern.


KIDDE INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KIDDE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
696,685,000
591,168,000
Net inc
14,806,000
13,240,000
Share earns
.67
.59
6mo sales
1,351,698,000
1,142,999,000
Net inc
28,223,000
25,750,000
Share earns
1.27
1.15


JWP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JWP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
148,600,000
85,100,000
Net inc
5,650,000
3,600,000
Share earns
.46
.34
Shares outst
12,370,000
10,590,000
6mo rev
277,660,000
133,250,000
Net inc
9,900,000
5,115,000
Share earns
.81
.49
Shares outst
12,280,000
10,330,000


YELLOW FREIGHT SYSTEM INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*YELLOW FREIGHT SYSTEM INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
437,821,000
436,601,000
Net inc
12,622,000
21,164,000
Share earns
.44
.74
6mo rev
853,129,000
833,835,000
Net inc
18,288,000
35,385,000
Share earns
.64
1.24


Sears Profits Rise by 37%
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said today that its second-quarter earnings rose 37 percent, largely because of a $58 million after-tax gain from the sale of its Sears Savings Bank branch offices in California and because of record earnings from its Allstate insurance unit.


World Debt Rise Cited
LEAD: Foreign borrowing of debtor countries is approaching $1 trillion, according to data from the Bank for International Settlements and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
In a survey of bank and official credit, the two organizations said gross claims on 159 countries totaled $896.6 billion in December, up from $850.6 billion in June 1986 and $813 billion at the end of 1985.


Bristol-Myers Net Rises
LEAD: The Bristol-Myers Company, a leading drug manufacturer, said its earnings rose 35.4 percent in the second quarter, largely because of increased international sales resulting from the declining value of the dollar.
The company, which produces Bufferin and Excedrin, said it earned $161.5 million, or 56 cents a share, up from $119.3 million, or 42 cents a share, a year ago.


TRINOVA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRINOVA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
418,817,000
366,024,000
Net inc
19,275,000
b82,675,000
Share earns
1.13
4.85
6mo sales
806,992,000
715,747,000
Net inc
36,203,000
b98,807,000
Share earns
2.13
5.11


MORGAN STANLEY GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORGAN STANLEY GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
830,699,000
690,607,000
Net inc
62,389,000
45,480,000
Share earns
2.46
1.82
Shares outst
25,250,766
24,876,715
6mo rev
1,577,739,000
1,280,246,000
Net inc
126,664,000
103,512,000
Share earns
5.00
4.61
Shares outst
25,217,618
22,332,102


Turnpike Director to Retire
LEAD: William J. Flanagan, executive director of the New Jersey Turnpike Authority for 25 years, has told the chairman of the agency, Joseph A. Sullivan, that he will resign from his $138,696-a-year job in six months.


Panel Votes Toshiba Ban
LEAD: The House Armed Services Committee unanimously approved a bill today that would prohibit the Defense Department from buying the Toshiba Corporation's consumer products to sell in military exchange stores.


NORTHERN TELECOM LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHERN TELECOM LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,253,000,000
1,067,400,000
Net inc
77,600,000
64,900,000
Share earns
.31
.25
6mo rev
2,396,300,000
2,037,000,000
Net inc
137,700,000
115,000,000
Share earns
.54
.43


Genesis of Jewish Humor Sought in a Serious Series
LEAD: If there is anything that is apt to prompt serious attention, it is the question of Jewish humor.
As the topic of a series, it has been filling the house at the Jewish Museum for the last two years, and this weekend it returns for another annual check-up, which will take more than a month to complete.


Hart's Collateral
LEAD: Trying to recoup more than $500,000 owed to it by Gary Hart's 1984 Presidential campaign, the National Bank of Washington held an auction yesterday for 93 lithographs that had been specially made for Mr.
Hart by the American artist Robert Rauschenberg.
The prints have been held in a vault at the bank since 1984, part of the collateral for a $3.5 million loan.


EXCERPTS FROM GORBACHEV VIEWS
LEAD: Following are excerpts from written answers by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, to questions submitted by the Indonesian newspaper Merdeka, as provided by Tass:


RYLAND GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RYLAND GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
233,050,000
157,392,000
Net inc
9,641,000
5,171,000
Share earns
.73
.40
6mo sales
407,639,000
277,689,000
Net inc
15,785,000
7,724,000
Share earns
1.20
.60


New York to Ban Bicycles on 3 Major Avenues
LEAD: In an effort to reduce accidents caused by speeding bicycle messengers, New York City will ban all bicyclists from Park, Madison and Fifth Avenues in midtown Manhattan between 10 A.M. and 4 P.M. on weekdays, under a three-month experiment announced yesterday by the Koch administration.


Don McMahon Dies
LEAD: Don McMahon, a relief pitcher with seven major-league teams from 1957-74, died tonight, hours after apparently suffering at heart attack while pitching batting practice for the Los Angeles Dodgers.
He was 57 years old and had heart bypass surgery three and one-half years ago.


Thompson Concerned
LEAD: John Thompson, basketball coach at Georgetown and of the United States Olympic team for next year's Summer Games in Seoul, said he was worried about his players missing valuable school time during the event, which is scheduled Sept. 17-Oct.2.


Fannie Mae Appoints Chief Operating Officer
LEAD: Roger E. Birk, who surprised many in the securities industry when he stepped down as chairman and chief executive of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company a little more than two years ago, has been named president and chief operating officer at the Federal National Mortgage Association, Fannie Mae said yesterday.


ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,076,900,000
1,070,900,000
Net inc
72,000,000
62,700,000
Share earns
.59
.51
6mo rev
2,166,400,000
2,067,900,000
Net inc
136,600,000
118,300,000
Share earns
1.12
.97


Scoot-Through Shower Service
LEAD: Frank Ortiz providing Erse Britto, left, and Francine, his daughter, with liquid relief from the 93-degree heat outside his home on West 43d Street.
He should keep the hose handy; they'll need it again today and tomorrow as more heat is expected, but with higher humidity. (NYT/Jim Wilson)


ALSO AT RISK IN THE GULF: U.S. DETERRENT STRATEGY
LEAD: More than the Kuwaiti tankers sailing under the American flag were put at risk today when the United States naval escort program got under way in the Persian Gulf.
The assumptions upon which the United States has based its deterrent strategy in the gulf - that its willingness to use naval might to protect the tankers and to retaliate if attacked will deter


The Open Museum
LEAD: To the Editor:


VF CORP reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VF CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Sales
640,683,000
345,522,000
Net inc
42,792,000
29,939,000
Share earns
.63
.48
Shares outst
67,725,000
62,417,000
6mo sales
1,222,165,000
662,258,000
Net inc
75,289,000
55,545,000
Share earns
1.11
.89
Shares outst
67,664,000
62,335,000


SEARS, ROEBUCK &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEARS, ROEBUCK &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,720,000,000
10,750,000,000
Net inc
b390,400,000
284,900,000
Share earns
1.03
.77
6mo rev
22,200,000,000
20,140,000,000
Net inc
678,300,000
480,200,000
Share earns
1.78
1.29


DIAMOND SHAMROCK R&amp;M INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAMOND SHAMROCK R&amp;M INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
428,800,000
404,100,000
Net inc
2,200,000
28,900,000
Share earns
.10
1.30
Shares outst
22,534,868
22,286,482
6mo sales
807,000,000
896,200,000
Net inc
4,900,000
b5,300,000
Share earns
.22
-
Shares outst
22,410,675
22,286,482


Sandinistas Report Capture of Redeye Missile
LEAD: Defense Minister Humberto Ortega Saavedra said today that Nicaraguan forces had captured a sophisticated Redeye antiaircraft weapon that was parachuted into Nicaragua for use by United States-backed guerrillas.


A Hands-Off Takeover Stance
LEAD: President Reagan's nominee for chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, David S. Ruder, told Congress today that he would support a hands-off approach to hostile takeovers and would favor only minor changes in the current Federal laws that govern them.


Both Sides Confer With Mediator in NBC Strike
LEAD: A mediator met separately yesterday with the negotiating committee of NBC's striking union and then with network officials in hopes of opening the way for a face-to-face meeting today.


Steve's to Acquire 80% of Swensen's
LEAD: The majority owner of Swensen's Inc. has agreed to sell its 80 percent stake in the ice-cream shop operator to Steve's Homemade Ice Cream Inc.
The transaction between Steve's, a New York producer of expensive ice cream, and Red River Resources Inc. would consist of a stock swap, exchanging two of Steve's class A common shares and a five-year warrant to buy one Steve's share at $6 for every six


Reorganization Plan by Hunts
LEAD: Lawyers for the bankrupt William Herbert Hunt Trust Estate filed an initial reorganization plan today that included, for the first time, the possibility that the secretive Hunt family would soon offer stock in one of their companies.


AMP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
585,875,000
492,328,000
Net inc
62,510,000
42,288,000
Share earns
.58
.39
6mo sales
1,111,724,000
945,350,000
Net inc
116,650,000
75,939,000
Share earns
1.08
.70


Aquino Decrees A Compromise On Land Issue
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino issued a compromise decree on land redistribution today that left open a number of crucial questions and drew immediate criticism from both landowners' and farmers' groups.


MANY IN NEWARK HAIL CULTURE PROJECT
LEAD: Corporate leaders, residents and out-of-towners reacted enthusiastically today to a plan to build a $300 million cultural complex in the center of the city.


Two Dance Companies Set for Mostly Mozart
LEAD: The Lar Lubovitch Dance Company and New York Baroque Dance Company are to perform tonight at 8 at Avery Fisher Hall in a program called ''Mozart and the Dance.''


ROTHSCHILD, L F HOLDINGS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROTHSCHILD, L F HOLDINGS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
124,100,000
104,100,000
Net loss
9,800,000
b7,500,000
Share earns
-
.42
6mo rev
282,000,000
233,800,000
Net inc
6,000,000
21,300,000
Share earns
.39
1.28


THEATER: 'NOTHING BUT BUKOWSKI,' 2 ONE-ACTS
LEAD: THERE are two running jokes in the playwright John Ford Noonan's comic tribute to the Los Angeles-based author and notoriously seedy roustabout Charles Bukowski.
One is that the author, who exalts the gross, bestial aspects of life both in his writing and through his mammoth slovenliness, should be irresistibly attractive to beautiful young women.


ARCO, Hess Report Gains
LEAD: ARCO and the Amerada Hess Corporation yesterday reported substantial gains in second-quarter earnings.
Both companies cited sharply higher earnings from their exploration and production divisions.


GOLDEN WEST FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOLDEN WEST FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b40,892,000
c45,616,00
Share earns
1.31
1.46
6mo net inc
b83,029,000
c93,408,000
Share earns
2.66
2.99
b-Includes a writeoff of $7,846,000 pretax of FSLIC secondary reserves for both the quarter and 6 months; pretax losses on the sale of properties acquired through foreclosure of $940,000 for the quarter and $2,267,000 for the 6 months; and the 6-month excludes an extraordinary charge of $3,289,000.


GM HUGHES ELECTRONICS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GM HUGHES ELECTRONICS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,622,800,000
2,754,300,000
Net inc
b178,000,000
c170,200,000
Share earns
.89
.85
6mo rev
5,307,400,000
5,314,300,000
Net inc
b353,200,000
c323,600,000
Share earns
1.77
1.62


SSC&amp;B: Methodical Hunter
LEAD: MANY agency chief executives tell their people that the pursuit of new business is everybody's job.
To which Spencer Plavoukos, chairman and chief executive of SSC&amp;B, United States division, says, ''When you say that new business is everybody's business, it ends up nobody's business.''


Shorter Courses Derided
LEAD: Jan Stephenson, who created a stir three years ago when she criticized courses on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour as being too short, repeated that argument today.
She added that if certain women's major tournaments were not played on more suitable courses, the events should be taken off the major list.


Prices in New York Area Rise 0.5%
LEAD: Consumer prices for the New York-northeastern New Jersey region rose five-tenths of 1 percent last month, driven by the rising cost of energy, food and housing, the Labor Department said yesterday.


PINIELLA CRITICIZES YANKS AFTER A 2D ANEMIC EFFORT
LEAD: This time, the burn inside Lou Piniella did not come roaring out at the start, in the anger of the moment, as it has done on occasion in his 11 seasons as a Yankee player and two as a manager.
Tonight, the manager exhibited a slow burn.
There was no mistaking the fire.


Farmers Need Fair Trade, Not Just Free Trade
LEAD: To the Editor:


PITNEY BOWES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PITNEY BOWES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
552,143,000
485,658,000
Net inc
44,552,000
38,025,000
Share earns
.56
.48
6mo rev
1,056,675,000
928,010,000
Net inc
85,559,000
b75,130,000
Share earns
1.08
.95


Anthony Truglia, 60, Connecticut Legislator
LEAD: Anthony D. Truglia, the assistant majority leader of the Connecticut State Senate, died at Hartford Hospital yesterday of complications stemming from injuries suffered in an automobile accident last week, a hospital spokesman said.
He was 60 years old and lived in Stamford.


MUSIC: VIOLIN PRODIGY AND DE LARROCHA
LEAD: THE Mostly Mozart Festival's program Tuesday evening featured a cast of impressive guest artists, most notably the pianist Alicia de Larrocha, but the evening's most intriguing player made his appearance at a brief, pre-concert recital.
Stefan Milenkovic, a 10-year-old violinist from Yugoslavia, is the youngest of several prodigiously gifted musicians appearing at the festival this season.


REYNOLDS METALS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REYNOLDS METALS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,041,300,000
1,044,100,000
Net inc
b51,100,000
b18,900,000
Share earns
1.02
.36
6mo rev
1,957,100,000
1,891,900,000
Net inc
c77,000,000
cd95,800,000
Share earns
1.57
2.05


Washington Post Co. Net Up
LEAD: The Washington Post Company said yesterday that its second-quarter net income rose 39.5 percent, to $42.4 million, or $3.29 a share, from $30.4 million, or $2.37 a share, in 1986.


WASHINGTON POST CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON POST CO (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
339,126,000
313,275,000
Net inc
42,362,000
30,409,000
Share earns
3.29
2.37
6mo rev
637,490,000
590,036,000
Net inc
61,011,000
42,771,000
Share earns
4.74
3.33


FIRST NATIONAL CINCINNATI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST NATIONAL CINCINNATI CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
10,815,000
9,605,000
Per share
.88
.78
6mo net inc
22,263,000
19,628,000
Per share
1.81
1.60


British Trade Deficit
LEAD: Britain registered a trade deficit in May of $:561 million, or about $897 million at current exchange rates, the worst performance since last August, the Government said.
The visible trade deficit of $:1.16 billion was offset by an estimated surplus of $:600 million in so-called invisible trade, including shipping, banking and tourism, the Trade and Industry Department said today.


PACCAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACCAR INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
605,378,000
426,887,000
Net inc
26,234,000
b1,129,000
Share earns
1.46
.06
6mo sales
1,118,791,000
865,228,000
Net inc
47,430,000
14,927,000
Share earns
2.64
.83


POPE SEEKING WAY TO REPAIR TIES WITH JEWS
LEAD: Senior Vatican officials say that Pope John Paul II is searching for ways to repair relations between his church and Jewish organizations after the widespread Jewish protests over Kurt Waldheim's visit here.


RECRUITING PRESSURE EXTENDS TO WOMEN
LEAD: The recruiting hunt is behind her, but the high-pressure tactics she faced are a vivid memory for Daedra Charles, one of the top female basketball players in the nation's high schools last year.


U.S. Deficit Again Falls
LEAD: The Federal Government's budget deficit shrank to $420 million for the month of June, the Government said today.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.50
6.58
6.41
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.68
5.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.82
5.79
5.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.35
8.29
7.18
30-YR.


Poindexter's Tale Stuns Lawmakers
LEAD: Lawmakers from both parties say they are deeply dismayed at the picture of White House operations drawn by Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter in the Iran-contra hearings.
They add that President Reagan must bear some measure of responsibility for the lying and deception practiced by his subordinates.


Shultz and Others on the Iran Deal
LEAD:  Nov. 16, 1986: ''My own information about the operational aspects of what was going on was fragmentary at best.''  - Secretary of State George P. Shultz  Nov. 17: ''There is a lot of what transpired that I don't know about.''  - Mr.
Shultz  Nov. 20: ''It was not kept from the Secretary of State.


MINNESOTA MINING &amp; MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MINNESOTA MINING &amp; MANUFACTURING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,381,000,000
2,185,000,000
Net inc
240,000,000
198,000,000
Share earns
1.05
.86
6mo sales
4,588,000,000
4,254,000,000
Net inc
453,000,000
379,000,000
Share earns
1.98
1.65


TORCHMARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TORCHMARK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b46,346,000
c55,769,000
Share earns
.68
.73
Shares outst
67,268,000
76,091,000
6mo net inc
b97,349,000
c118,431,000
Share earns
1.40
1.55
Shares outst
68,879,000
76,034,000


JOSTENS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOSTENS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
218,231,000
203,428,000
Net inc
b25,597,000
c20,915,000
Share earns
.70
.50
Yr sales
587,256,000
525,541,000
Net inc
b44,712,000
c40,315,000
Share earns
1.22
.95


BANCORP HAWAII CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANCORP HAWAII CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
13,238,000
11,284,000
Per share
1.41
1.24
6mo net inc
25,463,000
22,448,000
Per share
2.72
2.48


Two Old Scouts Talk Baseball
LEAD: In their 4-3 victory over the Atlanta Braves yesterday, the Mets were without Gary Carter, out now ''day to day'' with a damaged knee.
Another injury for the World Series champions who have turned ''disabled list'' into household words.
The Mets don't add up their injuries, but nine different players have been on the disabled list at one time or another, including six pitchers.


TEXAS MUSEUM TO BUY A MAJOR CARAVAGGIO
LEAD: The Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth is to buy Caravaggio's ''Card-Sharps,'' a painting of primordial importance to the development of Italian 17th-century art and one that had been lost to view for nearly 100 years.


A.T.&amp;T. Plans Market Shift
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, in a significant strategy shift, will aggressively market its semiconductors and other electronics products to outsiders instead of relying on sales to other A.T.&amp; T. divisions, a top company official said yesterday.


PENNWALT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNWALT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
311,890,000
289,255,000
Net inc
13,687,000
11,394,000
Share earns
1.08
.80
6mo sales
588,436,000
556,349,000
Net inc
26,084,000
25,381,000
Share earns
1.94
1.78


TRANS WORLD AIRLINES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANS WORLD AIRLINES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,056,383,000
741,876,000
Net inc
52,839,000
b87,020,000
Share earns
1.28
-
6mo rev
1,880,430,000
1,404,786,000
Net loss
1,974,000
256,582,000


LORAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LORAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
317,783,000
152,628,000
Net inc
15,639,000
b13,347,000
Share earns
.64
.55
b-Includes a net non-recurring credit of $1.2 million, or 3 cents a share, from the sale of a subsidiary and a revaluation of a minority interest investment.


Library of Congress Gets Loewy Papers
LEAD: THE Library of Congress is to receive some 600 designs, letters, photographs and drawings by the industrial designer Raymond Loewy, who died last year at the age of 92 after a career that spanned nearly three-quarters of a century.


CLIMBING OIL PRICES BRING SIGH OF RELIEF TO SOUTHWEST, BUT EDGINESS REMAINS
LEAD: When the price of oil hit $20 in mid-June, they celebrated in the streets in the Texas Panhandle town of Perryton with noisemakers, nonalcoholic champagne and a giddy spirit not been seen since oil prices collapsed at the end of 1985.


LONGTIME CO-HOST OF 'TODAY'
LEAD: Jack Lescoulie, one of the original stars of NBC's ''Today'' show, died of colon cancer yesterday at St.
Francis Hospital in Memphis.
He was 75 years old.


WESTERN CO OF NORTH AMERCA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN CO OF NORTH AMERCA (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
38,984,000
44,232,000
Net loss
b108,648,000
78,476,000
6mo rev
71,498,000
131,110,000
Net loss
b135,280,000
111,822,000
b-Includes a $90 million writedown of the carrying value of onshore oil services equipment.


Boxing Notebook; HIGH ROLLERS ATTRACTED BY MAJOR FIGHTS
LEAD: In recent years, the casinos of Las Vegas and Atlantic City have consistently won the bidding on the live rights to major fights.
There's a simple enough reason for the near monopoly.
Plainly put: Boxing pays.


Santo Domingo Journal; Old Hand Shows His Magic, Juggling $600 Million
LEAD: Joaquin Balaguer is a few weeks away from his 80th birthday and virtually blind.
But he is proving to be a dynamic President of this Caribbean country, fighting waste and corruption, directing a huge public works program and taxing the stamina of aides half his age.


FIRST EMPIRE STATE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST EMPIRE STATE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
6,733,000
6,636,000
Per share
2.45
2.42
6mo net inc
13,307,000
12,855,000
Per share
4.85
4.70


Oliver Ramsay Pilat, Reporter And New York 'Night Mayor'
LEAD: Oliver Ramsay Pilat, a retired newspaper reporter and author of seven books who once served as the ''night mayor'' of New York City, died Tuesday at Bellevue Medical Center of complications following surgery for a broken hip.
He was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Nissan to Sell Luxury Cars
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Company, taking a cue from a Japanese rival, said today that it will set up a dealer network to sell its new Infiniti luxury cars by the fall of 1989.


Mellon Bank Corp. Fills President's Job
LEAD: In a step toward restoring its financial health, the Mellon Bank Corporation said yesterday that it had hired Anthony P. Terracciano, vice chairman of the Chase Manhattan Corporation, as Mellon's president and chief operating officer.
In this newly created post, Mr.
Terracciano, 48 years old, will oversee Mellon's daily operations.


AMERADA HESS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERADA HESS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,155,130,000
927,115,000
Net inc
89,386,000
19,652,000
Share earns
1.06
.24
6mo rev
2,387,900,000
2,358,758,000
Net inc
b270,858,000
c319,636,000
Share earns
3.21
-


Calendar: Art Fabrics And Indian Beadwork
LEAD:  Artworks For Wearing  Gayle Willson Gallery, 16 Job's Lane, Southampton, L.I.; 516-283-7430.


French Aides Predict A Long Iran Standoff
LEAD: As the deadline set by France for the return home of French and Iranian diplomatic personnel passed without action, French officials warned today that the standoff could go on for months.


Streets of Seoul
LEAD: Through the iron grille guarding the entrance, the acolytes can be seen, neat in blue, standing silent in a great hall.
A gentle recorded voice talks to them of their duties and aspirations and they bow seven times.
A young woman walks a dozen steps, pushes a button, the grille lifts and the temple is opened.


Treasury Price Slide Continues
LEAD: Treasury bond prices continued to slide lower yesterday, raising yields to their highest level since early June.


G.E., a Pioneer in Radio and TV, Is Abandoning Production of Sets
LEAD: The General Electric Company, bowing to unrelenting Japanese competition, said yesterday that it was selling its $3 billion-a-year consumer electronics business to Thomson S.A., France's Government-owned electronics giant.


Hilton Makes Bid For Dunes Hotel
LEAD: The Hilton Hotel Corporation said it had offered to buy the troubled Dunes Hotel and Country Club for $122.5 million in cash.
It said the offer will expire on Aug. 3.
Hilton said that if its bid succeeded, it would spend an additional $110 million to renovate and expand the hotel and casino.
The Hilton chain already owns two other hotels in Las


JERSEY PLANS TO SHIP TAINTED SOIL TO TENNESSEE FROM MONTCLAIR
LEAD: Some of 5,000 barrels of radium-contaminated soil that has been stored in Montclair for three years will be shipped next week to Tennessee under a pilot project announced today by environmental officials.


NABISCO BRANDS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NABISCO BRANDS LTD
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
229,326,000
213,770,000
Net inc
b111,864,000
6,205,000
Share earns
5.59
.31
6mo sales
471,517,000
434,341,000
Net inc
b138,769,000
14,965,000
Share earns
6.94
.75


'FOLLIES' RESTAGED IN LONDON
LEAD: The English theater put its money where its affection is Tuesday night, introducing a $3 million production of Stephen Sondheim's ''Follies'' that features some of the most elaborate stagecraft of the season and four new Sondheim songs tucked amid a string of show stoppers.


NEWMONT MINING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWMONT MINING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
128,077,000
96,547,000
Net inc
b290,666,000
c62,021,000
Share earns
4.63
1.02
Shares outst
62,717,000
60,784,000
6mo sales
243,226,000
179,727,000
Net inc
b315,536,000
c70,658,000
Share earns
5.09
1.16
Shares outst
62,018,000
60,783,000


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Alpo Petfoods, Allentown, Pa., a subsidiary of Grandmet USA Inc., named Joseph Sestek chairman and chief executive and Franklin W. Krum president and chief operating officer.


2 Black Executives Form Specialty Agency
LEAD: Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's vast worldwide holdings now include Jamison &amp; Leary Advertising, an American specialty shop for advertising to black consumers.
Jamison &amp; Leary is a subsidiary of Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates, which is itself the result of the recent merger of Backer &amp; Spielvogel and Ted Bates


Metro Matters; After 3 Months, Ferrer Is Holding His Own in Bronx
LEAD: ''There are no pure souls in politics,'' Fernando Ferrer was explaining. ''Somewhere along the way they have made a judgment that 'my guts tell me one thing, but I'm going to hold my nose.' ''


MCKESSON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCKESSON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,712,000,000
1,556,600,000
Net inc
21,400,000
b21,200,000
Share earns
.49
.50
Shares outst
43,100,000
42,400,000
b-After net from discontinued operations of $1.4 million.


Relieving Motion Sickness
LEAD: As terrible as it might seem at the time, motion sickness is a normal response to movement, and it rarely leads to serious complications, medical experts at the Food and Drug Administration have reported.


Yields Are Steady
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were little changed for the week ended yesterday.


N.B.A. Picks Sanders
LEAD: Tom (Satch) Sanders, who grew up in Harlem and played basketball for Seward Park High School and New York University before going on to play 13 years for the Boston Celtics, will be coming home soon.
The 49-year-old Sanders, a coordinator of the National Basketball Association's rookie transitional program, was named to a full-time position as the league's director of player programs by Commissioner David Stern.


MARION LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARION LABORATORIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
188,123,000
118,677,000
Net inc
28,727,000
14,674,000
Share earns
.18
.09
Yr sales
597,420,000
399,267,000
Net inc
96,898,000
55,049,000
Share earns
.61
.35


Jewish Legislators Dine With Shultz
LEAD: It was one of the hottest nights on record here Tuesday when Secretary of State George P. Shultz's car pulled up to the northwest Washington home of Representative James H. Scheuer, Democrat of Queens.


JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,009,900,000
1,732,300,000
Net inc
224,400,000
189,800,000
Share earns
1.30
1.04
6mo sales
3,990,700,000
3,474,800,000
Net inc
459,900,000
b53,300,000
Share earns
2.66
.29


Midwesterners Love the Beauty of Their Man-Made Prairies
LEAD: It is hardly news that gardeners across the country are currently enthusiastic about planting wildflowers.
Midwesterners are no exception.
But in this area the trend, with its appealing combination of ecological, esthetic and practical advantages, has taken a particular twist: planting prairies.


ON ''OUR WORLD,' FEAR ON 3 FRONTS IN 1938
LEAD: ''OUR WORLD'' tonight goes back to the fall of 1938:


CHRISTIE'S SALES TOTAL $900 MILLION
LEAD: Christie's International said yesterday that it would announce record worldwide sales of $900 million for the 11-month auction season ending July 31.
That is a 57 percent increase over its international sales of $573.3 million in the 1985-86 season.


NAVY ENTERS GULF WITHOUT INCIDENT
LEAD: Within striking range of Iranian bases and with their crews at a high state of alert, three United States warships escorted two re-registered Kuwaiti tankers into the Persian Gulf today.


If High Court Is So Political, Let's Elect Justices
LEAD: To the Editor:


Video of 'Angel Heart' Restores Edited Scene
LEAD: The 10 seconds of ''Angel Heart'' that audiences couldn't see in theaters last spring will be available in their homes in September.


Fun and Games
LEAD: A failing television station, with depressed ratings in a highly competitive market, decides to change its presentation completely.
The desperate station manager, trying to find a magic formula to captivate new viewers, searches for a motif to dominate the station's programming, something with great appeal for many viewers that will be able to thrive in almost all programming environments.


Met Opera Changes Managerial Balance
LEAD: THE Metropolitan Opera is evolving a new managerial structure in which Bruce Crawford, the general manager, will assume more of the artistic authority previously vested with James Levine, the artistic director.


Old Sturbridge Village Plans Gardening Talks
LEAD: LECTURES on 19th-century gardens, seeds and plant varieties will be held Aug. 1 and 2 at Old Sturbridge Village, a re-creation of a New England town of the 1830's.


Permitting More Jews To Leave
LEAD: By freeing nearly all Jewish prisoners of conscience, allowing some prominent high-profile refuseniks -those once refused permission to emigrate - to leave the country and opening the gates slightly to Jewish emigration, the wily Mikhail S. Gorbachev has shown welcome signs of change and has scored points with his country's critics.


LAW ON SPECIAL PROSECUTORS IS UPHELD BY A FEDERAL JUDGE
LEAD: A Federal judge has upheld the constitutionality of the Ethics in Government Act's independent-counsel provisions, under which special prosecutors are appointed by a court.


Networks Take Turns In Covering Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 9 A.M. on the CBS television network under the network rotation system.
The hearings will also be televised on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New York.


WASHINGTON TALK: F.B.I. Comes Word of a Possible New Director
LEAD: Maybe, just maybe, the White House has found a candidate in its often embarrassing four-month search for a new Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigaiton.


Kean Is Planning Arts Center For Newark With 8,000 Seats
LEAD: Governor Kean presented plans today for a state center for the performing arts in downtown Newark that would be the second largest in the nation, after Lincoln Center.


Consumer Prices Rose 0.4% in June
LEAD: Easing fears of a sharp acceleration in inflation, the Labor Department reported today that the Consumer Price Index had climbed a moderate four-tenths of 1 percent in June.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JULY 23, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-15


TECUMSEH PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TECUMSEH PRODUCTS CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
270,737,000
240,325,000
Net inc
21,808,000
16,149,000
Share earns
3.99
2.95
6mo sales
509,304,000
474,977,000
Net inc
38,065,000
31,174,000
Share earns
6.96
5.70


Beverly Hills Eases Its Ban On Smoking in Restaurants
LEAD: The City Council, which put one of the toughest antismoking ordinances in the nation into effect in April, has decided to modify the new regulation.


MOVE BY FRENCH SUPRISES AMERICAN EX-COLLEGUES
LEAD: Although the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution collaborated with French oceanographers in the project that found the wreck of the Titanic two years ago, the French group's salvage expedition, announced today, has taken the Americans by surprise.


AIDS-INFECTED ARE FOUND TO PRODUCE VIRUS-KILLERS
LEAD: People infected with the AIDS virus produce cells that can kill cells containing the virus, scientists said today.
They said the finding could help identify people who would benefit most from an AIDS vaccine, if one is developed.


If High Court Is So Political, Let's Elect Justices; Glaring Inconsistency
LEAD: To the Editor:


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,476,131,000
5,175,043,000
Net inc
b757,204,000
775,800,000
Share earns
3.24
3.27
b-Includes a gain of $68,044,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


FRENCH EXPEDITION TO START DIVING FOR TREASURES ON TITANIC TODAY
LEAD: The organizers of a French expedition said today that it had reached the site of the wrecked ocean liner Titanic and would start diving Thursday to recover a strongbox and other treasures from the ship, which sank off the Newfoundland coast 75 years ago.


Looking Over a Lawn of Clover Is Sweet Pleasure
LEAD: LAST fall, for the first time in years, I looked at my lawn with the kind of pride suburban males are expected to feel toward their expanses of grass.


The Big Bucks
LEAD: The Big East Conference, which was represented by five teams - including Syracuse and Providence, which reached the Final Four - received $3,801,697 in award money from the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I championship basketball tournament last spring.
It was the most money received by any conference.


Auto Emission Curbs Sought
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency today proposed two rules to reduce the emission of gasoline vapor that causes ozone pollution in many urban areas.
One rule would require an upgrading of gasoline vapor recovery systems in new cars and the other would require refiners and blenders to make gasoline less subject to evaporation.


Icahn Plans Buyout Of T.W.A. Holders
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn, chairman and owner of 73 percent of Trans World Airlines Inc., announced a plan yesterday to buy out the remaining public shareholders, turn the airline into a private company and give himself back practically all the $450 million he invested in the company a year and a half ago.


FLOOD TOLL NEAR 100, SEOUL SAYS
LEAD: More than 100 people were feared dead after two days of torrential rain in South Korea caused floods and landslides that leveled villages, blocked roads and tore up train tracks, the state television said today.


Sports People; Knight Is Sorry
LEAD: In a letter dated June 27 and published yesterday in the Spanish-language newspaper, El Mundo, Coach Bobby Knight of Indiana said he was ''very sorry for whatever misunderstanding'' resulted following a confrontation with a policeman during the 1979 Pan American Games in Puerto Rico.


ON THE IRT: NEW RIDERS, NEW CARS, OLD COMPLAINTS
LEAD: Even on a midweek morning, when many customers still have a supply of tokens, there is a line at the booth of the West 72d Street IRT station that would pass for a Monday morning line elsewhere in the subways.


113,000 Claims On Robins Halted
LEAD: A Federal judge has disallowed the claims of 113,000 women against the A. H. Robins Company because the claimants failed to meet a request for more information on the extent of injuries purportedly caused by the Dalkon Shield birth-control device.
Federal District Judge Robert R. Merhige Jr. said he would reinstate any claim if given adequate reason why a questionnaire was not returned.


ANHEUSER-BUSCH COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANHEUSER-BUSCH COMPANIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,350,000,000
2,170,000,000
Net inc
181,800,000
152,400,000
Share earns
.60
.49
6mo sales
4,450,000,000
4,090,000,000
Net inc
309,900,000
260,400,000
Share earns
1.02
.84


COOPER INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COOPER INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
895,198,000
900,642,000
Net inc
45,420,000
36,693,000
Share earns
.91
.75
Shares outst
49,829,000
48,692,000
6mo rev
1,695,720,000
1,767,385,000
Net inc
73,011,000
62,499,000
Share earns
1.47
1.29
Shares outst
49,673,000
48,544,000


Q &amp; A
LEAD: Q. Mildew has appeared on the ceiling of my lakeside vacation cottage for the first time in many years.
What will kill the mildew spores so that I can paint the ceiling?


SHIP'S INSURANCE RATES A CONCERN
LEAD: The decision to fly American flags on two Kuwaiti oil tankers and provide them with United States Navy escorts through the Persian Gulf, has yet to raise the insurance rates that shipping operators pay to transport oil in the gulf.
But shipping and insurance executives are anxiously monitoring the situation to see if that will happen.


Knicks, Rangers: Let's Go to the Tape
LEAD: WWOR-TV and Madison Square Garden are discussing the possibility of limiting telecasts of most Knick and Ranger road games played on Mondays through Thursdays to the late-night hours.


FIREMAN'S FUND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIREMAN'S FUND CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b115,522,000
cd54,887,000
Share earns
-
.83
6mo net inc
b93,369,000
d85,189,000
Share earns
1.43
1.29
b-After realized capital gains of $43,361,000 and $124,019,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively; and the 6-month also includes a gain of $61,596,000 on pension plan termination.


An Alternative To the Rebate
LEAD: MANUFACTURERS of consumer goods have long relied on an array of discounts and rebates to both consumers and retailers as a way of increasing sales.
There are coupons, billions of them, printed every week in newspapers and magazines.
There are millions of dollars in rebates.
And there are the cooperative promotion programs, in which a carpet maker, for instance, pays part of a store owner's advertising costs if the store's ads mention the manufacturer's product.


TRANSCANADA PIPELINES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSCANADA PIPELINES LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
775,100,000
993,500,000
Net inc
38,100,000
41,400,000
Share earns
.23
.31
6mo rev
1,700,000,000
2,280,000,000
Net inc
78,000,000
93,200,000
Share earns
.46
.72
Shares outst
124,850,000
100,143,000


FIRST AMERICAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMERICAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
11,647,000
b15,411,000
Per share
.57
.82
6mo net inc
25,973,000
b26,621,000
Per share
1.27
1.42
Shares outst
20,418,000
18,581,000
b-Includes a nonrecurring gain of $6 million from the sale of the company's interest in its headquarters building for the quarter and 6 months.


Gandhi Meets Gurkha Group In an Effort to End Violence
LEAD: In an effort to end nearly a year of rising violence in eastern India, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi met today with the leader of Gurkha separatists and ruled out the creation of a special state for the group.


Right, Let's Talk About Iran Policy
LEAD: Like almost every witness in the Iran-contra hearings, Rear Adm.
John Poindexter charged Congress with looking at the little picture, the trivia -deceit within the Administration, lies to Congress, laws twisted here and there.
He challenged critics to focus on the national interest, on policy.


Iran Supporters Rally Anti-U.S. Volunteers
LEAD: Moslem fundamentalists loyal to Iran urged Lebanon's Moslems today to join ''a mobilization campaign for a fight to the finish'' against the United States and its allies in the Middle East.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
Net Income
Percent
April-June
Change
1987
From '86
Anheuser-Busch Cos.
$181,800,000
+19.3
ARCO
330,000,000
+120.0
Digital Equipment Corp.
377,300,000
+58.1
Holiday Corp.
74,900,000
+96.6
Johnson &amp; Johnson
224,400,000
+18.2
Loral Corp.


Hahn to Use Playboy To Tell But Not Show
LEAD: Jessica Hahn, the former church secretary whose tryst with the Rev.
Jim Bakker set off the PTL scandal, will tell her version of the events in the November issue of Playboy magazine, her lawyer said today.


Boesky Studying Hebrew and Talmud at Seminary
LEAD: Last winter, after Ivan F. Boesky had been fined $100 million in the insider-trading scandal, the Jewish Theological Seminary, acting at his request, took his name off its $20 million library.


Leader Presses Blacks' Goals
LEAD: John E. Jacob, the president of the National Urban League, today served notice that blacks would no longer be ''taken for granted'' politically, or economically.


THE NEW YORK TIMES CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THE NEW YORK TIMES CO (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
426,255,000
401,244,000
Net inc
b44,109,000
c36,849,000
Share earns
.54
.45
Shares outst
81,972,000
80,916,000
6mo rev
835,294,000
776,679,000
Net inc
b85,244,000
c70,795,000
Share earns
1.04
.87
Shares outst
81,941,000
80,933,000


AT LAST, METS RESCUE DARLING
LEAD: The Mets seemed well on their way to wasting another game yesterday in Shea Stadium, but they suddenly strung together six singles for four runs in the sixth inning and beat the Atlanta Braves, 4-3.
And nobody was more impressed than Ron Darling.


ILLINOIS TOOL WORKS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ILLINOIS TOOL WORKS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
425,148,000
203,010,000
Net inc
28,679,000
19,526,000
Share earns
.56
.38
6mo rev
826,516,000
379,612,000
Net inc
53,034,000
34,822,000
Share earns
1.03
.68


TRIAL OF A MARINE IN SPY CASE OPENS
LEAD: The trial of Sgt.
Clayton J. Lonetree on charges of spying for the Soviet Union opened at the Marine Corps base here today with his lawyers seeking to portray him as a persecuted American Indian.


Bridge: Just Two Top Seeds Remain In Spingold Knockout Event
LEAD: A day of carnage in the Spingold Knockout Teams here Tuesday left a group of top-ranked teams on the sidelines at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.


GENERAL MOTORS ACCEPTANCE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL MOTORS ACCEPTANCE CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
411,800,000
298,600,000
6mo net inc
893,200,000
575,200,000


HEALTH WORKERS TO GET AIDS PROTECTION
LEAD: The Federal Government will, for the first time, require private employers to protect the nation's health-care workers against infection with the AIDS virus, Labor Department officials said today.


Vote Proposal Is Opposed
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission's proposal to impose a uniform one-share, one-vote standard on stock exchanges was greeted today with outright opposition from one exchange and little enthusaism by two others.


Software Move Set By I.B.M.
LEAD: In its strongest move yet to become a major player in applications software, I.B.M. said today that it was forming a corporate division devoted specifically to developing computer programs for use in offices, factories and a range of industries.


Opening Off Till Oct. 1 For 'Roza,' a Musical
LEAD: The opening of ''Roza,'' a musical based on the book, ''La Vie Devant Soi'' by Romain Gary, which was also the source of the film ''Madame Rosa,'' has been postponed from Aug. 27 to Oct. 1.
Previews are to begin Sept. 14 at the Royale Theater.


DANCE: 'DANCE AND THE MUSIC OF AFRICA,' AT JACOB'S PILLOW
LEAD: ''The Dance and Music of Africa,'' a program that opened last night at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, is not your ordinary presentation of ethnic dance.


LAKE'S RESCUE THREATENS EVERGLADES
LEAD: Efforts to save ailing Lake Okeechobee are threatening to change the unique character of the Everglades, Florida's vast sawgrass marshland.


FIGHTING FAKE ART: VICTIMS' SHAME AND MUDDLED LAW
LEAD: Federal and state authorities say an unusual array of circumstances is hindering their efforts to eliminate the multimillion-dollar counterfeit-art market that is flourishing in New York and other parts of the country.


INGERSOLL-RAND CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INGERSOLL-RAND CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
664,300,000
726,000,000
Net inc
22,200,000
20,700,000
Share earns
.40
.39
6mo sales
1,273,700,000
1,386,300,000
Net inc
42,000,000
39,200,000
Share earns
.75
.74


MAYTAG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAYTAG CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
489,400,000
452,500,000
Net inc
41,800,000
b17,888,000
Share earns
1.02
.41
Shares outst
41,118,000
43,399,000
6mo sales
968,200,000
858,400,000
Net inc
83,000,000
b50,440,000
Share earns
1.99
1.16


MORRISON KNUDSEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORRISON KNUDSEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
494,553,000
575,354,000
Net inc
6,522,000
10,256,000
Share earns
.59
.94
6mo rev
963,671,000
1,061,504,000
Net inc
12,025,000
18,283,000
Share earns
1.09
1.67


PRIME COMPUTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIME COMPUTER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
236,047,000
210,547,000
Net inc
15,685,000
11,422,000
Share earns
.32
.24
6mo rev
457,759,000
407,368,000
Net inc
27,566,000
20,672,000
Share earns
.56
.43


TANK ARMOR ISSUE TO BE FOCUS OF CAPITAL HEARING
LEAD: A debate among Army experts over allegations that American infantrymen can no longer defend themselves against Soviet tanks will be aired at a bipartisan hearing next Wednesday, Congressional aides said yesterday.


ARCO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARCO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,103,000,000
3,549,000,000
Net inc
330,000,000
150,000,000
Share earns
1.80
.83
6mo rev
7,847,000,000
7,836,000,000
Net inc
569,000,000
449,000,000
Share earns
3.11
2.47


BRIDGEPORT COLLAPSE YIELDS JUST MANY THEORIES SO FAR
LEAD: Three months after the L'Ambiance Plaza apartment complex collapsed, killing 28 construction workers, theories abound on the cause of the accident.
But Federal investigators say they do not expect any answers before September.


SNAP-ON TOOLS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SNAP-ON TOOLS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
184,628,000
168,584,000
Net inc
20,930,000
17,567,000
Share earns
.51
.42
6mo sales
370,118,000
325,923,000
Net inc
42,458,000
34,247,000
Share earns
1.03
.83


IMPERIAL CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMPERIAL CORP OF AMERICA (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
269,879,000
261,871,000
Net inc
16,543,000
11,346,000
Share earns
1.11
.77
6mo rev
540,536,000
489,086,000
Net inc
b35,515,000
18,197,000
Share earns
2.39
1.23


THE RECEIVER AND A POSSIBLE END-AROUND PLAY
LEAD: Cris Carter, the all-America wide receiver from Ohio State who last week was ruled ineligible for next season because he signed with an agent, may have been lured into the arrangement by his brother, according to Carter's lawyer, who said the brother secretly received thousands of dollars from the agent.


Clarendon Bids For Argonaut
LEAD: The Argonaut Group Inc. said today that the Clarendon Group Ltd. had offered to acquire the Los Angeles insurance company, for $52 a share, or about $600 million.


BIDEN DEFENDS HIS CRITICAL COMMENTS ON BORK
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., attempting to recover his political equilibrium in the face of criticism that he has been too outspoken in opposing the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court, said today that it would be ''dishonest'' for him to pretend he had an ''open mind.''


2 Russians and Syrian Begin Orbital Flight to Mir Station
LEAD: Syria's first man in space and two Soviet astronauts were launched today in a Soyuz spacecraft toward the Soviet Union's orbiting space station Mir, at the start of a 10-day mission.


Correction
LEAD: An article in Science Times on July 14 about the Indian mathematician Srinivasa Ramanujan contained several errors.
He was born in Erode, a town near Kumbakonam, not in Kumbakonam itself, where he grew up.


'Anyone' Can Help the Homeless
LEAD: Nancy Abraham is a practical woman.
The 39-year-old Shearson Lehman vice president is also impatient, tenacious and not above being a pest.
She is, in other words, a person who gets things done.
What Ms.
Abraham wanted to do was help New York City's homeless, and in particular the group she thought most ''helpable'' - mothers and their children.


Tax 'Corrections'
LEAD: Congressional tax-writers have been trying for months to push through a ''technical corrections'' bill, a way to fix drafting errors and make other minor changes to the sweeping Tax Reform Act of 1986.
But the corrections bill has been delayed numerous times because many representatives and senators see the legislation as an opportunity to toss in a tax break for a pet interest, even if there is little chance it will end up in the bill.


UNION PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,343,800,000
1,578,000,000
Net inc
143,300,000
b834,800,000
Share earns
1.25
-
6mo rev
2,645,100,000
3,399,800,000
Net inc
265,200,000
b731,700,000
Share earns
2.32
-


Natalie Hinderas, 60; Played Classical Piano
LEAD: Natalie Hinderas, one of the first black artists to establish an important career in classical music and a pianist who played with most of the major American orchestras, died of cancer yesterday at her home in Philadelphia.
She was 60 years old.
Ms.
Hinderas was born in Oberlin, Ohio, and studied with Olga Samaroff at the Juilliard School and with Edward Steuermann at the Philadelphia Conservatory.


Give New York Schools Real Decentralization
LEAD: To the Editor:


PUBLIC SERVICE CO OF INDIANA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUBLIC SERVICE CO OF INDIANA (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
295,606,000
250,178,000
Net inc
30,223,000
25,092,000
Share earns
.47
.33
6mo rev
528,458,000
519,609,000
Net inc
b107,302,000
54,852,000
Share earns
1.78
.75


Victory Over Health Care Anxiety
LEAD: The catastrophic Medicare health insurance bill passed yesterday by the House goes well beyond the version offered last fall by the Reagan Administration - but not so far beyond that it merits the President's threatened veto.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Manhole Cover as Art


MERCHANTS NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCHANTS NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b14,000,000
c8,745,000
Per share
-
.65
6mo net loss
b5,784,000
c15,510,000
Per share
-
1.16
b-After a $30 million provision for losses related to Latin American debt.


INDIANA NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDIANA NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b4,018,000
c9,968,000
Per share
-
.84
6mo net inc
b8,136,000
20,589,000
Per share
.64
1.71
b-After an after-tax charge of $15,180,000 from additions to loan loss reserves for the quarter and 6 months.


HBO &amp; CO (ATLANTIC, GA)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HBO &amp; CO (ATLANTIC, GA)(O)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
43,733,000
37,567,000
Net inc
b2,386,000
c6,256,000
Share earns
.10
-
6mo rev
81,139,000
78,765,000
Net inc
3,221,000
c5,510,000
Share earns
.14
-


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


BECTON DICKINSON &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BECTON DICKINSON &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
392,886,000
337,406,000
Net inc
b36,742,000
c34,462,000
Share earns
.89
.80
6mo sales
1,126,455,000
921,989,000
Net inc
b105,062,000
c86,832,000
Share earns
2.52
2.03


PROVIDENT BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROVIDENT BANCORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,986,000
2,979,000
Per share
.57
.56
6mo net inc
4,893,000
5,739,000
Per share
.94
1.07
The per share earnings in 1986 are restated to reflect a change in accounting for loan acquisition costs.


POTLATCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POTLATCH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
243,918,000
249,878,000
Net inc
22,317,000
19,431,000
Share earns
.80
.70
6mo sales
492,546,000
483,162,000
Net inc
40,103,000
33,074,000
Share earns
1.43
1.17


UNION ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,886,620,000
1,702,065,000
Net inc
360,516,000
318,330,000
Share earns
3.10
21.64


Dollar and Gold Are Up In Quiet U.S. Trading
LEAD: The dollar firmed in quiet domestic trading yesterday after turning mixed overseas.


LAURA CARTER FAHY
LEAD: Laura Carter Fahy, a former community volunteer worker, died Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 88 years old.


Great Notions Confront Small Realities
LEAD: MANY New Yorkers cope with tiny kitchens, windowless bathrooms and inadequate closets by streamlining their lives or by just putting up with being cramped.
Others have grander ideas.
Instead of complaining, they make the most of their diminutive domains without sacrificing elegance or atmosphere.


WEST POINT-PEPPERELL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEST POINT-PEPPERELL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
487,603,000
477,031,000
Net inc
12,173,000
9,037,000
Shares outst
15,267,994
14,603,802
Share earns
.80
.62
9mo sales
1,485,346,000
1,314,075,000
Net inc
48,739,000
34,937,000
Share earns
3.28
2.71
Shares outst
14,837,977
12,908,222


Blackmun Treatment Is Going as Expected
LEAD: Treatment of Justice Harry A. Blackmun of the Supreme Court for recurrence of prostate cancer is proceeding as expected, a Mayo Clinic spokesman said today.


NEWS GROUP FAULTS MILITARY DELAY ON GULF REPORTS
LEAD: A newspaper group whose representative was among a pool of reporters traveling with the Navy convoy in the Persian Gulf sent a letter of protest to the Pentagon today about the delay in the military's release of four dispatches from the pool.


HOLIDAY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to July 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOLIDAY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to July 3
1987
1986
Revenue
422,967,000
420,989,000
Net inc
b74,933,000
38,069,000
Share earns
3.12
1.48
Shares outst
24,045,000
25,686,000
6mo rev
822,208,000
808,494,000
Net inc
b111,419,000
57,889,000
Share earns
4.65
2.25
Shares outst
23,972,000
25,691,000


A MEDICARE SHIELD FOR COSTLY ILLNESS IS VOTED BY HOUSE
LEAD: The House of Representatives voted today to protect 31 million elderly and disabled people against the costs of catastrophic illness by approving the largest expansion of Medicare benefits in the program's 22-year history.


Officials Say Inspector Cited 5th Amendment and Retired
LEAD: The Inspector General of the New York City Housing Authority retired this month after citing his Fifth Amendment right to avoid self-incrimination before city investigators about charges that Housing Authority officials impeded a corruption inquiry, city officials said yesterday.


Federal Investigators Gather Data at PTL Ministry Offices
LEAD: A team of 18 Federal criminal investigators has begun gathering evidence at the headquarters of the troubled PTL television ministry, a PTL official said today.


Owner of Store Is Charged in Explosion
LEAD: Propane was stored illegally at the Brooklyn plumbing supply store that was leveled Tuesday by a propane explosion that killed 4 people and injured 11, according to the authorities.
More than 20 other tanks - of propane and acetylene - were removed from the rubble yesterday.


MEDIA GENERAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDIA GENERAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
186,967,000
161,663,000
Net inc
12,651,000
11,467,000
Share earns
.44
.40
6mo rev
354,042,000
313,075,000
Net inc
20,712,000
18,392,000
Share earns
.72
.64


Maiden Rallies to Victory
LEAD: Morgan's Levee, the only maiden in a field of seven 2-year-olds, rallied from last place to run down Endurance and Eon and win the $72,000 Tremont Stakes yesterday at Belmont Park.


MUSIC: 'JAZZ IN JULY,' SERIES AT 92D STREET Y
LEAD: ''JAZZ IN JULY,'' the annual two-week series of concerts at the 92d Street Y focusing on jazz of the 1920's and 30's, opened its third season Tuesday evening with three established series favorites - ''Stridemonster,'' the stride-piano duo of Dick Hyman and Dick Wellstood; the singer Carrie Smith and Vince Giordano's big band - and a newcomer to the series, the Jim Cullum Jazz Band of San


HUNTINGTON BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUNTINGTON BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,275,000
15,739,000
Per share
.11
.59
6mo net inc
20,317,000
30,363,000
Per share
.73
1.14
b-Includes a $25 million provision for possible loan losses.


Home Beat; Pairing Up With Plastics
LEAD: IN 1986 Michel Hurst, near right, a chef, and Robert Swope, far right, a punk-rock singer, opened Full House, a shop that offers furnishings from the 40's through the 60's.
They specialize in plastic objects made in the United States and Europe during the 60's.
Right now, they have a collection of more than a dozen pieces of plastic furniture, including tables and chairs, and dozens more plastic accessories.


Correction
LEAD: The Home Improvement column in The Home Section on May 21 incorrectly described several steps in the connection of telephone wires.
Four-conductor cable made for telephone installation is the only cable that should be used.


LARRY DAVIS, AT RIKERS, IS SAID TO STAB A GUARD
LEAD: Larry Davis, who is being held in prison on charges of killing five drug dealers and wounding six police officers, stabbed a correction officer in the head with a ballpoint pen yesterday, officials said.


Digital Equipment Posts A 58% Rise in Earnings
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation, whose profits have soared as those of other computer makers have faltered, said yesterday that net income in its fourth fiscal quarter jumped 58 percent, to $377.3 million.


If High Court Is So Political, Let's Elect Justices; Best We Can Hope For
LEAD: To the Editor:


AC by Superconductor
LEAD: To the Editor:


STANLEY WORKS reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANLEY WORKS (NYSE)
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Sales
433,438,000
357,771,000
Net inc
b21,693,000
c19,893,000
Share earns
.50
.47
6mo sales
850,286,000
636,047,000
Net inc
b39,450,000
c35,823,000
Share earns
.91
.85


MILITANTS BLOCK DIGGING IN ISRAEL
LEAD: Fifty American volunteers pulled out of an archeological excavation site here today after a group of rigorously Orthodox Jews mobilized international pressure to halt digging in the area, which they say is an ancient burial ground.


Pepsico Net Climbs 56.6%
LEAD: Pepsico Inc. yesterday reported a 56.6 percent surge in its second-quarter net income, reflecting strong growth in its three business units and help from acquisitions made in 1986.


Drug Shootout in Peru
LEAD: A drug trafficker was killed and a police sergeant wounded in a shootout at a cocaine laboratory in a remote Amazon basin river valley, the Interior Ministry said today.
A ministry spokesman said the gun battle erupted when the police burst into the laboratory on Monday in the hamlet of Alto Limon, 275 miles northeast of Lima, and found three Colombian drug traffickers and their Peruvian bodyguards.


Democrats Win, 15-14
LEAD: Well, sports fans, the annual Congressional baseball game is over, and what a game it was.


WARNER-LAMBERT COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARNER-LAMBERT COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
855,801,000
761,207,000
Net inc
80,810,000
120,591,000
Share earns
1.12
1.61
6mo sales
1,677,978,000
1,508,152,000
Net inc
154,243,000
185,710,000
Share earns
2.14
2.48


TELEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELEX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
221,412,000
201,239,000
Net inc
20,673,000
18,793,000
Share earns
1.40
1.28


PPG INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PPG INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,333,700,000
1,208,800,000
Net inc
102,400,000
91,800,000
Share earns
.85
.77
6mo sales
2,594,500,000
2,345,900,000
Net inc
189,300,000
161,000,000
Share earns
1.58
1.36


NORTH'S TESTIMONY SET FOR RELEASE ON CASSETTE
LEAD: At least two home video companies are racing to be the first to release excerpts of the Iran-contra testimony of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North to video stores.


Rejection Leads To a 25-0 Streak
LEAD: The Salt Lake Trappers, a 26-man team made up completely of players not selected by major league clubs in the free-agent draft, seem to be a team with a mission.
The Salt Lake players, running away with the pennant in the Pioneer League for rookie professionals, seem bent on proving that the scouts who overlooked or rejected them were wrong, wrong, wrong.


POLICE AND PROTESTERS CLASH IN 2-DAY BANGLADESH STRIKE
LEAD: A 54-hour general strike called to force the resignation of President H. M. Ershad provoked violent clashes today between the President's supporters and mobs fielded by opposition parties.


Abercrombie Sale To Investor Group
LEAD: Abercrombie &amp; Fitch, the sporting goods store known for its sometimes exotic merchandise, will be sold by Oshman's Sporting Goods Inc. of Houston.
An investor group headed by Michel Zelnik, former president of Bidermann Industries, will pay $30 million in cash and $20 million in junior subordinated notes.


AMDAHL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMDAHL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
341,016,000
209,348,000
Net inc
30,963,000
2,705,000
Share earns
.60
.06
6mo rev
659,517,000
409,550,000
Net inc
56,199,000
5,124,000
Share earns
1.11
.11


Loss at BankAmerica: A Record $1.14 Billion
LEAD: SAN FRANCISCO, July 23 - With a $1.1 billion special addition to its reserve for loan losses, the BankAmerica Corporation today reported its largest quarterly loss to date, $1.14 billion.


Money Fund Assets Soar
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 386 money market mutual funds increased a record $2 billion, to a new high of $240.57 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 96 institutional funds increased $652.9 million, to $66.90 billion.
Assets of the 200 general-purpose funds increased $915.4 million, to $68.35 billion.


LAC MINERALS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAC MINERALS LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
81,100,000
62,500,000
Net inc
18,100,000
2,500,000
Share earns
.63
.09
6mo rev
148,800,000
111,900,000
Net inc
23,900,000
4,900,000
Share earns
.84
.17


BEMIS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEMIS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
236,360,000
215,808,000
Net inc
b8,016,000
6,194,000
Share earns
.59
.44
Shares outst
13,624,000
13,948,000
6mo sales
462,337,000
419,958,000
Net inc
13,498,000
10,456,000
Share earns
.99
.75
Shares outst
13,619,000
13,910,000


CMS ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CMS ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
552,811,000
612,166,000
Net inc
b28,827,000
c4,290,000
Share earns
.33
-
6mo rev
1,396,541,000
1,640,066,000
Net inc
b50,778,000
30,270,000
Share earns
.59
.35


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


FRUIT OF THE LOOM reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRUIT OF THE LOOM (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
235,700,000
194,600,000
Net inc
b17,900,000
c8,900,000
Share earns
.28
-
6mo sales
406,100,000
323,200,000
Net loss
b39,500,000
c1,700,000
Share earns
-
-


Sosnoff's Caesars Stake
LEAD: Martin T. Sosnoff, a New York investor, said today he had bought contracts to buy 445,000 shares of Caesars World Inc. common stock, equal to about 1.3 percent of the company's common stock.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Sosnoff, who recently made an unsuccessful bid for the company, said he had bought the contracts from July 20 to July 22, for $9.37 each.


MORE GAS FOUND NEAR BLAST SITE
LEAD: Fire marshals discovered 144 small cylinders of propane yesterday in a Brooklyn building two doors away from the site of a propane explosion that killed four people Tuesday morning.


U.S. Sues Integrated Housing Complex in Chicago on Use of Racial Quotas
LEAD: The Justice Department sued a fully integrated housing complex here today, saying the racial quotas used to achieve that integration unlawfully discriminated against blacks.


BARRISTER INFORMATION SYSEMS reports earnings for Qtr to June 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARRISTER INFORMATION SYSEMS (OTC)
Qtr to June 26
1987
1986
Revenue
8,262,000
5,563,000
Net inc
55,000
b574,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


CINCINNATI MILACRON INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINCINNATI MILACRON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 20
1987
1986
Sales
192,391,000
208,059,000
Net inc
4,590,000
5,706,000
Share earns
.19
.24
6mo sales
381,796,000
389,644,000
Net inc
b9,251,000
10,898,000
Share earns
.38
.46


EQUIPMENT TESTED FOR TITANIC SEARCH
LEAD: Deep-sea treasure hunters at the site of the sunken liner Titanic tested a minisubmarine and its robot craft today in preparation for a disputed salvage mission to the wreckage.


Views About the Supreme Court
LEAD: ''In general do you think the United States Supreme Court is too liberal or too conservative in its decisions?''
Too
Too
About
Don't
liberal
conservative
right*
know
TOTAL
36%
38%
8%
18%
Men
31


IMPERIAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMPERIAL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,109,000
b2,495,000
Per share
.30
.24
6mo net inc
5,189,000
b29,301,000
Per share
.49
2.85
b-Includes after-tax gains of $678,000, or 6 cents a share, from the sale of certain assets for the quarter and after-tax gains of $25,740,000, or $2.50 a share, principally from the sale of the company's insurance premium division in March 1986 for the 6 months.


30 MILLION NIGERIANS ARE LAUGHING AT THEMSELVES
LEAD: Uzorma Onungwa doesn't like ethnic humor.


BALLARD MEDICAL PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALLARD MEDICAL PRODUCTS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,531,253
1,416,936
Net inc
330,139
30,212
Share earns
.09
.01
9mo sales
6,729,081
3,716,391
Net inc
884,135
70,572
Share earns
.24
.02


Texas Air Wins Reservation Pact
LEAD: The Texas Air Corporation said yesterday that its technology subsidiary had won a contract to supply the software and technical support for what would be the world's largest computerized airline reservation system.


Bo Diddley
LEAD: Bo Diddley, the guitarist and singer who is a member of the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame, is to perform Sunday night at midnight at the Limelight, 660 Avenue of the Americas, at 20th Street (807-7850).
Tickets are $12.


MINNESOTA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MINNESOTA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
107,106,000
99,026,000
Net inc
13,815,000
22,848,000
Share earns
.45
.70
6mo rev
208,181,000
203,013,000
Net inc
36,658,000
41,505,000
Share earns
1.22
1.39


JUDGE EMERGES AS CHOICE TO HEAD F.B.I.
LEAD: Federal District Judge William S. Sessions emerged tonight as the leading candidate to head the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


BANKVERMONT CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKVERMONT CORPORATION
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,312,000
1,026,000
Per share
.53
.44
6mo net inc
2,734,000
1,672,000
Per share
1.11
.75


ART PEOPLE
LEAD:  Neo-Geo's Newest


The 'T' Party
LEAD: The Republican Party may try to pin a new alliterative label on the Democrats as the 1988 Presidential campaign unfolds.
Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr., the national chairman, said at a breakfast with reporters yesterday that the Democrats are a party of ''taxes, tariffs and timidity.''


Bossy Puts Pain, Olympics Aside
LEAD: He is still bothered by the mysteri-ous back ailment that spoiled his 10th season in professional hockey and has threatened to foreshorten his career, but Mike Bossy plans to report to the Islanders' training camp in September, anyway, and has no thought of abandoning the club in order to play for Canada in the 1988 Winter


Military Spurt Pushes Durable Goods Up 1.4%
LEAD: Orders for ''big ticket'' durable goods rose 1.4 percent in June, the biggest increase since March, but the improvement came entirely from higher demand for military equipment, the Government reported today.


From Tulane to Auburn
LEAD: ''Ned Fowler deserves a chance and that's why he's here,'' said Sonny Smith, Auburn's basketball coach, after naming the former Tulane coach to be his assistant yesterday.
The 49-year-old Fowler coached Tulane to a 70-45 record in four years but left in the wake of scandals that prompted the Tulane president to drop basketball in


ARKANSAS BEST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARKANSAS BEST CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
177,224,834
172,263,460
Net inc
1,851,596
7,257,714
Share earns
.18
.72
6mo rev
347,967,086
331,657,042
Net inc
2,025,100
9,543,601
Share earns
.20
.94


FFB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FFB CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
5,020,000
2,752,000
Per share
.46
-
6mo net inc
8,822,000
5,321,000
Per share
.80
-
The latest second quarter includes a one-time writeoff of $680,000 for the FSLIC secondary reserve and a one- time after-tax gain of $2.2 million on a real estate investment.


BE-BOP REDUX: OLD IS NEW
LEAD: FOR the seasoned jazz-lover, the lineup of performers in the downtown clubs this weekend - most weekends, in fact - has an aura of deja vu.
Art Blakey and the Jazz Messengers are at Sweet Basil, Anita O'Day is at Fat Tuesday's.
Alto saxophonists - Lou Donaldson at Carlos 1, Clarence C-Sharpe at Barry Harris's Jazz Cultural Theater - are flexing their Bird wings, keeping Charlie Parker's music alive and, perhaps, reminding old-timers of Charles Mingus's comment that ''if Bird was a gunslinger, there'd be a whole lot of dead copycats.


Hong Kong's Uneasy Boom
LEAD: WHAT will happen to Hong Kong when China takes it over from Britain just 10 years from now?
Will this thriving center of trade, manufacturing and finance wither away in the Communist embrace - or will it help to liberalize and invigorate the economy of China?


UNIVERSAL HEALTH SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSAL HEALTH SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
195,873,000
166,517,000
Net inc
b3,228,000
6,618,000
Share earns
.23
.34
6mo rev
395,673,000
332,967,000
Net inc
b16,446,000
13,813,000
Share earns
1.06
.71
Shares outst
16,232,000
22,547,000


CRACK TO HOPSCOTCH: PURGING 107TH STREET
LEAD: On the same block of West 107th Street where crack dealers once congregated like spice merchants in a Middle Eastern bazaar, a little girl was playing hopscotch the other day.
The mothers who used to warn their children to walk down some other street were watching them roller skate and shoot baskets.


Koch Plans Cuts If Cuomo Signs Bill on Pensions
LEAD: Mayor Koch yesterday ordered agency heads to prepare to cut back $81 million in jobs and service improvements called for in the new budget because of concern that Governor Cuomo might sign the state's pension supplementation bill.


FIRST CAPITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST CAPITAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
6,075,938
5,989,096
Per share
.70
.69
6mo net inc
12,100,676
12,010,857
Per share
1.39
1.38


Broadway
LEAD:  A Rigorous Rabbi, Now


U.S. Sues Over Quotas
LEAD: Assistant Attorney General William Bradford Reynolds said racial quotas in an integrated Chicago housing complex constituted discrimination.
Page D19. (NYT)


ARVIN INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARVIN INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
345,231,000
225,527,000
Net inc
15,399,000
11,299,000
Share earns
.80
.68
6mo sales
708,364,000
430,917,000
Net inc
26,633,000
21,495,000
Share earns
1.41
1.27


UNION EXPLORATION PARTNERS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION EXPLORATION PARTNERS LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
176,900,000
142,300,000
Net inc
66,500,000
40,400,000
Share earns
.28
.18
6mo rev
347,700,000
353,000,000
Net inc
136,500,000
92,300,000
Share earns
.57
.41


JOHN BRADEN
LEAD: John Braden, a composer and lyricist, died Wednesday of complications from meningitis at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 41 years old, and lived in Manhattan.


Taylor of Giants, in a New Book, Says He Used Cocaine Frequently
LEAD: Lawrence Taylor, the Giants' star linebacker, has disclosed in his autobiography that he used cocaine and crack, a powerful cocaine derivative, as frequently as three times a week during the 1985 season.


HECKLING UMPIRES: IT'S LEGAL
LEAD: Needling the umpire is a time-honored baseball tradition.
It is also legal, a New York State appeals court ruled yesterday.


SOUTHERN NEW ENGLAND TELEOMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN NEW ENGLAND TELEOMMUNICATIONS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
353,100,000
356,000,000
Net inc
b32,200,000
35,700,000
Share earns
1.05
1.13
6mo rev
717,200,000
704,500,000
Net inc
b67,700,000
69,700,000
Share earns
2.21
2.21
Shares outst
30,601,000
30,221,000


TBC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TBC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
114,120,000
102,337,000
Net inc
3,061,000
1,333,000
Share earns
.43
.17
Shares outst
7,093,000
7,985,000
6mo sales
204,157,000
181,652,000
Net inc
4,743,000
2,411,000
Share earns
.67
.30
Shares outst
7,083,000
7,985,000


Auto Emission Curbs Sought
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency Wednesday proposed two rules to reduce the emission of gasoline vapor that causes ozone pollution in many urban areas.
One rule would require an upgrading of gasoline vapor recovery systems in new cars and the other would require refiners and blenders to make gasoline less subject to evaporation.


FILM: BABY SWITCH IN 'MIX-UP'
LEAD: ''Mix-Up'' was shown as part of last year's New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times April 4, 1986.
The film opens today at the Thalia SoHo, 15 Vandam Street, and will be shown today and tomorrow only.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Apollo Computer Inc., Chelmsford, Mass., appointed Roland D. Pampel president and chief operating officer, succeeding Thomas A. Vanderslice, who will remain as chief executive and chairman.


G.O.P. CHALLENGES BORK'S OPPONENTS
LEAD: Senate Republican leaders made it clear today that they would challenge the Democrats' argument that the Senate should weigh Judge Robert H. Bork's judicial philosophy and political views in deciding whether to confirm him to the Supreme Court.


CAMCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAMCO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
43,957,000
41,348,000
Net inc
62,000
2,052,000
Share earns
.01
.28
6mo sales
81,565,000
81,513,000
Net inc
690,000
3,138,000
Share earns
.09
.43


MUSICAL PRODIGIES STRIVE FOR HARMONY ONSTAGE AND OFF
LEAD: ALMOST exactly one year ago, Midori, a Japanese-born, Juilliard-trained, 14-year-old violinist, dazzled a Tanglewood Festival audience by overcoming not one but two broken E strings and tossing off what was by all accounts a thrilling performance of Leonard Bernstein's Serenade.
Since then, increased curiosity about prodigiously gifted musicians has focused attention on other youngsters forging careers.


Gromyko to Study Homeland For Resettled Crimean Tatars
LEAD: Andrei A. Gromyko, the Soviet President, will head a Government commission to examine demands for a homeland by Crimean Tatars, forcibly transported to Central Asia in 1944, the press agency Tass said today.


CROQUET OVERLOOKING THE HUDSON
LEAD: Concerts, croquet and a nature walk are just a few of the activities available in the Hudson Valley this weekend.


INSIDE
LEAD:  A Quandary for Teheran


MAGNET BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAGNET BANK (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
4,576,000
b424,000
Per share
-
.25
6mo net loss
4,996,000
b1,010,000
Per share
-
.60
b-Net income


FIRSTIER FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRSTIER FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,409,000
2,712,000
Per share
.88
.55
6mo net inc
9,418,000
6,959,000
Per share
1.88
1.40


Double Dip
LEAD: Luis Salazar, left, and Tim Flannery of the Padres reaching for a fly ball by off the bat of Pirates' Sammy Khalifa yesterday in San Diego.
Salazar, the shortstop, made the play.
Page B12. (AP)


Caramoor Baroque
LEAD: The St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble is to present works by Haydn, Mozart, Mendelssohn and Grieg tonight at 9 in the Spanish Courtyard at Caramoor in Katonah, N.Y.
Tomorrow evening at 8:30, the Canadian Brass is to play music by Purcell, Bach, Byrd, Gabrieli, Luther Henderson and Gershwin in the Venetian Theater.


DAVIS CUP HONOR AT STAKE FOR U.S.
LEAD: The West German team wore suits and ties while the American team wore sweats, but the players of both squads were in accord today on the importance of the Davis Cup relegation round that starts Friday at the Hartford Civic Center.


FILM: 'WISH YOU WERE HERE'
LEAD: HER name is Lynda and she's as much of a problem as she can possibly be.


SCAN-OPTICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCAN-OPTICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,735,000
5,329,000
Net loss
147,000
b346,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
21,044,000
12,356,000
Net inc
379,000
1,212,000
Share earns
.06
.18
b-Net income


COMAIR INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMAIR INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
19,484,000
15,170,000
Net inc
1,716,000
46,000
Share earns
.18
.01


NEIGHBORS YOUNG AND OLD OFFER EACH OTHER A HAND
LEAD: Gina Petrushka and Brenda Erskines appear an unlikely pair.
One wears a bright-yellow jump suit and wraps a colored scarf around her head, while the other buttons her collar up to her chin and twists her hair into a small, prim knot.
One leans on a cane for support; the other strides unaided.
One is elderly; the other is 19 years old.


Not-So-Small Change
LEAD: However many candy bars or trinkets they pick up on the way out of a foreign country, most travelers still wind up with a handful of pesos, kopeks or francs.
They are usually thrown away or turned into unplanned coin collections.
The United Nations Children's Fund has a better idea.


Columnist Investigated By New York Officials
LEAD: A former Forbes magazine columnist, under fire for reportedly misleading editors and readers about his research, is also the subject of a criminal investigation, a New York State official said yesterday.


Auto Sales Up by 13.8% in Mid-July
LEAD: Sales of American-made passenger vehicles totaled 297,369 in mid-July, up 13.8 percent from the comparable 1986 period, the eight domestic manufacturers reported today.


DURAKON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DURAKON INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,396,000
22,231,000
Net inc
1,926,000
1,145,000
Share earns
.31
.27
Shares outst
6,202,000
5,341,000
6mo sales
49,813,000
37,935,000
Net inc
2,618,000
1,645,000
Share earns
.42
.31
Shares outst
6,207,000
5,337,000


Now Wrap Up a Missile Pact
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev has thrown aside the last major obstacle to a nuclear arms treaty.
He has accepted President Reagan's proposal to eliminate all medium- and shorter-range nuclear missiles in Asia as well as in Europe.
There is now no serious excuse for failure to resolve remaining differences.


FILM: 'LA BAMBA,' A MUSICAL BIOGRAPHY
LEAD: WE already know as much about Ritchie Valens's brief life as we learn from ''La Bamba,'' the film biography that traces his early love of music, his dizzying rise to stardom and his tragic death in a plane crash.
We know these things less specifically from Valens's own story than as conventions of this film and others like it, among them ''The Buddy Holly Story'' and ''Sweet Dreams,'' the biography of Patsy


MORTGAGE &amp; REALTY TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORTGAGE &amp; REALTY TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,674,000
4,173,000
Share earns
.45
.52
Shares outst
10,475,000
8,104,000
9mo net
11,705,000
13,351,000
Share earns
1.24
1.66
Shares outst
9,457,000
8,057,000


Josephine Jacobsen Gets Poetry Fellowship
LEAD: Josephine Jacobsen, the author of seven books of poetry, has been awarded the $10,000 Fellowship of the Academy of American Poets.


ERC INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ERC INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
29,592,000
25,380,000
Net inc
1,335,000
b705,000
Share earns
.31
.17
6mo rev
57,416,000
45,314,000
Net inc
2,545,000
b1,316,000
Share earns
.60
.31


Tesoro Executives Cleared in Lawsuit
LEAD: A Texas jury has cleared top executives of the Tesoro Petroleum Corporation of claims that management lied to investors and manipulated stock prices as part of an unsuccessful secret plan to take the company private.
The state court jury found Tesoro's founder and chairman, Robert V. West, and other executives of the San


A Sweeping Shift at Salomon
LEAD: Salomon Inc., parent of one of Wall Street's most powerful securities firms, said yesterday that its earnings dropped sharply after a rocky second quarter.
Then late in the day, Salomon said that it was losing its second senior executive in a week and that it had initiated a sweeping management restructuring.


BAKER HUGHES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAKER HUGHES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
526,283,000
-
Net loss
41,241,000
-
9mo rev
1,556,537,000
-
Net loss
b212,865,000
-
b-Includes a charge of $140 million relating to the combination of Baker International Corp.


Thomas W.M. Smith Dies; Ex-U.S. Ambassador in Africa
LEAD: Thomas W. M. Smith, a career diplomat who served as Ambassador to Ghana and Nigeria, died of cancer Wednesday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington, D.C.
He was 57 years old.


GORBACHEV OFFER FOCUSES PRESSURE ON WEST GERMANY
LEAD: With its latest arms proposal, the Soviet Union has sought to put pressure on the United States and West Germany to give in on the issue of West Germany's short-range Prshing 1A missiles, Administration officials said today.


Setbacks For Data General
LEAD: The Data General Corporation yesterday announced a $65.1 million loss in its third quarter.
The computer maker also said it would close three plants and lay off 950 people, in an effort to trim $100 million from its annual operating costs.


Confinement of Marine In Spy Case to Be Eased
LEAD: The attorney for Sgt.
Clayton J. Lonetree, the marine who is being court-martialed here on espionage charges, successfully sought today to have his client released from what he called a ''medieval'' solitary confinement.


REYNOLDS &amp; REYNOLDS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REYNOLDS &amp; REYNOLDS CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
140,370,000
102,140,000
Net inc
5,811,000
6,512,000
Share earns
.52
.69
Shares outst
11,134,000
9,501,000
9mo sales
411,006,000
270,362,000
Net inc
15,347,000
16,832,000
Share earns
1.38
1.77
Shares outst
11,113,000
9,501,000


NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL BANORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL BANORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
63,531
b
Per share
.04
b
6mo net inc
84,467
b
Per share
.05
b
b-Comparable figures are not meaningful as its initial public offering was completed in April 1986, and its only operating entity, National Industrial Bank, was acquired in May 1986.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aga A.B., Stockholm, which produces industrial and medical gases, said it would acquire two Norsk Hydro A.S.
Industrial Gas units based in Sweden and would take a majority stake in the Finnish company Oy Finsk Kolsyreindustri A.B.


SENATE REJECTS DEMOCRATIC PLAN FOR AUTOMATIC CUTS IN SPENDING
LEAD: The Democratic-controlled Senate today handily defeated a proposal to give the budget-balancing law a new automatic mechanism for making spending cuts.


EX-CREIGHTON PLAYER SURRENDERS AFTER SIEGE
LEAD: Kevin Ross, a former college basketball player who said he could barely read or write after four years at Creighton University, barricaded himself in his hotel room today until he was coaxed out by the educator who gave him a second chance.


THE EVENING HOURS
LEAD: THEY go by bus or train, by limousine, helicopter or private plane.
They line up for meals at delicatessens or make reservations at places with names like Le Posh.
They carry paper cups of quarters or wads of hundred dollar bills.


TW SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TW SERVICES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
548,594,000
479,922,000
Net inc
13,954,000
10,706,000
Share earns
.29
.20
6mo rev
1,044,689,000
908,949,000
Net inc
22,882,000
18,322,000
Share earns
.47
.33


VISTA CHEMICAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VISTA CHEMICAL (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
160,288,000
140,128,000
Net inc
b15,677,000
10,499,000
Share earns
.82
.61
9mo sales
442,326,000
410,312,000
Net inc
35,528,000
19,933,000
Share earns
1.91
1.14


A DEBATE ON MAKING SECRETS AND KEEPING THEM
LEAD: How can the need for secrecy in intelligence operations be balanced against Congress's demand to oversee those operations?


Kohlberg, Kravis Fund
LEAD: Oregon and other states plan to invest millions of dollars in the $5 billion fund being raised by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company to finance leveraged buyouts, according to state officials and the New York-based investment firm.


Contra Message Confirmations Go Awry
LEAD: Camille Roman, a social worker from Queens, did not believe Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North when he testified before the Iran-contra panel last week.
So she sent a telegram of support to Senator Daniel K. Inouye.


Dining Out Guide; Cold Plates and Salads
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
AMERICAN FESTIVAL CAFE, #20 West 50th Street (246-6699) - *(July 27, 1984) American antiques are featured against the background of light woods, glass and brass of this glittering restaurant with its outdoor umbrella-covered tables that spill onto the winter skating rink of Rockefeller Center.


PICKING THE RIGHT GEAR FOR SURF FISHING
LEAD: Would-be surf fishermen are often overwhelmed by the plethora of equipment they encounter in a well-stocked tackle shop.


Old-Timers' Camps
LEAD: Old quarterbacks are old hat in the National Football League, but even those who toil in the trenches sometimes play to a ripe age.
According to the N.F.L., these were the oldest players at each position at training camp Wednesday.
Assuming there are no old holdouts, the list is expected to stand up as long as the players do.


3 Innings for Tudor
LEAD: John Tudor, the left-hander sidelined since April 19 with a broken leg suffered when Barry Lyons, the Mets' rookie catcher, crashed into him while chasing a foul into the dugout, pitched three innings for the St.
Louis Cardinals' American Association club Wednesday night.


104 POUNDS OFF, A POLITICAL HEAVYWEIGHT NO MORE
LEAD: Representative Gary L. Ackerman was startled by a stranger in his house one day last week - himself.


FIRST AMERICAN SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMERICAN SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,436,483
1,446,891
Per share
.42
.42
6mo net inc
3,113,458
2,590,000
Per share
.90
.75
Both latest periods include a charge of $500,847 for the extinguishment of an FSLIC secondary reserve.


POP AND JAZZ GUIDE
LEAD: The Budweiser Superfest, Madison Square Garden (563-8300).
This year, Budweiser's annual pop-soul musical marathon co-stars the indefatigably exuberant Patti LaBelle, and the duo Ashford and Simpson.
The big-hearted belter from Philadelphia and the love birds from Manhattan epitomize grown-up East Coast pop-soul, and always deliver solid, upbeat entertainment.


ORIOLES BEAT ROYALS FOR NINTH IN A ROW
LEAD: Eric Bell pitched a five-hitter and Cal Ripken Jr. drove in two runs tonight as the Baltimore Orioles beat the Kansas City Royals, 2-1, for their ninth consecutive victory.


BALTIMORE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALTIMORE BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
5,718,000
5,144,000
Per share
.45
.40
6mo net inc
11,384,000
10,840,000
Per share
.90
.85


Networks Take Turns In Covering Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 9 A.M. on the ABC television network under the network rotation system.
The hearings will also be televised on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New


STEINBRENNER BACKS PINIELLA'S CRITICISM
LEAD: Are the Yankees in need of an attitude adjustment hour?


BROOKLYN UNION GAS CO reports earnings for 12mos June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROOKLYN UNION GAS CO (NYSE)
12mos June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
917,122,000
1,018,874,000
Net inc
59,003,000
b48,505,000
Share earns
2.42
1.89
b-After a charge of $14.7 million after-taxes due to declining energy prices.


Allied Settles S.E.C. Charges
LEAD: The Allied Stores Corporation has settled Federal civil charges that it had violated disclosure rules during its unsuccessful battle to avert a hostile takeover from the Campeau Corporation.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.60
6.52
6.33
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.64
5.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.88
5.82
5.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.35
8.35
7.26
30-YR.


Palmieri and Ruiz
LEAD: Two pianists, Eddie Palmieri and Hilton Ruiz, are leading groups in a Latin-jazz double bill tonight through Sunday at the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street (475-8592).
Sets begin at 9 and 11:30 P.M. through Sunday, plus a 1:30 A.M. show tonight and tomorrow; there is a $15 cover and a $5 minimum at tables, or a $7.50 charge at the bar.


ALEX BROWN INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALEX BROWN INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
85,631,000
62,447,000
Net inc
7,258,000
5,792,000
Share earns
.45
.40
6mo rev
164,380,000
124,323,000
Net inc
15,187,000
12,361,000
Share earns
.97
.85


MORTGAGE INVESTMENTS PLUS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORTGAGE INVESTMENTS PLUS (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,381,376
1,619,343
Share earns
.16
.18
6mo net
2,849,832
3,471,488
Share earns
.32
.38


Advertising; Hyundai to D.M.B.&amp;B.; Dove Bar to Burnett
LEAD: The San Francisco office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles has just picked up the account of Hyundai Electronics America, United States marketer of the Korean-made, I.B.M.-PC-compatible peripheral equipment.
The D'Arcy people believe that the advertising was previously done in-house.


REAGAN PICKS EX-PROSECUTOR FOR A JUDGESHIP IN NEW YORK
LEAD: A former prosecutor, Michael B. Mukasey, was nominated by President Reagan yesterday to become a Federal district judge in Manhattan.


Off Center to Feature 'Street of Crocodiles'
LEAD: The Public Broadcasting Service's usually cheerful avant-garde series ''Alive From Off Center'' takes a surrealistic spin into hell with ''Street of Crocodiles,'' a work of puppet animation created by Timothy and Stephen Quay, American graphic artists and film makers who live in London.


ENDY A. ANDERSON
LEAD: Endy A. Anderson, a manufacturer of plastics, died last Friday in an automobile accident on the Cross Westchester Expressway in Rye, N.Y.
He was 72 years old and lived in Greenwich, Conn.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  VERONESE GENTLEMEN


A FRESH BREEZE IN SUMMER
LEAD: How to stay cool as hot air settles in for the summer on New York's streets?
Some beat the heat the old-fashioned way: they churn it, fans in hand.
Fans of fanning can easily find precursors.
Madame Butterfly did it with delicacy.
Karl Lagerfeld, the French designer, is so enamored of his fans that he carries them constantly and has even used them as the logo on his designs.


COACHMEN INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COACHMEN INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
105,760,045
101,768,052
Net inc
1,770,582
2,324,542
Share earns
.22
.28
6mo sales
194,178,944
192,704,890
Net inc
2,163,827
3,955,869
Share earns
.27
.47


ADVISORY COUNCIL WARNS NASA OF 'HOLDOVER' MANAGEMENT WOES
LEAD: The National Research Council expressed concern today that space agency managers, at least at some levels of the organization, were hiding behind review boards and failing to take individual responsibility for improving the stricken space shuttle.


FIRST FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,159,000
c2,271,000
Share earns
.71
.52
6mo net inc
b6,777,000
c4,042,000
Share earns
1.53
.93
b-Includes a tax credit of $2,741,000 and a net charge of $628,000 from the penalty incurred on pre-payment of debt for both the quarter and 6 months.


PRESIDENT SIGNS $1 MILLION BILL TO AID HOMELESS
LEAD: President Reagan has signed a bill authorizing the Government to provide slightly more than $1 billion in emergency assistance to the nation's homeless over the next two years.


BENJAMIN J. KOTSHER
LEAD: Benjamin J. Kotsher, president of Communication Channels Inc., an Atlanta-based business magazine publishing company, died of pulmonary fibrosis Tuesday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Atlanta.
He was 64 years old and lived in Atlanta.


SHADOW OF DAWA PRISONERS
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz and previous witnesses before the select committees have often referred to ''the Dawa prisoners.'' Here is how they have figured in the Iran-contra story:


Rev. Dr. Jitsuo Morikawa, Former Baptist Pastor
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
Jitsuo Morikawa, a former official of the American Baptist Churches, died of stomach cancer Monday at the University of Michigan Hospital.
He was 75 years old and lived in Ann Arbor, Mich.


RUSSIAN OPTIMISTIC ON MISSILE ACCORD
LEAD: A Soviet arms negotiator said today that an accord on medium- and short-range missiles could be concluded within two months, but he reaffirmed Moscow's insistence that American warheads designed to fit West German missiles must be eliminated.


GORBACHEV'S ARMS PLAN REFLECTS SKILL AT WRAPPING IDEAS IN SOVIET BUNTING
LEAD: With his announcement Wednesday that the Soviet Union would accept a worldwide ban on medium-range and short-range missiles, Mikhail S. Gorbachev once again turned the arms control tables on the United States.
Just as he has done before, Mr.
Gorbachev took what had begun as an American proposal, repackaged it in Soviet bunting and presented it as a


How the Poll Was Conducted
LEAD: The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews conducted July 21 and 22 with 745 adults around the United States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.


WATERFRONT HOUSING GOES UP IN DOWNTOWN YONKERS
LEAD: Waterfront living is hardly the sort of luxury that middle-income buyers expect to be able to afford.
Indeed, it takes a most unusual site in an offbeat location to make it possible.


LOMAS MORTGAGE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOMAS MORTGAGE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
5,083,600
3,144,000
Share earns
.64
.52
Shares outst
7,898,901
6,000,000
6mo net inc
8,717,803
6,114,690
Share earns
1.25
1.02
Shares outst
6,954,696
6,000,000


SENATE SHOULD CONSIDER THE OPINIONS OF HIGH COURT NOMINEES, POLL FINDS
LEAD: Americans say the Senate should attach a great deal of importance to a Supreme Court nominee's positions on constitutional issues in weighing confirmation, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.


AVON PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AVON PRODUCTS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
805,500,000
711,900,000
Net inc
41,500,000
40,800,000
Share earns
.59
.57
6mo sales
1,496,900,000
1,320,400,000
Net inc
60,200,000
58,500,000
Share earns
.86
.81


LAXALT IS TRYING TO CHIP AWAY AT BUSH'S LEAD
LEAD: How does a rival Republican Presidential candidate chip away at Vice President Bush, the party's perceived front-runner, without violating what some call the party's 11th commandment: ''Thou shalt not speak ill of any other Republican''?


REGAL-BELOIT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REGAL-BELOIT CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
21,871,000
19,163,000
Net inc
1,645,000
1,299,000
Share earns
.28
.27
Shares outst
5,917,170
4,821,171
6mo sales
43,543,000
38,476,000
Net inc
3,268,000
2,410,000
Share earns
.55
.50
Shares outst
5,907,121
4,818,039


BOARDING A BUS FOR JAZZ, LANDMARKS AND A NOSH
LEAD: ABOUT 75 times a year, Lou Singer gets into his blue Dodge van, picks up a hungry band of sightseers and embarks on a six-hour odyssey of eating and adventure on the Lower East Side of New York.
As he navigates the van toward his caloric mecca, he announces: ''This isn't a straight pigging-out operation.


Smiths to Buy 2 Lear Units
LEAD: The Lear Siegler Holdings Corporation said Smiths Industries P.L.C. of London had agreed to buy two of its aerospace group units for $350 million.
The concerns include Lear Siegler's international marketing arm, based in Stamford, Conn., and the Instrument and Avionic Systems Corporation, which makes weapons management and navigation systems.


NEWELL COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWELL COMPANIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
94,692,000
95,061,000
Net inc
6,479,000
5,053,000
Share earns
.54
.46
6mo sales
195,954,000
189,603,000
Net inc
12,588,000
9,195,000
Share earns
1.05
.90


COUTURE: WAITING FOR LACROIX
LEAD: Christian Lacroix will open the fall and winter couture showings in Paris Sunday with his first collection under his own name.
In the 40 years since Christian Dior revived the couture with the wasp waists and full skirts of the collection that was dubbed the New Look, no fashion show has evoked the same anticipation.


ENGRAPH INC reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENGRAPH INC (OTC)
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Sales
29,971,000
28,395,000
Net inc
1,040,000
935,000
Share earns
.19
.17
6mo sales
59,260,000
55,085,000
Net inc
1,964,000
1,780,000
Share earns
.36
.32
Share earnings are adjusted to reflect a 10-percent stock dividend paid in March 1987.


Reichhold Looking
LEAD: Repeating an announcement it made more than three weeks ago, Reichhold Chemicals Inc. said it was pursuing all superior alternatives to a $52.50-a-share offer by Dainippon Ink and Chemicals Inc. to buy the company for $473 million.
It said it was studying a sale or a restructuring plan, but the announcement suggested that the Japanese offer was the only one to date.


Thomson Seeks Size To Take On Japanese
LEAD: Since taking the helm of the Thomson Group five years ago, Alain Gomez has been dramatically reorganizing France's largest electronics company, determined to turn Thomson into a power capable of taking on the Japanese and other East Asian competitors.


Financial Corp.'s Loss
LEAD: The Financial Corporation of America said today that it lost $176.8 million in the second quarter, in contrast to a profit of $11.6 million, or 23 cents a share, in the period last year.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''I don't think desirable ends justify means of lying, deceiving, of doing things that are outside our Constitutional processes.''  - Secretary of State George P. Shultz.  [ A1:6. ]


ABDUCTED MAN FLEES CONTRAS AND ASKS THE U.N. FOR HELP
LEAD: In April he was kidnapped by contras inside Nicaragua and then marched to one of their camps on the Honduran-Nicaraguan border, where he was held for three months.


DUQUESNE LIGHT CO reports earnings for 12mos June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DUQUESNE LIGHT CO (NYSE)
12mos June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
878,006,000
911,714,000
Net inc
164,024,000
166,503,000
Share earns
1.97
2.03


Sports of the Times; The Testing Of L.T.
LEAD: The impression given in the Sport magazine excerpt of the forthcoming autobiography, ''LT: Living on the Edge,'' by Lawrence Taylor with David Falkner, is that Giants officials knew of Taylor's cocaine problem and, because he was such a good player, did nothing about it.


The Senate Trashes Trade
LEAD: The Senate's foreign trade bill was too protectionist in overall thrust when debate began last month.
Now, as approved by a resounding 71 to 27 majority, its final details are even worse.


Sonny Fortune
LEAD: Sonny Fortune, an alto saxophonist, is to lead a group tonight through Sunday at the West End Cafe, 2911 Broadway, at 114th Street (666-8750).
Sets begin at 9, 10:30 P.M. and midnight and 1:30 A.M.; there is no fourth set on Sunday.
There is a $6 cover and a $7.50 minimum tonight and tomorrow, a $5 cover and a $7.50 minimum on Sunday.


'DOWN AND OUT IN BEVERLY HILLS' BECOMES A SERIES
LEAD: THE title is the same, but on television it looks different. ''Down and Out in Beverly


ROCHESTER TELEPHONE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCHESTER TELEPHONE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
108,948,000
98,393,000
Net inc
10,805,000
10,365,000
Share earns
.96
.92
6mo rev
219,762,000
204,800,000
Net inc
19,947,000
19,641,000
Share earns
1.77
1.75


Support for Contra Aid Continues to Increase
LEAD: Support for aid to the Nicaraguan contras continued to increase in the last week, but the latest New York York Times/CBS News poll, taken Tuesday and Wednesday, still shows 49 percent of the public opposed and only 40 percent in favor.


COMMONWEALTH EDISON CO reports earnings for 12mos June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMONWEALTH EDISON CO (NYSE)
12mos June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,540,495,000
5,175,447,000
Net inc
1,051,967,000
988,214,000
Share earns
4.63
4.47
Shares outst
202,830,000
194,825,000


Kimberly-Clark Wins Diaper Case
LEAD: A Federal jury ruled that the Kimberly-Clark Corporation did not violate the Procter &amp; Gamble Company's patent in making rival Huggies disposable diapers.
Procter &amp; Gamble, maker of Pampers and Luvs disposable diapers, contended that Kimberly-Clark had willfully infringed on a patent that covers the use of heat-shrinkable material to form gathers in the waistbands of


ART: CHAGALL'S BIBLE ILLUSTRATIONS, AND NAIVE WORKS BY ISRAELIS
LEAD: IT helps to approach the exhibition ''Chagall and the Bible,'' currently on view at the Jewish Museum, from two distinct vantage points: as an exhibition of illustrations of a great text and as an exhibition of the work of a great artist.
As the first, this show is a passing success, a lively and enriching way for anyone, no matter how deeply or how casually schooled in the Bible, to become reacquainted with scenes and stories from the Old


FIRST INDIANA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST INDIANA CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
951,000
1,255,000
Per share
.43
.57
6mo net inc
2,263,000
2,243,000
Per share
1.03
1.03


Ford Posts 38.9% Rise In Profits
LEAD: Closing the books on one of the best quarters ever for Detroit's automobile makers, the Ford Motor Company today reported a 38.9 percent rise in earnings, while the General Motors Corporation posted a 3.9 percent decline.


A Long Island 'Lucia'
LEAD: The National Grand Opera is to present ''Lucia di Lammermoor'' tomorrow evening at 8 o'clock at the Harry Chapin Theater in Eisenhower Park, East Meadow, L.I.
The cast includes Denia Mazzola, soprano, and Michael Austin, tenor.
The performance is free.
Information and directions: (516) 248-6772.


A Witness in Scandals Must Serve Probation
LEAD: Robert Richards, a businessman who cooperated with prosecutors in the municipal corruption scandals in New York City, was given a suspended sentence yesterday and was placed on probation for three years.


BUSINESS CARDS TOMORROW reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUSINESS CARDS TOMORROW
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,591,000
1,241,000
Net inc
16,000
b81,000
b-Net loss


Scientists Promote Visits to Soviet
LEAD: When members of Congress begin campaigning for re-election next year, a lot of them are likely to hear a new kind of personal question from their constituents: ''In the light of your comments on the Soviet Union, may I ask if you have ever been there?''


Science Teaching in New York City Must Also Improve by 2000
LEAD: To the Editor:


ART: A SHOW OF ETCHINGS AT ACADEMY OF DESIGN
LEAD: THE term ''painter-etcher'' was more than a genteelism distinguishing the ''fine'' from the commercial etcher.
A coinage of the 1870's, it was also a reflection, if faint, of the growing interest in blending all the arts into one Wagnerian whole.
Similarly, the American painter-etcher movement accomplished more than the estheticizing of the graphic medium.


Hugh Bryant Dies as He Sings Tribute at Lee Gaines Funeral
LEAD: Hugh Bryant, baritone for the jazz and pop vocal group The Delta Rhythm Boys, collapsed and died while singing a tribute Wednesday at the funeral of the group's founder.


TANDON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TANDON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 28
1987
1986
Revenue
81,773,000
51,785,000
Net inc
5,565,000
b20,269,000
Share earns
.10
-
9mo rev
238,576,000
157,698,000
Net inc
11,709,000
b17,479,000
Share earns
.22
-


The Witness File
LEAD:  Name: George P. Shultz  Age: 66  Position: Secretary of State since 1982.
He previously served as Secretary of Labor, Director of the Office of Management and Budget and Secretary of the Treasury.
Between 1974 and 1982, he was executive vice president and then president of the Bechtel Corporation.


BOOKS OF THE TIMESS
LEAD: PSYCHIATRY AND THE CINEMA.
By Krin Gabbard and Glen O. Gabbard. 304 pages.
Illustrated.
University of Chicago Press. $24.95


Respite in Conflict Needed but Feared
LEAD: Since United States warships began escorting Kuwaiti tankers under the American flag into the Persian Gulf, the Iranians have issued a barrage of threats and statements suggesting the brink of war.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a dispatch yesterday from Houston on the effect of rising oil prices on the Southwest incorrectly stated a comment by E. L. Williamson, chief executive officer of the Louisiana Oil and Exploration Company.
Mr.
Williamson said his company had increased its budget for exploration and development because of the ability, not inability, of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Companies to hold prices.


A SECRETARY WHO OFFERED RESIGNATION 3 TIMES
LEAD: During his testimony yesterday, Secretary of State George P. Shultz was asked if he had ever intended to resign.


DEATH OF A PASSER-BY: MOURNERS LOOK FOR MEANING
LEAD: In the streets of Borough Park, they now debate the strange and mysterious meaning of George Paskesz's death.


STRATUS COMPUTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STRATUS COMPUTER INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
42,736,000
30,157,000
Net inc
3,864,000
3,276,000
Share earns
.19
.17
6mo sales
80,183,000
57,102,000
Net inc
7,571,000
6,326,000
Share earns
.38
.33


OHIO EDISON CO reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OHIO EDISON CO (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,747,980,000
1,765,913,000
Net inc
435,036,000
393,254,000
Share earns
2.58
2.45


Moslems in Lebanon Join Forces With Left
LEAD: Lebanon's leftist and Moslem militias have announced they are setting their differences aside and joining an alliance against the regime of President Amin Gemayel, a Christian.


Suit Charging G.O.P. Sought To Cut Black Vote Is Settled
LEAD: The Democratic National Committee today announced the settlement of a lawsuit against the Republican National Committee alleging the Republicans tried to keep blacks from voting in Louisiana, Indiana and Michigan.


Daimler-Benz Names Leader
LEAD: Daimler-Benz A.G., the luxury-car maker that is West Germany's largest company, said that its deputy chief executive, Edzard Reuter, would replace the chairman, Werner Breitschwerdt, effective Sept. 1.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about advertisements that purport to show Mayor Koch boarding up the Holland Tunnel misidentified its western terminus.
The tunnel connects Canal Street in Manhattan with Jersey City.


A FERVOR FOR FILM PAYS OFF: ANDY GARCIA
LEAD: IN ''The Untouchables,'' Andy Garcia leads a charmed life as the rookie cop who helps Eliot Ness go after Al Capone.
Unlike lots of other characters in the Brian De Palma film, he doesn't get killed.


Gulf Convoy Sails On Without Any Trouble
LEAD: The convoy of Kuwaiti tankers and American warships passed the midpoint in the gulf voyage today without incident and are expected to arrive Friday in waters off Kuwait, the Pentagon said.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JULY 24, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-10


ARMOR ALL PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMOR ALL PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
28,378,000
25,343,000
Net inc
5,272,000
3,986,000
Share earns
.25
.19


PULITZER PUBLISHING reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PULITZER PUBLISHING (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
94,609,000
85,015,000
Net inc
4,971,000
5,859,000
Share earns
.47
.39
6mo rev
178,269,000
153,776,000
Net inc
6,485,000
9,067,000
Share earns
.62
.60
Shares outst
10,474,000
14,989,000


GRAND (AND NOT SO GRAND) TOURS
LEAD: The major tour-bus companies have a fairly standard menu of tours by day and night, uptown, downtown and to the Statue of Liberty, some of which include interludes on boats or helicopters.
Most New Yorkers steer clear of these tours, whose clientele is made up overwhelmingly of out-of-town tourists.


GATEWAY BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GATEWAY BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,281,000
2,281,000
Per share
.41
.29
6mo net inc
6,433,000
4,629,000
Per share
.81
.58
The per share earnings reflect a 50 percent stock dividend in May.


Of History and Honor: Shultz's Story
LEAD: He is, by nature and training, a placid man who seldom raises his voice and almost never loses control of his emotions.
As an academic and a labor negotiator, George P. Shultz learned to study the record deliberately, reach a conclusion and then, almost diffidently, try to persuade others to share his judgment.


REAGAN'S AIDS PANEL: WHO THE MEMBERS ARE
LEAD:  Dr.
W.
Eugene Mayberry . . . appointed last month as chairman of the commission . . . chief executive of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn. . . . specialist in glands with no specific expertise in AIDS . . . an acquaintance of Howard H. Baker Jr., White House chief of staff, who was a trustee of the Mayo Foundation before joining the Adminstration.


Houston Overtaken by Dallas In U.S. Metropolitan Census
LEAD: The Dallas area edged past its rival Houston in the Census Bureau's latest population estimates for the nation's 281 metropolitan areas, but New York continued to lead the list by a wide margin.


COMPUTER ASSOCIATES INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER ASSOCIATES INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
89,195,000
50,091,000
Net inc
4,104,000
2,360,000
Share earns
.08
.05
Share earnings reflect a 2-for-1 stock split effective May 7, 1987.


Policing New York's Tailpipes
LEAD: Why do only 7 percent of automobiles in the New York metropolitan area fail tests for pollutant emissions when the national failure rate runs 20 percent to 35 percent?
The answer is inadequate testing, and it threatens air quality.


CULLUM COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CULLUM COMPANIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
253,204,000
244,037,000
Net inc
4,409,000
4,320,000
Share earns
.40
.40
Yr sales
1,002,714,000
1,036,450,000
Net inc
18,109,000
18,094,000
Share earns
1.65
1.65


Mixed Results By Publishers
LEAD: The Tribune Company, publisher of The Chicago Tribune and The Daily News in New York, said yesterday that its second-quarter profits rose 18.2 percent.
Another big publisher, the Times Mirror Company, said its net earnings dropped sharply, primarily because of a one-time gain posted a year ago.


New Offer Studied For Van Heusen
LEAD: Rosewood Financial Inc. said it might present a second merger proposal to the Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation.
Rosewood withdrew a $22-a-share bid, with a total value of $333 million, after it was rejected this week by the board of the New York-based apparel concern.


WHAT WILL BE WHEN
LEAD: Art on the Beach runs through Sept. 20 at 54-05 Second Street at Hunters Point, Long Island City, Queens.
Exhibition hours are Thursdays through Sundays noon to 6 P.M., with admission free.
Unless otherwise noted, all performances are at 7 P.M. and admission to each is $6; children and the elderly, $3; Theater Development


IBP's Chairman Faces Two More Challenges
LEAD: Robert L. Peterson, the chairman and chief executive of IBP Inc., has overcome a number of challenges in the last decade to build up the Dakota City, Neb., company into the nation's largest meatpacker.
Time will tell whether Mr.
Peterson can continue his success as he faces two new hurdles.


THOR ENERGY RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THOR ENERGY RESOURCES (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,898,000
1,568,000
Net inc
175,000
b191,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Don't Abolish Medicare
LEAD: To the Editor:


GOODEN IS FOCUS OF 'CONCERN'
LEAD: Seven weeks after he returned to the Mets from treatment for cocaine abuse, Dwight Gooden says that his pitching and his personal life are going ''better than I expected.'' But he acknowledges that he now takes ''a beer or two with the guys,'' although beer was identified as the initial source of his problem, and the Mets concede that ''it is a matter of concern.


Migrant Workers Are Different in France
LEAD: To the Editor:


Two Bach Cantatas
LEAD: The Marlboro Music School and Festival are to present the Blanche Moyse Chorale and the Bach Festival Orchestra of the Brattleboro Music Center, under the direction of Blanche Moyse, in a performance of two Bach cantatas, tonight at 8:30 at the Marlboro Festival Concert Hall in Marlboro, Vt.
Outdoor seats are available at $3.50.


What Shakespeare Knew About Deniability
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESTAURANTS
LEAD: TWENTY-FOUR-YEAR-OLD Nippon is the granddaddy of Manhattan Japanese restaurants, dating from an era when all but the most adventurous Americans would sooner swim to Japan than bite into a chunk of raw fish.
Today, of course, sushi has become the fast food of the executive set, and the competition is intense.


Harcourt Holdersv Toughen Defenses
LEAD: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. shareholders strengthened the publisher's anti-takeover defenses against the British newspaper owner Robert Maxwell by doubling the number of Harcourt's common shares.
The approval was granted at a special shareholders meeting at which some investors expressed opposition to a $3 billion recapitalization plan announced in late May by Harcourt to force Mr.


Davidovich at Waterloo
LEAD: The pianist Bella Davidovich is to perform Schumann's Piano Concerto with the Waterloo Festival Orchestra, conducted by Gerard Schwarz, tomorrow evening at 8:30 at Waterloo Village in Stanhope, N.J.
The program also includes works by Respighi and Tchaikovsky.
Tickets are $15 to $17, or $10 for lawn seats.


The Colonel Frightened Me
LEAD: I once wore the same uniform as Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and walked in the same bloody fields.
Listening to him on television, I heard in his voice the echo of the past, and I looked at my two sons and was afraid.


Treasury Prices Decline a Bit
LEAD: Treasury bond prices fell a bit further yesterday as lingering fears of inflation, underscored by the recent rise in oil prices, continued to cause nervousness in the credit markets.


MID-AMERICA BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MID-AMERICA BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,048,000
1,726,000
Per share
.42
.34
6mo net inc
4,306,000
b5,092,000
Per share
.88
1.01
b-Includes an accounting adjustment of $1,335,000, or 27 cents a share.


Stocks Weaken Despite Dow Gain
LEAD: The stock market weakened again yesterday, even though the Dow Jones industrial average managed a 1.76-point gain to close at 2,471.94.


Ford's Defense
LEAD: Representative Harold E. Ford, a Tennessee Democrat who is under indictment on conspiring to commit mail, bank and tax fraud, is apparently finding that defending himself is expensive.


Sports People; Red Sox Drop Buckner
LEAD: Bill Buckner, owner of 2,542 major-league hits and one unforgettable World Series error, was released yesterday to make room for the Boston Red Sox youth movement.
Unable to trade the 37-year-old first baseman because of his $800,000 salary, the Red Sox cut him loose and promoted Sam Horn, a 23-year-old designated hitter who was leading the International


Advertising; Publisher Is Named For Cosmopolitan
LEAD: Seth Hoyt, 44, who while at Rolling Stone helped D. Claeys Bahrenburg start Outside magazine, is now following Mr.
Bahrenburg as publisher of Hearst's Cosmopolitan magazine.


Oil-and-Gas Swindle Case
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission charged 10 individuals today and a myriad of shell companies with fraudulently selling $43.8 million worth of interests in oil and gas properties since 1985.


Coasters on the Pier
LEAD: The Coasters, and other singers, are to perform songs by Jerry Lieber and Mike Stoller tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Summerpier series at the South Street Seaport Museum's Pier 16, Fulton and South Streets (669-9424).


Racing Notebook; AT SALES, A MERE $31.3 MILLION
LEAD: Last year, the four Maktoum brothers from the Persian Gulf emirate of Dubai spent $40.2 million on horseflesh at the Keeneland select yearling sales.
This year, they spent a mere $31.3 million.
That difference, $8.9 million, accounted for almost the entire 9 percent drop in average prices at this year's sales, which concluded Tuesday night in Lexington,


'EXTREMELY DANGEROUS' PRISONER FLEES RIKERS ISLAND
LEAD: A 27 year old man who once served a prison term for manslaughter and was described by the authorities as ''extremely dangerous'' escaped from a dormitory-style jail annex on Rikers Island early yesterday by breaking a hole through the wall of the prefabricated structure, the police said.


CHARIOT GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHARIOT GROUP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,033,000
6,509,000
Net inc
450,000
329,000
Share earns
.18
.14
6mo sales
21,487,000
12,890,000
Net inc
917,000
563,000
Share earns
.36
.26
The company said share earnings reflect a 10-percent stock dividend paid last month.


ACTIVISION INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACTIVISION INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
8,709,000
4,580,000
Net inc
b524,000
c1,916,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $291,000.
c-Net loss


Discrimination Suit Is Won Against Civil Liberties Group
LEAD: A jury has ruled that the American Civil Liberties Union discriminated against a police officer who said he was ''fingered as a spy'' at a meeting of the group.


MOZAMBICANS TELL OF MASSACRE OF 386
LEAD: Wounded survivors of a raid by right-wing rebels on a village near here said Thursday that the rebels attacked pregnant women, children and hospital patients.


HUDSON FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUDSON FOODS (AMEX)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
105,093,913
60,377,367
Net inc
3,978,299
3,155,228
Share earns
.32
.26
9mo sales
311,233,253
152,713,753
Net inc
14,349,983
8,121,267
Share earns
1.15
.72


New Top Executive At Delta Air Lines
LEAD: Ronald W. Allen, president and chief operating officer of Delta Air Lines Inc., has been named chairman and chief executive.
He replaces David C. Garrett Jr., who recently reached age 65, Delta's mandatory retirement age for senior executives.


AMERICAN FILTRONA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FILTRONA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
31,411,000
29,392,000
Net inc
1,551,000
1,497,000
Share earns
.42
.40
6mo rev
60,820,000
58,821,000
Net inc
2,908,000
3,167,000
Share earns
.79
.84


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JULY 24, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


SALES MARK AT FESTIVAL
LEAD: The United States Olympic Festival has set a ticket sales record of $2.6 million, far exceeding its goal, and with four days remaining could break the attendance mark, the president and executive director of the local organizing committee said today.


S.E.C. Study On Dow's Fall
LEAD: Program trading was not the cause of a sudden 115-point drop in the Dow Jones industrial average on Jan. 23, a Securities and Exchange Commission official told a Congressional committee today.


TRANSCO EXPLORATION PARTERS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSCO EXPLORATION PARTERS LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
57,900,000
54,100,000
Net loss
7,500,000
55,200,000
6mo rev
135,500,000
137,200,000
Net loss
9,800,000
b313,800,000
b-Includes a charge of $284.7 million for writedown of oil and gas properties.


CITYTRUST BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITYTRUST BANCORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
5,683,000
4,631,000
Per share
1.37
1.20
6mo net inc
11,459,000
9,060,000
Per share
2.77
2.36
The per share earnings are fully diluted.


WELLS-GARDNER ELECTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WELLS-GARDNER ELECTRONICS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,377,000
4,706,000
Net inc
363,000
b71,000
Share earns
.10
-
6mo sales
15,105,000
8,911,000
Net inc
671,000
b227,000
Share earns
.61
-


Advertising; WCRS Rules Out Bid for Bozell, Jacobs
LEAD: Britain's WCRS Group, which has been rumored to be interested in acquiring Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt from Lorimar Telepictures, which in turn has announced plans to divest itself of it, did indeed take a look at the company, according to Tim Breene, deputy group chief executive of WCRS, but decided about a week ago not to make any kind of offer.


Two Giants Swap Ambitions
LEAD: In its huge trade of businesses with Thomson S.A. of France, the General Electric Company seems to be getting the better end of the deal.
On the surface, it appears to be exchanging its low-growth, low-margin consumer electronics business for a bigger piece of a much more alluring high-technology business: medical imaging.


TELLABS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELLABS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
29,500,000
26,995,000
Net inc
1,987,000
1,489,000
Share earns
.15
.11
6mo sales
57,664,000
54,138,000
Net inc
3,942,000
3,560,000
Share earns
.30
.27


TRANSACTIONS
LEAD:  BASEBALL


CONSUL RESTAURANT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSUL RESTAURANT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,821,000
18,688,000
Net loss
8,402,000
b10,055,000
Yr rev
73,535,000
77,587,000
Net loss
9,703,000
b5,254,000
b-Includes a non-recurring loss of $2,107,000 and a non-recurring gain of $4,266,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, both from an early debt payment.


Comsat's President Resigns
LEAD: The Communications Satellite Corporation said today that Marcel P. Joseph is stepping down as president of the telecommunications company, which earlier this month sold off all but two of its unregulated businesses.


PRECISION CASTPARTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRECISION CASTPARTS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
103,513,000
52,232,000
Net inc
8,887,000
2,877,000
Share earns
.54
.19
The company said that the year-ago first quarter was the last reporting quarter prior to the acquisition of PCC Airfoils and that most of the increases over last year came from the Airfoils division, and the balance from continued improvements in the structurals division.


THE TESTIMONY: 'THE PRESIDENT WAS ASTONISHED' AND 'SO MAD'
LEAD: ? * * * How Could It Happen?


GENENTECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENENTECH INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
47,504,000
32,649,000
Net inc
b5,271,000
2,823,000
Share earns
.06
.04
Shares outst
85,223,000
70,741,000
6mo rev
86,110,000
61,691,000
Net inc
b9,815,000
4,576,000
Share earns
.12
.07
Shares outst
83,893,000
70,050,000


LOWELL INSTITUTION FOR SAVNGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOWELL INSTITUTION FOR SAVNGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
541,000
1,081,000
Per share
.12
-
6mo net inc
1,655,000
1,978,000
Per share
.36
-
The company converted to stock form in May 1986.


Union Asserts New York City Subverted a Civil Service Test
LEAD: The union representing administrative employees in New York City government yesterday accused three agencies of subverting Civil Service tests to keep unqualified people on the job and announced it had filed papers seeking a contempt-of-court order.


PROTESTS PLANNED FOR POPE'S VISIT
LEAD: Feminists and religious groups seeking equal rights for women today announced a series of rallies to protest Vatican policies concerning women when Pope John Paul II visits the United States in September.


Oil Contract Prices Ease On Persian Gulf Rumors
LEAD: Oil futures prices eased yesterday amid rumors at the New York Mercantile Exchange that Iran and Iraq might avoid attacking ships in the Persian Gulf.


President Names 12 to AIDS Commission
LEAD: President Reagan with a 14-month-old AIDS victim at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., where he spoke to the members of a national panel on AIDS and pledged to defeat the disease.
Page A12. (White House Photo via AP)


Henley Filing On Santa Fe
LEAD: The Henley Group Inc. said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission today that it had proposed discussing a friendly merger with the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation last month, but that Santa Fe had turned it down.


Union Carbide Profits Decline
LEAD: The Union Carbide Corporarion said yesterday that it earned $69 million, or 52 cents a share, in the second quarter, down 82.2 percent from $388 million, or $3.97 a share, a year ago.


LANDMARK BANCSHARES CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANDMARK BANCSHARES CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b282,000
2,114,000
Per share
.05
.46
6mo net inc
2,186,000
3,888,000
Per share
.43
.91
b-Included a loan loss reserve of $3,001,000.


Volcker Plans To Head Panel
LEAD: Paul A. Volcker, who is retiring as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said today that he would head a new privately financed commission on public service.


Nofziger Pleads Not Guilty to Charges of Conflict
LEAD: Lyn Nofziger, the former White House political director, pleaded not guilty today to charges he violated Federal conflict-of-interest laws by lobbying his former Reagan Administration colleagues on behalf of the Wedtech Corporation and other private companies.


Dollar Declines Slightly; Gold Is Barely Changed
LEAD: The dollar fell slightly yesterday, while gold was practically unchanged, rising 25 cents an ounce, to $455, in New York trading.


U.S. Suspends Aid to Panama To Press Regime for Change
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has suspended all military and economic aid to Panama to demonstrate growing unhappiness with the military-controlled Government, officials said today.


McEvoy-Willis
LEAD: Smith International Inc. said it would sell its McEvoy-Willis unit, maker of oil and gas wellhead equipment, to Cameron Iron Works Inc. of Houston for $51 million.
Smith, based in Newport Beach, Calif., said depressed conditions in the energy business would force the company to post a $33 million loss on the deal.


Head of Coke's TV Unit Is Named Viacom Chief
LEAD: Frank J. Biondi Jr, chief executive of Coca-Cola Television, will become chief executive of Viacom International Inc., the broadcast and cable company acquired earlier this year by Sumner M. Redstone, the companies said yesterday.


ALLTEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLTEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
187,744,000
171,120,000
Net inc
22,726,000
19,457,000
Share earns
.66
.58
6mo rev
720,227,000
686,470,000
Net inc
44,558,000
38,640,000
Share earns
1.30
1.17


CHESAPEAKE CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHESAPEAKE CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
175,045,000
154,472,000
Net inc
b7,137,000
2,973,000
Share earns
.70
.30
6mo sales
330,505,000
288,095,000
Net inc
b11,369,000
480,000
Share earns
1.11
.05


Gondrezick in Hospital
LEAD: Glen Gondrezick, a former forward for the Denver Nuggets, remained hospitalized in serious condition yesterday with a bullet wound in the chest after apparently trying to kill himself Wednesday, authorities in Boulder, Colo., said.


ADOLPHE E. PROULX
LEAD: Archbishop Adolphe E. Proulx, a champion of the poor and oppressed, was found dead at his summer cottage on the St.
Lawrence River Wednesday.
He was 59 years old.


Thomas Challenged
LEAD: Lee M. Thomas, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, has enjoyed cordial relations with members of Congress, Democrat and Republican alike, who regard him as an accomplished manager concerned about protecting the environment.


BIG-CITY MAYORS URGING CHANGES FOR NEXT CENSUS
LEAD: The Mayors of New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago and Kansas City, Mo., yesterday urged the head of the Federal Census Bureau to use statistical adjustments in the 1990 Census to avoid undercounting black and Hispanic citizens.


FOR 463 SUBWAY STATIONS, A PLAN FOR TOP-TO-BOTTOM SPRUCING UP
LEAD: In what could prove to be New York's most extensive basement cleanup, the Transit Authority plans to remove old pipes and electrical lines, obsolete lighting fixtures and other hardware, misleading signs, dormant newsstands and many of the advertising billboards in an attempt to make many of the 463 subway stations look much the way they did when they were new.


SEI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEI CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
30,384,000
30,353,000
Net inc
2,106,000
916,000
Share earns
.17
.07
6mo rev
60,331,000
59,036,000
Net inc
3,907,000
2,152,000
Share earns
.31
.17


TGI FRIDAY'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TGI FRIDAY'S INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
95,331,000
90,513,000
Net inc
2,332,000
2,149,000
Share earns
.13
.12
6mo rev
187,957,000
174,261,000
Net inc
4,975,000
3,181,000
Share earns
.28
.18


REAGAN NAMES 12 TO PANEL ON AIDS
LEAD: President Reagan named the 12 members of a national commission on AIDS today and pledged to send the deadly disease ''the way of smallpox and polio.''


The Germans Aren't Tempted
LEAD: Thirty-eight years after the establishment of two rival states in Germany, the leader of the Communist East is coming to visit the capitalist West for the first time this September.


DIME SAVINGS BANK OF WALLNGFORD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIME SAVINGS BANK OF WALLNGFORD
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,761,000
c967,000
Per share
.33
-
6mo net inc
b3,556,000
c1,829,000
Per share
.67
-
b-Includes provisions for loan losses of $59,000 for the quarter and $105,000 for the 6 months, and net securities gains of $19,000 and $309,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


GROLIER INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROLIER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
102,372,000
86,756,000
Net inc
b6,036,000
c1,172,000
Share earns
.39
.09
Shares outst
15,669,494
13,730,729
6mo rev
191,019,000
164,401,000
Net inc
b11,016,000
c3,427,000
Share earns
.70
.26
Shares outst
15,623,265
13,249,374


Sun Belt Renews Battle Over Federal Funds
LEAD: Bolstered by a new study showing that Sun Belt States lag well behind other regions of the country in their share of the Federal dollar, a coalition of Southern lawmakers vowed today to wield their legislative power to send more money southward.


'Faust' at City Opera
LEAD: The New York City Opera is to present its first performance this season of Gounod's ''Faust,'' tonight at 8, at the New York State Theater.
Richard Leech sings the title role, Faith Esham is Marguerite, and John Cheek is Mephistopheles; Sergiu Comissiona conducts.
The production is in French with supertitles in English.


Try That With Schools
LEAD: To the Editor:


Why Can't We Form a National Health Policy?
LEAD: To the Editor:


ALLOY COMPUTER PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLOY COMPUTER PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,060,000
9,177,000
Net inc
818,000
212,000
Share earns
.18
.06
6mo rev
22,900,000
19,200,000
Net inc
1,600,000
852,000
Share earns
.35
.23


COPPERWELD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COPPERWELD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
56,001,000
53,612,000
Net inc
3,124,000
b1,137,000
Share earns
.29
-
6mo sales
106,373,000
103,769,000
Net inc
4,692,000
b1,542,000
Share earns
.40
-


FIRST VALLEY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST VALLEY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,247,000
3,542,000
Per share
.67
.58
6mo net inc
8,186,000
6,990,000
Per share
1.30
1.15
The year-ago results are restated to include the company's West Side Bancorp Inc.


At the Movies
LEAD:  The Soul of 'Robocop'


Scallops on L.I. Again Imperiled By Brown Tide
LEAD: A mysterious brown tide of tiny marine organisms that has devastated Long Island's scallops for the last two years has reappeared, puzzling scientists.


Lam Jones Sent to 49ers
LEAD: With rookies, free agents and selected veterans scheduled to report to camp today, the Jets continued their frenzied bookkeeping yesterday by trading Johnny (Lam) Jones, their often-injured wide receiver, to the San Francisco 49ers for a ''high-to-middle'' but undisclosed 1988 draft choice.
The Jets also signed their third-round choice, Onzy Elam, a 6-foot-2-inch, 225-pound linebacker from Tennessee State to a series of one-year contracts.


SHULTZ PROPOSES TO CHANGE SYSTEM
LEAD: George P. Shultz, the Secretary of State and veteran of four Cabinet posts, used his testimony before the Iran-contra panel today to offer a wide-ranging prescription for solving the structural problems that he said had led to the Iran-contra affair.


Advertising; P.&amp;G. Signs Fox Contract
LEAD: Procter &amp; Gamble has just signed a contract that will make it the biggest advertiser on Rupert Murdoch's Fox Broadcasting Company network.
It is a company that is long accustomed to being the biggest advertiser in the media it uses.


Zydeco in the Park
LEAD: Fernest and the Thunders, a zydeco band from Louisiana, are to play a free concert tomorrow at 3 P.M. at the Central Park Band Shell, in the middle of the park at 72d Street, presented by New York City's Summerstage series (860-1335).


AFFILIATED BANKSHARES OF COLORADO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AFFILIATED BANKSHARES OF COLORADO INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,538,401
2,068,703
Per share
.23
.19
6mo net inc
4,778,650
4,404,136
Per share
.43
.41


AMETEK INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMETEK INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
155,342,000
146,240,000
Net inc
10,942,000
b9,880,000
Share earns
.50
.44
6mo sales
299,194,000
287,540,000
Net inc
20,783,000
b19,051,000
Share earns
.95
.86


Gorbachev on Arms: A Shifting Stand
LEAD: The Soviet position on medium-range arms has changed frequently over the last year and a half.
Here are several of the most significant changes, which followed President Reagan's first proposal of the so-called zero option in 1981.
Jan. 15, 1986: Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, offers a plan calling for, among other things, the elimination of American and Soviet intermediate-range missiles in Europe, as the first step that the British and French arsenals be reduced, along with American weapons, under a new treaty.


GUITAR: ABEL CARLEVARO PERFORMS AT FRICK
LEAD: ABEL CARLEVARO is a Uruguayan guitarist who plays seldom in this country but who over many years has developed an international reputation as a performer, an innovative teacher and a creative engineer of his instrument.
His brief, early-evening recital at the Frick Collection on Wednesday let us experience all three sides.


VISUAL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VISUAL INDUSTRIES
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,742,505
26,142,556
Net inc
35,637
b787,125
Share earns
.01
.23
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $55,001, a loss on the disposal of discontinued operations of $19,551 and a tax credit of $45,000.


BURNDY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURNDY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
70,500,000
61,471,000
Net inc
2,307,000
1,912,000
Share earns
.19
.16
6mo sales
137,677,000
117,982,000
Net inc
4,014,000
2,741,000
Share earns
.33
.23


Scouting; Mattingly Hoax
LEAD: The reporter for a national magazine must have thought he had stumbled on one of the baseball stories of the year - a 10-minute clubhouse interview with Don Mattingly in Minneapolis revealing an egotistical, boastful, obnoxious streak that the Yankee first baseman had never shown before.


And Still New Zealand Hasn't Left Anzus
LEAD: To the Editor:


Diner's Journal
LEAD: POOLSIDE dining near Times Square?
That is just one of the many appeals of Manhattan Island, a three-week-old restaurant at the site of the former Gardenia, in the Manhattan Plaza Health Club, Ninth Avenue at 43d Street.
The sunny, two-level dining room, done in a tropical theme with lots of wicker, colorful fabrics and greenery, faces the health club's rooftop pool.


AIDES SAY NEW PROCEDURES WILL PREVENT POLICY SECRETS
LEAD: White House officials say new procedures are in place to prevent the policy isolation that Secretary of State George P. Shultz described in testimony before the Congressional Iran-contra committees today.


Snapshots
LEAD: The potency of family photo albums derives from the fact that people change so slowly as to be hardly aware of it.
Set a current snapshot beside one from 20 years ago and the truth is irrefutable: Over time, tiny changes add up to startling transformations.
That goes for society as well as individuals.


No Headline
LEAD: A 4-year-old boy playing with a shotgun accidentally shot his mother, the authorities here said.
The boy's mother, Veronica Ibarra, 35, was in satisfactory condition today with a wound in her abdomen.
The boy, Pete Ibarra 4th, cried as he spoke with reporters Wednesday, shortly after the shooting.


Advertising; Kurnit: Pro Bono For Profit
LEAD: KURNIT COMMUNICATIONS was founded a year ago to create advertising for the public good while not going broke doing it.
It's Shepard Kurnit's way of paying back a system that has been very good to him.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tour de France  Spaniard Retains Lead: Pedro Delgado of Spain retained the overall lead yesterday after the 22d stage, a 115-mile mountain course from La Plagne to Morzine, France.
Another Spaniard, Eduardo Chozas, won the stage after a solitary breakaway at the 43-mile mark.
Stephen Roche of Ireland, in second place over all, reduced Delgado's lead from 39 to 21 seconds, which put him in a position to pass Delgado in the 24th stage tomorrow, a time trial encircling Dijon.


Xerox Profits Rise by 26.2%
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation's profits rose 26.2 percent in the second quarter, as results improved in both business products and financial services, the company said today.


Ticor Suit Charges Fraud by Houston Developer
LEAD: The Ticor Title Insurance Company of California has filed a lawsuit charging that it was bilked of about $50 million by a Houston developer, J.R.
McConnell, and his associates.
Ticor characterized the fraud case as the largest in the title insurance industry.


COURT UPHOLDS A RULING AGAINST SMOKING CURBS
LEAD: A state appeals court, in a 3-to-2 decision, upheld today a lower-court ruling that the Cuomo administration should not have issued broad restrictions on smoking without the approval of the Legislature.


NORTH KOREANS PROPOSE REDUCTION OF TROOPS IN THE NORTH AND SOUTH
LEAD: North Korea today proposed vast troop reductions by both North and South Korea, and said that it would cut its own forces by 100,000 before the end of the year to ''open up a practical breakthrough.''


North's Legal Defense Fund Tops $1.4 Million After Panel
LEAD: More than $1.4 million in public contributions have poured in to the Oliver North Legal Assistance Fund since the former White House aide took the witness chair at the televised Iran-Contra hearings, fund officials say.


ACCO WORLD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACCO WORLD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
66,120,000
57,264,000
Net inc
5,704,000
4,916,000
Share earns
.27
.24


A ONE ON ONE AT CHEQUERS WITH THATCHER AND SHULTZ
LEAD: During his testimony yesterday, Secretary of State George P. Shultz recounted a meeting he had with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain, and what it showed about differing styles of leadership


Beethoven at Rutgers
LEAD: The Orchestra of St.
Luke's will play an all-Beethoven program tomorrow night at 8 o'clock at the Nicholas Music Center at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.
Ilana Vered will be soloist in the Piano Concerto No. 5 (''Emperor''); other works include the Symphony No. 3 (''Eroica'').
Julius Rudel will conduct.


ON L.I., MAN'S TRAGEDY TURNS INTO HIS DREAM
LEAD: Witold Wroblewski paused.
Then, as he turned back to his interpreter, the expression on his bearded face showed that he recognized some of the irony in what he was about the say.


ART: WHITNEY SHOWS CINDY SHERMAN PHOTOS
LEAD: THE Cindy Sherman traveling show has reached the Whitney Museum of American Art.
It has exotic characters - sultans, knights, matadors, extraterrestrials, movie actresses - all of them and none of them the artist herself.
Ms.
Sherman has been billed as a great deconstructor, a simulationist par excellence, a heroine of the post-modern attack on the hero, an originator of the post-modern attack on originality, one of the select few who could have been a great artist in any medium.


NBC NEWS HEAD CHAGRINED OVER MISSED STORY ON G.E.
LEAD: The head of NBC News said yesterday that he was embarrassed that NBC failed to report that the General Electric Company was selling its consumer electronics business on its nightly news report Wednesday.
General Electric is the parent company of the network.


Iranian's Visit to West Germany Puts Bonn in Awkward Position
LEAD: An official visit by Iran's Foreign Minister today underscored West Germany's privileged relations with the Middle Eastern nation, which is at loggerheads with France and other Western governments.


Jibaro Music
LEAD: There is to be a free concert of Puerto Rican jibaro (rural) music by Sexteto Criollo Puertorriqueno on Sunday at 1 P.M. at Tompkins Square Park, East Seventh Street between Avenues A and B. The concert is part of the Musica Tradicional series presented by City Lore (529-1955).


Loan Set for Argentina
LEAD: The International Monetary Fund said its executive board had approved a $1.4 billion 14-month standby loan for Argentina.
The fund said the decision followed the conclusion of financial arrangements and represented its board's approval of the country's economic policies.
Last week, the fund approved $654 million from its compensatory financing facility, which grants loans to nations hurt by depressed commodity prices.


HEIN-WERNER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEIN-WERNER CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,991,000
11,006,000
Net inc
493,000
207,000
Share earns
.33
.15
6mo sales
40,850,000
22,888,000
Net inc
836,000
477,000
Share earns
.63
.35


Niagara Is Writing Off $755 Million
LEAD: The Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation said yesterday that it would take a $755 million after-tax write-off because of cost overruns at its Nine Mile Point 2 nuclear power plant in upstate New York.


2 BUSINESSES END SUPPORT OF A SCHOOL
LEAD: Two major corporations say they are withdrawing their support for an experimental high school program because of protracted ''obstruction'' and ''doublespeak'' by school officials.


SOO LINE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOO LINE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
158,243,000
164,844,000
Net inc
2,034,000
b2,620,000
Share earns
.21
.28
6mo rev
309,410,000
326,249,000
Net loss
540,000
b570,000
Share earns
-
.06


THOMAS &amp; BETTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THOMAS &amp; BETTS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
97,185,000
89,867,000
Net inc
11,485,000
10,473,000
Share earns
.73
.67
6mo sales
189,185,000
177,029,000
Net inc
21,893,000
20,040,000
Share earns
1.40
1.29


French Report on Terrorism Raises Suspicions About Iran
LEAD: With France and Iran making no apparent progress in efforts to resolve their diplomatic crisis, reports have begun to accumulate indicating a French belief that Iran was directly involved in a series of terrorist attacks here last year.


'EVERYBODY WAS SAYING I'M DISLOYAL
LEAD: In his testimony yesterday at the Congressional hearings in Washington, George P. Shultz told of a period in November 1986 when he felt himself under fire from all directions.


Apple to Introduce Software Products
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. will introduce two significant software products next month, the company's chairman, John Sculley, told securities analysts.
While he did not name the products, one is expected to be internal operating system software that would allow a Macintosh computer to handle several tasks at once.


CHANGES PROPOSED IN AVIATION AGENCY
LEAD: Experts today urged a Presidential commission to press for major changes in the Federal Aviation Administration.
They warned that fundamental restructuring and strengthening of the agency were necessary for it to maintain flight safety while continuing to handle a surge in air traffic brought on by deregulation of the airline industry.


Editor Is Found Slain At Home in the Village
LEAD: A 57-year-old travel-magazine editor was found stabbed to death in his ransacked Greenwich Village apartment yesterday, the police said.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in The Home Section yesterday about the remodeling of modest homes misstated the profit made on a house in Bedford, N.Y., that was purchased for $135,000.
The house, which was remodeled at a cost of $90,000, was sold for $300,000, netting the owners $75,000, or 33 percent.


ALZHEIMER DRUG PLAN BACKED
LEAD: A Senate committee has approved plans for a three-year study of an experimental drug heralded as possibly the first effective treatment for Alzheimer's disease.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Robert Kuperman will join Chiat Day, Los Angeles, as executive vice president and creative director.


Lawsuit Challenges Alien Re-Entry Rule In Amnesty Program
LEAD: An aspect of the immigration service's amnesty program that blocks amnesty for some aliens who briefly left the United States in the last five years has been challenged in Federal District Court here by a coalition of rights groups.


Our Towns; Toughest Area To Place a Home For the Retarded
LEAD: At the start of a town meeting on a community residence home for the mentally ill, Hempstead officials always read the same statement: ''The disabled are welcomed members of the town community.
And we . . . believe strongly that persons with mental disabilities should be offered every opportunity to lead productive lives.


ELDORADO BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELDORADO BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
584,000
442,000
Per share
.31
.23
9mo net inc
1,152,000
806,000
Per share
.64
.43


AGS COMPUTERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AGS COMPUTERS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
114,958,000
89,166,000
Net inc
3,560,000
2,133,000
Share earns
.32
.20
6mo sales
229,853,000
171,703,000
Net inc
6,301,000
3,713,000
Share earns
.60
.35


BUDGET RENT A CAR reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUDGET RENT A CAR (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
97,476,000
79,634,000
Net inc
3,478,000
2,047,000
Share earns
.37
.22
6mo rev
192,762,000
158,308,000
Net inc
5,066,000
1,819,000
Share earns
.59
.21


Million-Dollar Offer
LEAD: A million dollars for a rematch is what Donald Curry, the former undisputed welterweight champion, has offered Mike McCallum, the World Boxing Association junior middleweight champion, who beat Curry with one punch in their Las Vegas bout last Saturday.


Bridge: A Father and a Son Compete In the Spingold Quarterfinals
LEAD: A rare and perhaps unique event marked the quarterfinal stage of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship here this afternoon.


Forecasts: Greenspan's Grades
LEAD: For more than 20 years, Alan Greenspan has figured prominently on all the lists of famous American economic forecasters.
But now Mr.
Greenspan's forecasting accuracy has been challenged in the Senate, which is about to vote on his nomination as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.


ART ON THE BEACH RETURNS, IN A NEW SETTING
LEAD: Art on the Beach, one of the most popular and poetic of summer arts festivals, was mourned when it closed two years ago after having lost its dazzling site on a sandy landfill in TriBeCa.
But Creative Time, the nonprofit arts organization that is producing the series, will reopen Art on the Beach tonight on the East River in what seems to be another perfect spot.


POP AND JAZZ GUIDE
LEAD: Sonny Rhodes and Frankie Lee, Tramps, 125 East 15th Street (777-5077).
Sonny Rhodes would be a compelling blues performer even if he didn't play a lap steel guitar and wear a turban.
As it is, he's unique.
Frankie Lee is a soul singer with deep gospel roots.
Their Texas-California Blue Revue is to play tonight and tomorrow night around 9:30 P.M.


SHULTZ ANGRILY TELLS INQUIRY CASEY AND OTHERS DECEIVED HIM REPEATEDLY OVER IRAN DEALINGS
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz today laid out a chronicle of duplicity and intrigue at the highest levels of the Government, saying that he was deceived repeatedly by the Director of Central Intelligence and President Reagan's national security advisers and that they withheld vital information from him and from the President to keep the


GROVE BANK FOR SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROVE BANK FOR SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
533,000
384,000
Per share
.36
-
6mo net inc
1,125,000
724,000
Per share
.77
-
The company went public in August.


Colgate Profits Increase 12%
LEAD: The Colgate-Palmolive Company said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose 12 percent, with its household and personal care products segments turning in a strong performance.


LAUER, GERMAIN EXCEL IN HEAT
LEAD: There was little relief for the golfers exposed to hot sun and high humidity as they walked the middle of the fairways and stood on greens in the first round of the 42d United States Women's Open championship today.


Video Terminal Rules Vetoed by L.I. Official
LEAD: A bill to regulate the working conditions of people who use video display terminals was vetoed Wednesday by the County Executive.


LAUGH BARGAINS FOR A SUMMER NIGHT
LEAD: IT'S only fitting that Elayne Boosler, one of the most likable standup comics in the country, should harbor a special fondness for Jackie Gleason.


AUCTIONS
LEAD: AN 11th-century Byzantine mosaic - removed from an Italian cathedral in the 1850's and rediscovered a year ago in a Welsh church - was bought for $427,152 this month at Sotheby's in London by a New York art dealer.
The price for the work -which depicts the head of an apostle framed in a halo of gold - was a record at auction for a wall mosaic.


PENNSYLVANIA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNSYLVANIA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,108,959,000
2,124,846,000
Net inc
300,532,000
282,784,000
Share earns
3.24
2.69


Alaska Land-Oil Swap Put Off
LEAD: The Interior Department has decided to delay action on its plan to allow oil development in a portion of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, a department official said today.


CITIZENS BANKING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS BANKING CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,068,000
b4,793,000
Per share
.60
.72
6mo net inc
7,628,000
b9,091,000
Per share
1.14
1.37
b-After extraordinary gains of $938,000 for the quarter and $1,677,000 for the 6 months.


TRANSCO ENERGY CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSCO ENERGY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
642,300,000
813,900,000
Net inc
4,300,000
c65,800,000
Share earns
.15
-
6mo rev
1,570,000,000
1,920,000,000
Net loss
b65,200,000
45,600,000
b-Includes a charge of $81.2 million in gas contract settlements.


WATKINS-JOHNSON CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WATKINS-JOHNSON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
62,412,000
68,891,000
Net inc
3,768,000
4,749,000
Share earns
.45
.54
6mo sales
128,544,000
127,674,000
Net inc
8,448,000
9,337,000
Share earns
1.01
1.06


CAROLINA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for 12mos June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAROLINA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
12mos June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,031,020,000
1,988,551,000
Net inc
344,553,000
350,825,000
Share earns
3.81
3.94


Response to Taylor: Parcells Says Little
LEAD: Coach Bill Parcells of the Giants refused today to confirm or even discuss statements made by Lawrence Taylor about the linebacker's past drug problems.


No Headline
LEAD: Even by the standards of the normally volatile Tokyo stock market, this has been a turbulent week.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the main Washington dispatch Friday on Secretary of State George P. Shultz's first day of testimony before the Iran-contra panels misidentified an Iranian to whom Mr.
Shultz referred.


CITY GAS CO OF FLORIDA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITY GAS CO OF FLORIDA (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,534,581
8,440,499
Net inc
715,248
710,302
Share earns
.26
.26
Share earnings reflect a 3-for-1 stock split to be paid Aug. 17.


The Flavors Of Smoke And Spice
LEAD: As a child, I used to visit my aunt in the Roxbury section of Boston.
She moved away more than 30 years ago, and I had not been back, until last week.
I was not there to visit the old neighborhood, but to pay a call on a sausage maker who is proving that you don't have to be big to be successful.


DREYFUS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DREYFUS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
69,761,000
53,273,000
Net inc
24,303,000
20,165,000
Share earns
.58
.46
6mo rev
138,101,000
104,902,000
Net inc
47,449,000
37,689,000
Share earns
1.12
.91


COMMERCIAL CREDIT COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCIAL CREDIT COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b30,000,000
c13,000,000
Share earns
-
.35
6mo net loss
b9,900,000
c33,600,000
Share earns
-
.91
Shares outst
51,700,000
36,700,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $53.6 million and $52.9 million for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Uncovered Short Sales Rise by 14.7% on Nasdaq
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short, and not yet covered, in the month ended July 15 rose 35.7 million shares, or 14.7 percent, to 280 million shares.


OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,300,000,000
3,800,000,000
Net inc
b59,000,000
c48,000,000
Share earns
.23
.18
6mo rev
8,500,000,000
7,500,000,000
Net inc
b156,000,000
c122,000,000
Share earns
.70
.59


Crude Falls Below $21
LEAD: Energy futures plunged sharply with crude oil settling below $21 a barrel yesterday as traders apparently became less jumpy about the conflict in the Middle East and the American role in escorting oil tankers.


DEMETRIOS OPROPOULOS
LEAD: Retired Lieut.
Gen.
Demetrios Opropoulos, a leading opponent of the junta that ruled Greece for seven years, has died of a stroke, a family member said Friday.
He was 66 years old.
The junta headed by Col.
George Papadopoulos exiled him to the Aegean island of Lesvos.
He also lived in exile in London and headed a group of officers ousted by the junta.


100 Die in Greek Heat Wave; Hundreds Are Hospitalized
LEAD: More than 100 people have died in a blistering heat wave in Greece in the last five days, hospital sources said today.


WALT DISNEY CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WALT DISNEY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
819,367,000
647,945,000
Net inc
128,384,000
79,708,000
Share earns
.93
.58
9mo rev
2,341,209,000
1,744,520,000
Net inc
309,416,000
166,228,000
Share earns
2.25
1.23


MCA INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
611,397,000
522,734,000
Net inc
38,845,000
28,162,000
Share earns
.51
.37
6mo rev
1,144,619,000
1,036,692,000
Net inc
67,099,000
59,082,000
Share earns
.88
.78


TRIBUNE CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRIBUNE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
561,735,000
535,723,000
Net inc
48,555,000
41,082,000
Share earns
.61
.51
Shares outst
79,115,000
81,070,000
6mo rev
1,041,456,000
989,218,000
Net inc
65,237,000
b148,062,000
Share earns
.82
1.82
Shares outst
79,121,000
81,200,000


New York Asks Mediator to Join Contract Talks
LEAD: Declaring a lack of progress in negotiations between New York City and more than 100 unions, the city's chief labor negotiator sought yesterday to have a mediator join the talks as a possible prelude to arbitration.


Work Set on Tunnel Under Park Avenue
LEAD: Construction is to begin this fall on the Metro-North Commuter Railroad's Park Avenue tunnel now that the contractor has dropped its claim that the winning bid was a mistake.


Japan Trade Gain for China
LEAD: A 50 percent cut in China's trade deficit with Japan this year has helped improve economic relations between the two countries despite a worsening of political ties, Western diplomats said today.


HORIZON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORIZON INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Sales
65,950,000
55,073,000
Net inc
514,000
1,122,000
Share earns
.13
.27
9mo sales
187,338,000
150,954,000
Net inc
1,980,000
355,000
Share earns
.48
.09


Calls and Cables Favor Shultz In His Iran-Contra Testimony
LEAD: Judging by calls and telegrams that have been received so far, Secretary of State George P. Shultz has strong support across the nation for his testimony in the Iran-Contra Congressional hearings.


Court Date After Trip
LEAD: Kevin Ross, a former basketball player at Creighton University, can go to California to take a job, Associate Judge Michael Bolan of the Cook County Circuit Court in Chicago ruled yesterday, a day after the police said Ross held them at bay, tossing furniture from a downtown motel room.
Ross will be working with children in California, said Marva Collins, who persuaded Ross to leave the motel room.


Gulf Policy Critics Try to Stop Escorts
LEAD: Congressional opponents of the United States escort mission in the Persian Gulf introduced legislation today that would force the Administration to abandon the effort in six months unless it is explicitly approved by Congress.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''But the river, it hasn't changed a bit.
It's still got a mind of its own.
And when it says, 'Stop for a while and be patient,' well then, that's what you do.
And you know that everything will be O.K.''


Exxon Net Rises 3.6% In Quarter
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation, the Shell Oil Company and the Occidental Petroleum Company yesterday reported higher second-quarter profits resulting from the gradual rise in crude oil prices.
But the Phillips Petroleum Company and the Pennzoil Corporation reported lower profits.


Letter: On Child Welfare; Monitoring New York Day Care Homes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Court Rejects Suit Against Harcourt
LEAD: A Federal District Court has rejected a request by Robert Maxwell, the British publisher, to block a restructuring by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc., the book publisher said.
The decision by Judge John Keenan of New York's Southern District leaves the Orlando, Fla., company free to distribute its special $40-a-share cash dividend on


INSIDE
LEAD: Sri Lanka Peace Plan
Tamil guerrillas ''agreed in principle'' to a proposal that could end Sri Lanka's bitter ethnic conflict, Indian and Sri Lankan officials said.
The moves, which reportedly came after intense negotiations, meant an accord could be signed next week, people close to the talks said.


O'Brien Stays Away
LEAD: Ken O'Brien, the Jets' quarterback, did not follow the schedule and report to training camp last night, a team spokesman said.
O'Brien, entering the final year of a $1.6 million, four-year contract that he signed after being a 1983 first-round draft choice, is reportedly seeking about $1 million a year.


Quiche Gets the Boot on Columbus Ave.
LEAD: Not so long ago, Columbus Avenue residents complained that it was becoming almost impossible to get their shoes fixed or their clothes cleaned, as places selling quiche and sushi and $20 bowls of pasta pushed out longtime neighborhood service stores.
Now fashion foods are being pushed aside by fashion clothes, as another major wave of transformation rolls over the center of West Side


2 Raleigh Newspapers To Merge News Staffs
LEAD: The head of the family that owns the morning and evening newspapers in Raleigh, N.C., has announced plans to merge the reporting and editing staffs.


They Map the Arctic to a Finer Scale
LEAD: On the last frontier in North America, in a land of snowy mountains and ice-covered fjords, a group of Canadian soldiers is close to completing a job begun by some of the most famous names in Arctic exploration.


The Testimony: Access to a President Who 'Relied on Himself'
LEAD: In his second day of testimony yesterday at the Congressional hearings in Washington on the Iran-contra affair, George P. Shultz faced further questioning about high-level policy making.
Here, as recorded by The New York Times, are excerpts from his testimony.


Soviet Reports Nuclear Blast
LEAD: The Soviet Union said it exploded a nonmilitary nuclear device today in a remote part of Siberia, its 12th since it ended a unilateral moratorium almost five months ago.
Tass, the official press agency, reported that the explosion, in the Yakut Autonomous Region, had been ''conducted in the interests of the national economy,'' but it gave no other details.


Quick Approval of F.B.I. Nominee Seen
LEAD: White House and Justice Department officials said today that they were confident of quick Senate confirmation for William S. Sessions, President Reagan's choice to be the new Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The selection of a Federal judge for the post, they said, should limit Congressional opposition.


Opposition in Bangladesh Calls an End to Strike
LEAD: Opposition leaders today ended a 54-hour general strike but immediately announced a new series of protests intended to keep pressure on the President, Lieut.
Gen.
H.
M.
Ershad, through next week.


Seabrook Utility Says It May Fail
LEAD: A utility that has sunk $2 billion into the stalled Seabrook nuclear power plant risks becoming America's first public electric utility to file for bankruptcy protection since the Depression.
The Public Service Company of New Hampshire acknowledged in a report that its Wall Street financing had dried up and that finding an alternative would be extremely difficult before its cash runs out by the end of the year.


Finding Comparisons 'Unwise'
LEAD: During yesterday's session, Secretary of State George P. Shultz was questioned on historical comparisons involving the Iran-contra affair.


NIAGARA MOWAWK POWER CORP reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NIAGARA MOWAWK POWER CORP (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,605,121,000
2,683,893,000
Net loss
b409,787,000
c409,485,000
Share earns
-
2.78
b-Includes a $755 million writedown for the company's disallowed costs of building its Nine Mile Point Two nuclear plant.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article on women's basketball in Thursday's Sports Pages misidentified the college put on two-year probation in 1985 for recruiting violations involving Chana Perry.
It was Northeast Louisiana University, not Louisiana Tech.


Tank of Acid Explodes In Alabama, Killing 2
LEAD: A tank of sulfuric acid exploded Thursday at a chemical plant here, sending the 20,000-gallon container rocketing off its stand and killing two people and injuring at least three others.


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, JULY 25, 1987
LEAD: International 2-7  A Kuwaiti tanker hit a mine just west of an Iranian island in the Persian Gulf.
None of the 26 people aboard the 400,000-ton Bridgeton, which is traveling under American naval escort, were wounded.
Page 1  No U.S. minesweepers were around when the mine detonation sent a shock wave through the American convoy in the Persian Gulf.


Sid Caesar at Met Opera
LEAD: Sid Caesar will appear in the speaking role of Frosch, the jailer, in eight performances of ''Die Fledermaus'' at the Metropolitan Opera next season.
The comedian has starred in plays and films in addition to two television series in the 1950's.


Titles That Aren't Titles
LEAD: How many times do you have to read the following sentence to understand it? ''This genteel look at New England life, with a formidable circulation of 1 million, warmly profiles Hartland Four Corners, Vt., resident George Seldes, 96.'' (From a column syndicated by The Chicago Tribune.) What makes gibberish of it is a ''cute'' piece of journalese known as the false title.


About New York; A Gradual Fade To Memories At the Baths
LEAD: Hyman Cohen, the manager of the Brighton Beach Bath &amp; Racquet Club, was sitting in his office when his assistant arrived. ''Just lost another one,'' he told Mr.
Cohen. ''She went into a nursing home.''


FAIRCHILD INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAIRCHILD INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 28
1987
1986
Sales
168,058,000
172,486,000
Net inc
b18,780,000
c3,832,000
Share earns
.97
.05
Shares outst
19,427,000
14,256,000
6mo sales
308,678,000
323,688,000
Net inc
b22,121,000
c56,007,000
Share earns
1.11
2.90


West German Intruder To Be Tried by Soviet
LEAD: The Soviet authorities have informed West German diplomats that they will try Mathias Rust, the youth who landed his plane at the edge of Red Square, although no charges have been specified and no trial date has been set, West German Embassy officials said tonight.


Clash in Haiti Leaves 10 Dead
LEAD: Ten people were killed and 41 wounded during a march by followers of missionaries in a remote Haitian farming village today, the Information Ministry said tonight.


Lloyds Bank Posts Loss
LEAD: Lloyds Bank P.L.C. said today that it had increased its provisions for possible bad third world debts by $:1.07 billion, or $1.7 billion, resulting in a net loss in the first half of the year.
The loan-loss provision and resulting net loss were larger than analysts had been expecting.
The increase in loss provisions was taken as an exceptional charge, producing a net loss of $:516 million, or $826 million, for the first half, in contrast to a profit of $:214 million in the period a year ago.


BIOSEARCH MEDICAL PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOSEARCH MEDICAL PRODUCTS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,003,000
4,171,000
Net inc
b173,000
c413,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo rev
9,694,000
8,916,000
Net inc
b77,000
c397,000
Share earns
.01
-


Fermenta Progress
LEAD: Fermenta A.B., the troubled Swedish biotechnology company, said it would complete its proposed restructuring following the successful issuance of 345 million common shares.


BAXTER TRAVENOL LABORATOIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAXTER TRAVENOL LABORATOIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,478,000,000
1,390,000,000
Net inc
73,000,000
b51,000,000
Share earns
.27
.17
6mo sales
2,885,000,000
2,726,000,000
Net inc
137,000,000
b100,000,000
Share earns
.50
.32


Milwaukee's Marine Takes Banc One Bid
LEAD: The Marine Corporation, a banking group based in Milwaukee, said today that it had agreed to be acquired by the Banc One Corporation, a bank holding company based in Columbus, Ohio, in a stock swap valued at $546 million.


New Minilab From Kodak
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company said yesterday that it would introduce a new minilab system for photofinishing, the first such system designed and built in the United States.


Loss, and Gain, for Smoking Limits
LEAD: A new court decision marks an immediate setback for New York State's effort to regulate smoking in order to promote public health.
But the decision also makes clear the wisdom of such regulation, leaving in doubt only the question of who should carry it out.


Texas Oil Output Low
LEAD: Last year's slump in crude oil prices caused May production of Texas crude to fall to its lowest level in 43 years - below two million barrels a day - according to preliminary figures issued today by the Texas Railroad Commission.
The commission, which regulates the Texas oil and gas industry, said oil production averaged 1.97 million barrels a day in May, down 30,000 from April and 230,000 less than in May 1986.


Measure to Protect Benefits Of Retirees Passes Senate
LEAD: The Senate approved a bill today that is designed to protect the health benefits of retired workers whose companies enter bankruptcy proceedings.


XEROX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XEROX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,600,000,000
3,200,000,000
Net inc
154,000,000
b122,000,000
Share earns
1.44
1.13
6mo rev
6,950,000,000
5,990,000,000
Net inc
289,000,000
b265,000,000
Share earns
2.69
2.48


2d-Quarter G.N.P. Rise Put at 2.6%
LEAD: The economy grew somewhat faster this spring than was generally expected, the Commerce Department said today, but January-March growth was revised downward.


GENERAL MOTORS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL MOTORS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
26,700,000,000
27,630,000,000
Net inc
980,300,000
1,020,000,000
Share earns
2.80
2.92
6mo sales
52,796,700,000
54,445,400,000
Net inc
1,902,800,000
2,217,300,000
Share earns
5.42
6.44


Texaco Deadline Extended by Judge
LEAD: The judge overseeing the Texaco Inc. bankruptcy case yesterday gave the company an extra four months to file a plan for paying creditors and coming out of bankruptcy.


Union Carbide Agrees to Pay $408,500 Fine for Safety Violations
LEAD: The Union Carbide Corporation agreed today to pay penalties of $408,500 to settle charges by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration that it committed hundreds of willful violations of Federal job health and safety rules.


Carter Has Regrets
LEAD: Cris Carter, the all-America wide receiver who was dropped from the Ohio State team for signing a contract and taking money from Norby Walters and Lloyd Bloom, two New York agents, said he knew he did wrong but now wanted to ''be a man'' and face his mistake. ''Don't you wish I could change it and do it a different way?


BONN'S ARMS STAND SEEN AS KEY ISSUE IN U.S.-SOVIET PACT
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl's center-right coalition is avoiding a firm commitment on the fate of 72 Pershing 1A missiles and their American-held warheads, a remaining issue in the efforts to conclude a Soviet-American arms agreement.


Judge Severs Congressman From Robertson's Libel Suit
LEAD: A Federal judge today severed Representative Andrew Jacobs Jr. from a $70 million libel suit brought by the Rev.
Pat Robertson.


The Only Decent Thing to Do
LEAD: It seems little enough for a citizen to expect of the Government: to provide notice if officials find there has been on-the-job exposure to substances that could pose a health danger.
Yet legislation embodying that principle is stirring controversy on Capitol Hill and talk of a possible veto from the White House.


13 APARTHEID FOES SEIZED BY POLICE
LEAD: South Africa continued its crackdown on opponents of apartheid today, effectively wiping out, with detentions, the visible leadership of the country's major anti-apartheid group, the United Democratic Front.


15% Stake Sought In Crazy Eddie
LEAD: Entertainment Marketing Inc. said that it ''has a good-faith intention to acquire 15 percent'' of Crazy Eddie Inc.'s 30.9 million shares outstanding.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Entertainment said that it was seeking permission under Federal antitrust laws to raise its stake to 15 percent from its present 5.5 percent.


Pacesetter for Cruise Industry
LEAD: At a dinner for cruise line executives nine years ago, Ted Arison, then the president of Carnival Cruise Lines Inc., made an announcement that would help turn the industry around: He was going to build a ship.


2 Killed as Storms Sweep Minnesota
LEAD: Residents struggled today to clean up after storms that produced tornadoes and record rain in the Minneapolis area, killing two people and damaging hundreds of homes.


Illusions Exploded In the Gulf
LEAD: If anyone, from the White House on down, thought the protective presence of U.S.
Navy vessels would guarantee safe passage for reflagged tankers through the Persian Gulf, the mine that exploded against the Bridgeton should have disabused them.


DELTA AIR LINES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELTA AIR LINES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,566,213,000
1,107,253,000
Net inc
58,797,000
22,225,000
Share earns
1.21
.55
Yr rev
5,318,172,000
4,460,062,000
Net inc
263,729,000
47,286,000
Share earns
5.90
1.18


Stage: 'A Feast In the Plague-Time'
LEAD: ''A Feast in the Plague-Time,'' the Russian director Yuri Lyubimov's theatrical collage based on Pushkin, portrays an eerily somber ''Last Supper'' in a time of apocalyptic pestilence.
By the end of the banquet, its exhausted celebrants are shrouded corpses on a galleon that has sunk to the bottom of the ocean.


EVERGREEN BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EVERGREEN BANCORP INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,819,000
1,608,000
Per share
.89
.79
6mo net inc
3,555,000
3,166,000
Per share
1.74
1.55


CONTROL DATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTROL DATA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
785,900,000
828,500,000
Net loss
b5,500,000
d7,800,000
6mo rev
1,607,600,000
1,624,600,000
Net inc
b1,700,000
cd29,000,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-After extraordinary gains of $100,000 for the quarter and $900,000 for the 6 months.


Contamination by PCB's Is Possible in Bronx Fire
LEAD: An underground fire in the Bronx ruptured an electrical transformer, exposing as many as 55 firefighters and police officers to possible PCB contamination, the police said yesterday.


Fernandez and Teufel Lead Mets' Sweep
LEAD: The Mets, who often have trouble winning once a day this season, won twice last night, sweeping a doubleheader from the Houston Astros and staying in distant pursuit of their long-lost first place.


Lear in Ventures
LEAD: The Lear Siegler Seating Corporation, a unit of the Lear Siegler Holdings Corporation, said it had formed joint ventures with NHK Spring Company of Japan to build two plants, one in the United States and one in Canada.
The plants will initially supply seating assemblies to Japanese automobile factories in North America.


COLGATE-PALMOLIVE CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLGATE-PALMOLIVE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,437,083,000
1,246,600,000
Net inc
56,100,000
50,105,000
Share earns
.82
.71
Shares outst
68,585,000
70,414,000
6mo sales
2,750,331,000
2,453,520,000
Net inc
112,505,000
99,429,000
Share earns
1.62
1.41
Shares outst
69,139,000
70,367,000


BRAND COS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRAND COS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
24,275,000
30,443,000
Net inc
283,000
1,437,000
Share earns
.06
.31
6mo rev
44,935,000
58,975,000
Net loss
412,000
b2,480,000
Share earns
-
.52
b


Brazil Faces U.S. Patent Inquiry
LEAD: Clayton K. Yeutter, the President's special trade representative, has announced an investigation into accusations that Brazilian companies have abused American pharmaceutical patents.


Bonds Down in Light Trading
LEAD: Bond prices fell again in light trading yesterday following the report of a stronger-than-expected 2.6 percent rise in the nation's second-quarter gross national product.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Boxing  Bugner Wins in Australia: Joe Bugner took another giant step in his bid to challenge for the World Boxing Council heavyweight title when he scored a unanimous 10-round decision over Greg Page last night in Sydney.
Bugner, who was born in Hungary but was sworn in as an Australian citizen hours before the bout, dominated his opponent.


PIP Rejects Offer From Kane-Miller
LEAD: Postal Instant Press said that it had rejected as inadequate a takeover offer of $18.50 a share, or $77.3 million, made earlier this month from a group led by the Kane-Miller Corporation.
Thomas C. Marotto, president and chief executive of the franchiser of 1,100 instant printing centers, said directors, who met Thursday, concluded that ''now is not the time to sell the company in terms of realizing full value for our shareholders.


Dollar Declines Broadly And Gold Also Retreats
LEAD: The dollar fell against all major currencies except the Canadian dollar in active domestic trading yesterday.


BANKAMERICA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKAMERICA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b1,136,000,000
c640,000,000
6mo net loss
b1,070,000,000
c577,000,000
b-After provisions for credit losses of $1,337,000,000 and $1,652,000,000 for the quarter and 6 months; the provision include a special addition of $1.1 billion to the allowance for credit losses relating to developing countries.


EXXON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXXON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,162,000,000
17,981,000,000
Net inc
1,150,000,000
1,115,000,000
Share earns
1.61
1.55
6mo rev
39,597,000,000
40,224,000,000
Net inc
2,220,000,000
2,825,000,000
Share earns
3.11
3.90


HASBRO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HASBRO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
290,934,000
323,045,000
Net inc
14,025,000
25,121,000
Share earns
.24
.43
6mo rev
570,222,000
577,066,000
Net inc
30,268,000
43,755,000
Share earns
.52
.76


PHILLIPS PETROLEUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILLIPS PETROLEUM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,643,000,000
2,339,000,000
Net inc
3,000,000
b8,000,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
5,182,000,000
5,452,000,000
Net loss
29,000,000
104,000,000
Share earns
-
.39


Showtime Wins Court Ruling
LEAD: Showtime won a skirmish yesterday against its archrival, Home Box Office, in the competition for pay-television movie subscribers.


BIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIC CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
84,626,000
78,938,000
Net inc
8,560,000
8,073,000
Share earns
.71
.67
6mo sales
155,904,000
143,423,000
Net inc
15,279,000
13,706,000
Share earns
1.26
1.13


JET CREW MEMBERS CAPTURE HIJACKER
LEAD: The cabin crew of a hijacked Air Afrique jet overpowered and captured a lone Lebanese gunman today after he killed a French passenger and critically wounded a steward while the plane was on the tarmac at Cointrin Airport, witnesses and Swiss officials said.


FAST RISE AFTER A LATE START
LEAD: Leora Jones can trace the beginning of her athletic career to a fall evening in 1976 when she crawled from underneath her bed and told her parents that she had stayed after school to try out for the basketball team.


Mexico and the U.S. - a Joint Destiny
LEAD: Any study of our border with Mexico shows that economic actions on one side strongly afffect the other.
We tend to emphasize the problems arising from Mexico's proximity - drugs, illegal migration, flight capital.
But this proximity can also bring enormous benefits if the suspicious neighbors are willing to acknowledge their joint destiny and permit greater economic integration.


Net Falls 41.8% At Southland
LEAD: The Southland Corporation, owner of the 7-Eleven chain of convenience stores and the Citgo Petroleum Company, said yesterday that it earned $47.5 million, or 93 cents a share, in the second quarter, down 41.8 percent from $81.6 million, or $1.64 a share, a year ago.


Ewald Nyquist, Ex-Commissioner Of Education in New York State
LEAD: Ewald B. Nyquist, a former New York State Education Commissioner who played a key role in desegregating the state's schools, suffered a heart attack and died yesterday morning while driving with his wife near their home in Grafton, N.Y.
He was 72.


F.A.A. Head Says Flying Is Safe
LEAD: T. Allan McArtor, who is to be sworn in Monday as chief of the Federal Aviation Administration, said today he was confident that air safety had not deteriorated but both pilots and controllers must become more vigilant.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A correction in this space yesterday, about an article Thursday on rising oil prices, misidentified a company whose chief executive officer is E. L. Williamson and the organization whose acronym is OPEC.
The company is the Louisiana Land and Exploration Company; the organization is the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.


Dinosaur Eggshells in West Appear to Be Oldest Found
LEAD: Shells of dinosaur eggs found in western Colorado are believed to be the oldest ever discovered, researchers say.


A KUWAITI TANKER UNDER U.S. ESCORT HITS MINE IN GULF
LEAD: A Kuwaiti tanker under American naval escort hit a mine today just west of an Iranian island in the Persian Gulf.


Basque Bombing Wounds 8
LEAD: Eight civil guards were wounded today when a bomb exploded in a car outside their headquarters in this northern Basque town.
Basque separatists claimed responsibility, the regional government said.


The President Praises Shultz While His Advisers Squirm
LEAD: President Reagan believes that Secretary of State George P. Shultz's Congressional testimony has been ''honest, sincere and helpful,'' Marlin Fitzwater, the President's chief spokesman, said today.


Davies Leads a Delayed Women's Open
LEAD: Laura Davies of England, who hits a golf ball as far as any woman in the history of the game, survived another day of intense heat and humidity and a double bogey at the Plainfield Country Club to take the lead into the clubhouse midway through the 42d United States Women's Open championship.


Argonaut to Hold Talks on Merger
LEAD: The Argonaut Group said that it would begin friendly merger talks with Clarendon Group Ltd. and other unidentified third parties that have expressed an interest in acquiring the insurer.
Clarendon, which owns a 4.8 percent stake in Argonaut, offered on Tuesday to acquire the company for $52 a share, or $580 million, for the shares it does not already own.


ICM PROPERTY INVESTORS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ICM PROPERTY INVESTORS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
333,000
1,170,000
Share earns
.06
.20
6mo net inc
1,007,000
2,489,000
Share earns
.17
.43


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Steve Garvey won't be offered a contract with the San Diego Padres for the 1988 season, according to Chub Feeney, the team's president.
Garvey, who will be 39 in December, has been sidelined since May following reconstructive surgery on a torn biceps tendon. . . .
Baltimore has recalled Scott McGregor, a pitcher, from Class AAA Rochester and placed Fred Lynn, an outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.


Hafts Are Considering Dayton Hudson Move
LEAD: The Dayton Hudson Corporation, one of the nation's biggest department store chains, disclosed yesterday that the multimillionaire Haft family of Washington said it might be interested in buying at least half the company within the next year.


Tie Vote Prevents a Decision On Political Spending Rules
LEAD: The Federal Election Commission has left undecided a question that may provide a way for Presidential candidates to circumvent campaign spending regulations.


TV: Carly Simon On HBO
LEAD: Carly Simon is a singer who has always gone first class.
In her 16-year solo recording career, Ms.
Simon has collaborated with only the best producers, studio musicians and image makers to project an enviable portrait of high-powered patrician competence.
And in ''Carly in Concert: Coming Around Again,'' her one-hour Home Box


Breeze McMennamin Becomes Bride Of Gustavus W. Hobbs 4th, Geologist
LEAD: Marilyn Breeze McMennamin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
G.Barry McMennamin of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Gustavus Warfield Hobbs 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hobbs 3d of Manasota Key, Fla., and Stonington, Conn.
The Rev.
Roland M. Jones performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in New Canaan.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD: Dueling Pianos Last year a landmark Latin music concert at Lehman College featured five leading Latin pianists.
Two of them - Hilton Ruiz and Eddie Palmieri - constitute the weekend bill at the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, just east of Avenue of the Americas (475-8592).
Mr.
Palmieri represents the New York-born, jazz-influenced Latin musician, while Mr.


Kinder-Care Deal
LEAD: Kinder-Care Inc. said it had reached a definitive agreement to acquire the American Savings and Loan Association of Florida in a deal valued at about $138 million, or $17 a share.
Kinder-Care, a holding company primarily involved in day-care centers, said that it would complete the transaction through a subsidiary, Centerbanc, but that American would be the surviving institution.


ASHLAND OIL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASHLAND OIL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,801,952,000
1,687,850,000
Net inc
39,959,000
82,380,000
Share earns
1.32
2.42
Shares outst
30,287,000
33,205,000
9mo sales
4,822,983,000
5,373,283,000
Net inc
67,902,000
174,254,000
Share earns
2.13
5.13
Shares outst
31,746,000
32,500,000


ALTUS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALTUS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,900,000
4,700,000
Per share
.40
.97
6mo net inc
7,100,000
8,500,000
Per share
1.46
1.76


HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC INDUSRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC INDUSRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
151,701,000
134,339,000
Net inc
12,085,000
11,024,000
Share earns
.71
.66
6mo rev
289,712,000
296,602,000
Net inc
23,527,000
21,920,000
Share earns
1.38
1.32


27 in a Row Ties Record
LEAD: The Salt Lake Trappers tonight equaled the longest winning streak in the history of organized baseball by winning their 27th consecutive game, a 7-2 victory over the Pocatello Giants in the Pioneer League.


Birth Defect Seen As Death Cause
LEAD: The death of a Texas-El Paso basketball player stemmed from birth defects in his heart and not cocaine use, the Medical Examiner's office said today.


Rock: Diamono of Dakar
LEAD: Choppy yet smooth, light yet kinetic, the Senegambian rock of Super Diamono de Dakar is an international blend that sounds effortless.
The band, which has existed for two decades, has a large following in Africa and Europe for a style it calls Afro-feeling.
It opened a two-night engagement Wednesday at Sounds of Brazil to a star-struck, predominantly Senegalese audience.


Guatemala's War Against Its Mayas
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confusing Clothing Categories
LEAD: ONLY in fashion could better be worse.


Kellogg's Net Rises by 29.8%
LEAD: The Kellogg Company said today that it earned $89.8 million, or 72 cents a share, in the second quarter of 1987, up 29.8 percent from $69.2 million, or 56 cents a share, a year ago.


Women in Jazz Series To Begin on Monday
LEAD: A performance by Abbey Lincoln Moseka, a singer, will open the annual Women in Jazz Downtown series on Monday at 12:15 P.M. at Chase Manhattan Plaza, Liberty and Nassau Streets.
The series, which is free and runs through Aug. 7, is sponsored by the Lower Manhattan Cultural Council.


PREMIER INDUSTRIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PREMIER INDUSTRIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
123,818,000
115,023,000
Net inc
13,955,000
b10,586,000
Share earns
.47
.36
Yr rev
459,000,000
435,040,000
Net inc
48,280,000
41,377,000
Share earns
1.63
1.40


Regents Move Toward AIDS Teaching Plan
LEAD: The New York State Board of Regents, signaling its intention to require instruction about AIDS from kindergarten through the 12th grade, voted today to circulate the proposal to public and private school officials across the state.


FORD MOTOR CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORD MOTOR CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
19,500,000,000
17,300,000,000
Net inc
b1,500,000,000
1,080,000,000
Share earns
5.81
4.02
Shares outst
257,900,000
268,300,000
6mo sales
37,600,000,000
32,100,000,000
Net inc
3,000,000,000
1,800,000,000
Share earns
11.54
6.72


INDIAN HEAD BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDIAN HEAD BANKS INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,068,000
1,374,000
Per share
.89
.32
Shares outst
4,355,000
4,141,000
6mo net inc
7,485,000
4,164,000
Per share
1.65
.99
Shares outst
4,323,000
4,123,000


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.63
6.60
6.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.87
5.68
5.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.02
5.88
5.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.40
8.35
7.23
30-YR.


Lawyer at Interior Dept. Is Accused of a Conflict
LEAD: The Interior Department temporarily suspended its chief regional lawyer in California today pending a Justice Department review of a possible conflict of interest.
At issue is whether the lawyer sought employment with a law firm whose client benefited from a water rights settlement he had negotiated, Interior


Political Marketing; Campaigning to Instant Responses
LEAD: For political strategists, one of the newest weapons in the quest to understand how Americans react to candidates and their ideas is a personal computer that measures an audience's response instantly and then calculates changes from second to second.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the medical imaging business made an erroneous implication about the profitability of ADAC Laboratories.
The company has been profitable in its last three quarters.


Request Is Denied In Right-to-Die Case
LEAD: A nursing home here yesterday lost a bid to bar the family of a woman in a comalike state from removing her life-sustaining feeding tube.
The ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Philadelphia came one day after the United States Supreme Court refused to interfere in the case, involving Nancy Ellen


2,032 Letters Hidden By a Postal Worker
LEAD: A postal worker here who was trying to keep pace with her workload stashed in her locker more than 2,000 pieces of mail, which were not found until three years later.


Delta Offers Refunds on Safety Issue
LEAD: Delta Air Lines said today that it would offer refunds, even on restricted-fare tickets, to anyone concerned about flying the airline after its recent mishaps.


Killer of Medical Student Dies In Electric Chair in Louisiana
LEAD: Willie Watson went calmly and silently to his death in the electric chair early today for the rape, robbery and murder of a Tulane University medical student.


Ward Suggests Lone Suspect Committed Rapes in Queens
LEAD: Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward told a large gathering in Queens Thursday night that he believed one person was responsible for 13 sexual assaults in central Queens in recent months.
But department officials said yesterday that there could be one, two, or three rapists involved.


Dioxin Levels Found In Vietnam Veterans Termed Not Unusual
LEAD: Preliminary results of a study of 444 Vietnam veterans who may have been exposed to the herbicide Agent Orange show that very few veterans have unusually high levels of dioxin, the potentially harmful chemical in the herbicide, researchers said today.


Stop Abuse of Children in Schools
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senate Panel Asks N.A.S.D. Study Of Stock Trading Done for Meese
LEAD: The Senate panel investigating Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d's financial disclosures has asked the National Association of Securities Dealers to study the stock trading done by W. Franklyn Chinn on Mr.
Meese's behalf.


Wedtech Says It Owes Millions to U.S.
LEAD: The Wedtech Corporation disclosed yesterday that it owed ''tens of millions of dollars'' to the Government for payments made on contracts that the company had been unable to fulfill.


'Our Foreign Policy Suffered; You Were Out of the Game'
LEAD: Although Secretary of State George P. Shultz has received a favorable response from most legislators at the Iran-contra hearings, one Congressman challenged his conduct during yesterday's session.


Henley Journal; A Scene of Old England: The Mute Swan Census
LEAD: It was a frustrating morning for John Turk, a grizzled boat builder dressed in a dazzling crimson blazer that bespeaks his rank as Master of the Queen's Game of Swans, or swan master for short.


Keep Calm About the Gulf
LEAD: Despite the mine damage to the tanker Bridgeton and the ululations from Teheran, Washington does not have to turn injury into disaster.
By refraining from retaliatory action, the Administration can insure that the ayatollahs are not diverted from contemplating their present predicament and the desirability of a cease-fire.


Joan Collins Wins Suit on Prenuptial Agreement
LEAD: A Superior Court judge ruled today that Joan Collins's prenuptial agreement with Peter Holm, a former pop singer, was valid.
Mr.
Holm, the judge found, was entitled to no more than 20 percent of the ''Dynasty'' star's earnings from the 13 months they were together.


A Tough Nominee for F.B.I.
LEAD: The man President Reagan selected today to be the new Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Judge William Steele Sessions of San Antonio, is a minister's son who is known as a stern but scrupulously fair judge.


GENUINE PARTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENUINE PARTS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
666,470,000
617,630,000
Net inc
37,110,000
31,076,000
Share earns
.47
.39
6mo sales
1,275,300,000
1,183,499,000
Net inc
69,069,000
58,074,000
Share earns
.87
.73


VAN R. HALSEY
LEAD: Van R. Halsey, a former senior partner of a Wall Street brokerage firm, died July 17 at his home in Rumson, N.J.
He was 90 years old.


TEXTRON INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXTRON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,820,600,000
1,525,100,000
Net inc
b91,000,000
c61,300,000
Share earns
1.06
.74
6mo rev
3,662,300,000
2,946,200,000
Net inc
b151,200,000
c111,700,000
Share earns
1.79
1.36


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JULY 25, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


LAWMAKERS SAY SHULTZ ACCOUNT WAS FORTHRIGHT
LEAD: Senators and Representatives on the Iran-contra committees - Democrats and Republicans alike - praised Secretary of State George P. Shultz today as an emblem of sanity and candor surrounded by folly and deceit.


Believe That? Try This
LEAD: President Gipper knocked at Admiral Buckstopper's office door. ''Have you seen Colonel Shredder?'' he asked.


Izn't It Tiem to Give The Betys a Braek?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL CLEVELAND (AL) - Announced that Jack Aker, coach, has left the club.


A Primer for Law School: Arguing in Moot Court
LEAD: Alan Gavilanes gave up a $300-a-week summer job with A.T.&amp;T.
Gezabel A. Cortes gave up a $250-a-week job as a typist - and six weeks at home with her husband.


American Woman, 91, Conquers Mt. Fuji
LEAD: Hulda Crooks at the top of Japan's highest peak yesterday morning after completing a three-day ascent.
She became the oldest woman ever to have climbed the 12,385-foot mountain. ''You always feel good when you've made a goal,'' she said. ''You need goals.'' The oldest man to reach the summit did so last year at the age of 99.


Suit Against U.S. Attorney By Mayor Barry Dismissed
LEAD: A Federal judge today dimissed a lawsuit filed by Mayor Marion Barry Jr. that charged the United States Attorney with prosecutorial abuse in an investigation of purported corruption in city contracting.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 11.


DATA GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA GENERAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Revenue
313,600,000
325,300,000
Net loss
b65,100,000
2,000,000
9mo rev
942,100,000
937,900,000
Net loss
b104,400,000
c2,600,000
b-Includes a $53.8 million charge for a restructuring and cost reduction program for both the quarter and 9 months; and the 9-month also includes an extraordinary charge of $18.2 million from redemption of debentures.


A Sri Lanka Compromise Reported Near
LEAD: Indian and Sri Lankan officials said today that separatist Tamil guerrillas had ''agreed in principle'' to a proposal that could end a bitter four-year ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka.


CENTEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
363,394,000
340,707,000
Net inc
35,579,000
35,574,000
Share earns
1.22
1.27
Shares outst
28,974,000
27,669,000
6mo rev
707,386,000
658,477,000
Net inc
67,338,000
27,665,000
Share earns
2.30
2.38
Shares outst
28,941,000
27,665,000


Senate Panel Balks at Promotion of Two Generals
LEAD: The Senate Armed Services Committee has refused to approve promotion of two Marine brigadier generals after concluding that they were singled out for special treatment by the Marine commandant and the Secretary of the Navy.


Pregnancy And Rubella
LEAD: Women vaccinated against the disease rubella when pregnant do not risk seriously harming their babies, but Federal officials still do not recommend the vaccine for expectant mothers.


How Jose Sorzano Joined National Security Staff
LEAD: To the Editor:


Art Boom Slows In the East Village
LEAD: The East Village neighborhood in Manhattan, since the early 1980's a spawning ground for new artistic trends and the fastest-growing art district in New York City, has reached a plateau of growth, with fewer new galleries opening and some of its most successful ones moving to larger spaces in SoHo.


CHICAGO RIVET &amp; MACHINE CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHICAGO RIVET &amp; MACHINE CO (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,722,195
6,143,127
Net inc
231,887
242,732
Share earns
.32
.33
6mo rev
11,617,061
12,127,487
Net inc
517,893
527,608
Share earns
.71
.71


Candelaria Returns
LEAD: John Candelaria, the California Angels' pitcher who has been on the injured-reserve list for personal reasons since June 19, rejoined his team yesterday.
Candelaria will work out under the supervision of Gene Mauch, manager of the Angels, and Marcel Lachemann, the pitching coach, before the Angels decide whether the left-hander should be activated.


Worker Turnover Said to Slow U.S. Toxic Cleanup
LEAD: Better-paying private jobs are luring away Federal workers in the cleanup of the nation's worst toxic waste dumps, and the turnover is slowing down the project, Congressional investigators say.


Beating the Heat: Creative Cooling
LEAD: With the temperature climbing past 90 for the 18th time since May 1, thereby tying a record, and hitting 94 at midafternoon, tying another record, New Yorkers took to tall drinks, short haircuts and even metaphysical means to maintain their cool yesterday.


American Tells of Mozambique Raid
LEAD: An American, Mark van Koevering, gave a vivid account today of a massacre in Mozambique as anti-Government rebels and the South African Government repeated denials that they had been involved in the killing of 386 civilians in the town of Homoine.


McEnroe Loses 6 1/2-Hour Match
LEAD: The United States had already fallen behind West Germany, 0-1, in their Davis Cup relegation match today when John McEnroe was asked to summon some heroics for his meeting with Boris Becker, a marathon that required five sets and lasted more than six hours.


British Novelist Wins Libel Award of $800,000
LEAD: Jeffrey Archer, a best-selling novelist and former deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, today won a record award of $800,000 in libel damages against a London tabloid.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A Washington dispatch yesterday about President Reagan's appointment of 12 members to his national commission on AIDS misidentified a doctor who Mr.
Reagan said had provided helpful suggestions.
He is Dr.
Richard Davis of Philadelphia, a stepbrother of Nancy Reagan, not Dr.
Loyal Davis, her deceased stepfather.


Kate Smith's Burial: Dispute Persists
LEAD: The question, the conflicting parties agree, is if it doesn't have a door, is it still a mausoleum?


GOTAAS-LARSEN SHIPPING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOTAAS-LARSEN SHIPPING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
59,600,000
44,000,000
Net inc
b7,900,000
c8,800,000
Share earns
.58
.64
6mo rev
111,600,000
84,400,000
Net inc
b15,800,000
c15,600,000
Share earns
1.16
1.25
Shares outst
13,686,000
12,415,000


Maxwell Closes London Paper
LEAD: The publisher Robert Maxwell conceded defeat today in a bitter battle for London's newspaper readership and closed The London Daily News just five months after it started up.
Mr.
Maxwell, who also owns


A Joke on Koch: Jersey Ad Teases Plea to Business
LEAD: Mayor Koch may have succeeded in boarding up the entrance to the Holland Tunnel, but the interlopers from New Jersey managed anyway yesterday to reach the New York companies the Mayor is trying to keep.


ROCHESTER GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCHESTER GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
157,193,000
162,991,000
Net inc
18,315,000
21,085,000
Share earns
.61
.73
6mo rev
388,442,000
417,179,000
Net inc
52,683,000
58,900,000
Share earns
1.78
2.04


Baseball; Orioles' Streak Reaches 10
LEAD: Cal Ripken's sacrifice fly, which was dropped by Bo Jackson in left field, drove in the tiebreaking run in the bottom of the eighth inning tonight as the Baltimore Orioles extended their winning streak to 10 games with a 3-1 victory over the Kansas City Royals.


FALCONBRIDGE LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FALCONBRIDGE LTD (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
319,000,000
289,200,000
Net loss
17,800,000
10,100,000
6mo rev
576,600,000
582,100,000
Net inc
b10,800,000
c14,800,000
Share earns
.16
.26
b-Includes a $44 million gain on the sale of an interest in Western Platinum Ltd.


Books of The Times; Lights of the Vineyard
LEAD:  ILLUMINATION NIGHT.
By Alice Hoffman. 224 pages.
Putnam. $18.95.
A CAN OF WORMS.
By Russell H. Greenan. 214 pages.
Bantam.
Paper, $3.50.


Danaher Purchase
LEAD: The Danaher Corporation said a new subsidiary would acquire Ammco Tools Inc. for about $52.8 million.
The company said it expected the deal to be completed within 60 days.
Danaher, a real estate investment trust based in West Palm Beach, Fla., said the acquisition reflected the company's strategy to buy established brand names in related businesses.


3Com, Bridge Plan to Merge
LEAD: The 3Com Corporation and Bridge Communications Inc., both makers of computer network systems, said today that they would merge.
The combined company would retain the 3Com name and have its headquarters at 3Com's Santa Clara, Calif., facility, while Bridge would become a subsidiary and continue operating from Mountain View,


The Road to 'Kampuchea'
LEAD: He came to take one for the team yesterday, so that he and Tim Mayotte and the American doubles team could pour through Eric Jelen and avoid the lower depths of Davis Cup tennis.


Little Rejects Plenum Offer
LEAD: Arthur D. Little Inc., a consulting firm, today rejected an unsolicited takeover offer for $50 a share, or $128 million, from the Plenum Publishing Company., a small New York-based scientific press.


Trump Gets License For Skating Rinks
LEAD: The developer Donald J. Trump, who last year restored New York City's Wollman Rink and made a profit of $500,000, received the concession to run the rink for the next four years.


Restitution to Victims Works in Philadelphia
LEAD: To the Editor:


GENERAL SIGNAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL SIGNAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
396,676,000
412,434,000
Net inc
15,196,000
18,098,000
Share earns
.54
.63
6mo sales
781,855,000
817,846,000
Net inc
29,289,000
38,318,000
Share earns
1.03
1.33


AMFAC INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMFAC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
523,929,000
481,142,000
Net inc
1,369,000
b6,767,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
1,027,748,000
939,765,000
Net inc
4,682,000
b2,433,000
Share earns
.15
-


Movie: 'Superman IV: Quest for Peace'
LEAD: Part of the fun of each Superman film has always been that opening credit crawl, with its hilariously grandiose lettering and its stately pace.
In ''Superman IV: The Quest for Peace,'' which opened yesterday at the New Carnegie and other theaters, the credits zip by in a shaky manner, trailed by billows of unsightly glitter.


Israel Penalizes NBC Over Documentary
LEAD: The Israeli Government has decided not to grant the NBC television network any interviews with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and two other top officials because of the network's failure to respond to Israeli criticism of its recent documentary about the West Bank.


FINANCIAL CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FINANCIAL CORP OF AMERICA (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b176,785,000
cd11,568,000
Share earns
-
.23
6mo net loss
167,578,000
c60,656,000
Share earns
-
1.44
b-Includes an additional provision of $165.5 million for losses on loans and real estates and a $22.7 million loss as the result of the FSLIC secondary reserve writeoff.


Hollywood Summer Looking Up
LEAD: With Superman taking his cape out of mothballs this weekend and James Bond skydiving into the nation's box offices next Friday, all of Hollywood's most awaited summer treats will have been delivered by the end of July.


Holly Board Backs Arcanum Buyout
LEAD: The Holly Sugar Corporation's directors have unanimously approved a $130 million leveraged buyout of the company by Arcanum I partners, the sugar company announced.
The proposed agreement must still be approved by shareholders.
The Holly board has called a special shareholders meeting for Oct. 29 to consider the merger.


AMAX INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMAX INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
834,300,000
310,500,000
Net inc
b35,500,000
c8,000,000
Share earns
.41
.07
6mo sales
1,598,900,000
614,200,000
Net inc
b155,800,000
c61,200,000
Share earns
1.94
.75


Children's Game Show Captures Audiences
LEAD: It's a dirty, sweaty, messy job, being a contestant on ''Double Dare,'' the only nationwide television game show for children.
But, well, someone has to do it, and that someone - 13-year-old Michelle Hesse - was facing a crucial $20 question. ''All right, which of the following was not one of the seven dwarfs?


Telstar Also Made Legislative History
LEAD: To the Editor:


Diamond-Bathurst Suit Charges Stock Fraud
LEAD: Five senior officers of Diamond-Bathurst Inc., a manufacturer of specialty liquor bottles, have been accused by a former executive of manipulating the company's stock by filing false reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission in 1985 and 1986.


CHUBB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHUBB CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b95,400,000
c74,100,000
Share earns
2.27
1.96
6mo net inc
b182,700,000
c133,300,000
Share earns
4.43
3.65
b-Includes realized investment gains of $3.9 million for the quarter and $12.5 million for 6 months.


All 3 Active U.S. Minesweepers Far From Explosion in the Gulf
LEAD: When the detonation of a mine sent a shock wave through an American convoy in the Persian Gulf today, there were no American minesweepers anywhere in the region.


CARTER-WALLACE INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARTER-WALLACE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
116,800,000
109,797,000
Net inc
9,048,000
7,729,000
Share earns
1.20
1.02


HICKHAM, DOW B INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HICKHAM, DOW B INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,961,000
2,967,000
Net inc
352,000
568,000
Share earns
.14
.24
6mo sales
5,740,000
5,760,000
Net inc
b595,000
1,121,000
Share earns
.24
.48


UNION CARBIDE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION CARBIDE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,658,000,000
1,604,000,000
Net inc
69,000,000
b388,000,000
Share earns
.52
3.97
Shares outst
130,969,388
97,780,000
6mo sales
3,339,000,000
3,196,000,000
Net inc
135,000,000
b701,000,000
Share earns
1.03
6.60
Shares outst
130,701,228
106,209,522


Saturday News Quiz
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 54.


Your Money; Ethical Funds More Popular
LEAD: WHEN Lee Clayton of Huntington, L.I., decided to invest in a mutual fund five years ago, she chose the New Alternatives Fund, one of the small group of what are called socially responsive funds that consider more than just the bottom line in their investment strategies.


Trout and Yankees Fall to White Sox
LEAD: And now for the reasonable approach.


HASTINGS MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HASTINGS MANUFACTURING CO (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
17,253,782
15,916,282
Net inc
335,798
417,508
Share earns
.80
.99
6mo sales
32,873,054
30,759,734
Net inc
730,059
287,206
Share earns
1.74
.68


JEFFERSON SMURFIT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERSON SMURFIT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
270,565,000
238,249,000
Net inc
19,945,000
6,739,000
Share earns
1.04
.35
6mo sales
526,403,000
463,508,000
Net inc
34,606,000
10,604,000
Share earns
1.80
.55


General to Visit Hanoi On Missing
LEAD: President Reagan announced today that his special envoy, Gen.
John A. Vessey, would travel to Hanoi next month in an attempt to revive negotiations over missing American servicemen.


After the Blast, Journey Continues
LEAD: The mercury had hit 100 and the morning was calm and clear shortly before 6:55 A.M. today as two Kuwaiti oil tankers, with their escort of three United States Navy warships, steamed north toward Kuwait.
Then came the blast.
Seconds later, a Navy lieutenant, Richard Vogel, radioed from the supertanker Bridgeton: ''We've been hit!


TIME AND BUSY TRAFFIC HALT FOR A MISSISSIPPI SAND BAR
LEAD: In a rare twist of nature, a massive, shifting sand bar has paralyzed traffic on the Mississippi River, stalling hundreds of barges here with millions of tons in cargo in a nautical gridlock on the nation's busiest inland waterway.


Top Officers Suspended In British Ferry Disaster
LEAD: The captain and first officer of the Channel ferry Herald of Free Enterprise, which capsized March 6 with the loss of 188 lives, were suspended today and their employers censured for sloppy procedures on the vessel.


KELLOGG CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KELLOGG CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
923,100,000
867,200,000
Net inc
89,800,000
69,200,000
Share earns
.72
.56
6mo sales
1,819,100,000
1,665,200,000
Net inc
194,300,000
145,700,000
Share earns
1.57
1.18


CRONUS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRONUS INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,601,000
21,759,000
Net loss
b9,094,000
cd69,000
Share earns
-
.02
6mo sales
39,478,000
39,079,000
Net loss
7,507,000
d709,000
b-Includes an after-tax charge of $9.6 million for increased reserves against long-term leases.


Tunisia Continues on a Moderate Course
LEAD: To the Editor:


TIMES MIRROR CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIMES MIRROR CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
793,447,000
748,910,000
Net inc
83,001,000
191,663,000
Share earns
1.28
2.96
6mo rev
1,509,202,000
1,443,669,000
Net inc
141,187,000
234,786,000
Share earns
2.18
3.63


Bridge; Spingold Semifinal Teams Aren't From Top 11 Seeds
LEAD: The most upset-ridden Spingold Knockout Team Championship ever entered the semifinal stage this afternoon.


Section Is Closed At Orchard Beach
LEAD: The New York City Health Department yesterday temporarily closed the northern sections of Orchard Beach because of waste paper and plastic debris in the water.


Dow Shakes Off Slump, Gaining 13.39, to 2,485.33
LEAD: The stock market moved up yesterday, with all of the major market indicators gaining.


Innovative Vote Passes a Test
LEAD: A 35-year-old Hispanic businesswoman has been elected to the Alamogordo City Commission, apparently assisted by a new system intended to help members of minority groups win public office.


CHINA MAY ABSTAIN IN IRAN VOTE IN U.N.
LEAD: China will probably not block an effort by the United Nations Security Council to impose an arms embargo on Iran, but it will continue to provide military support to the Iranians nonetheless, according to Western diplomats here.


Costa Ricans to Plant Trees On Airstrip North Arranged
LEAD: Children will plant tree seedlings Saturday on an airstrip in Costa Rica that was built by the private network Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North set up to assist the Nicaraguan contras, Costa Rican officials say.


HOOPER HOLMES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOOPER HOLMES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,917,000
15,482,000
Net inc
533,000
341,000
Share earns
.25
.19
Shares outst
2,135,315
1,835,315
6mo rev
32,933,000
30,587,000
Net inc
836,000
725,000
Share earns
.39
.39


Bike Messengers Protest Midtown Ban
LEAD: A pedestrian trying to cross intersection of Houston Street and Avenue of the Americas as bicycle messengers gathered to protest a city plan to ban the two-wheeled couriers from stretches of Park, Madison and Fifth Avenues between 10 A.M. and 4 P.M. weekdays. ''There are a couple of crazy people,'' said Paul Dolyniuk, a messenger, ''But you can't crucify everyone.


Los Angeles Study Foiled by Clean Air
LEAD: Unusually clean air over the Los Angeles Basin has forced a four-week suspension of a $10 million study of smog in the nation's dirtiest air, the State Air Resources Board said Friday.


Amy Louise Feldman To Marry a Physician
LEAD: Rita Feldman of Fort Lee, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter Amy Louise Feldman to Dr.
Andrew Green, a son of Alvin and Dr.
Miriam Green of Great Neck, L.I.
The future bride is a daughter also of the late Elliott A. Feldman, a principal in a family-owned liquor concern in Kearney, N.J.


KIT TOBIN WEDS IN CALIFORNIA
LEAD: Katherine Oliver Tobin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Henry deYoung Tobin of Hillsborough, Calif., was married yesterday to George Carroll Whipple 3d, the son of Mrs.
George Carroll Whipple Jr. of New York and the late Mr.
Whipple.
Judge William Newsom of the California Court of Appeals officiated at the Burlingame Country Club in


Street Fashion; Today's Straw Hats Conjure Captivating Jazz Age Images
LEAD: THE jazz age is a bountiful source of inspiration for the current generation of fashion followers.
Loose, low-waisted dresses, antique lace collars and T-strap shoes are among the signatures of the flapper era that have made made the transition to the late 1980's.
But probably no touch from that era makes as vivid an impression as the new straw hats, with wide or narrow brims, worn low on the head, echoing the 1920's.


CONGRESS LEADERS REGARD CONTRA AID AS STILL IN DOUBT
LEAD: Key members of Congress, including Republicans who favor United States military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, say they do not share the Reagan Administration's view that the Iran-contra hearings have improved the outlook for continued aid.


At Last a Majority Rules in Portugal
LEAD: After 48 years of right-wing dictatorship, followed by 13 years of faltering coalitions and minority Governments, Portugal finally elected its first majority party last week.
Prime Minister Anibal Cavaco Silva's Social Democrats won 50 percent of the vote and at least 145 of the 250 seats in Parliament.


WHAT'S NEW IN BOOK DISTRIBUTION
LEAD: IF big publishers have problems getting their books to readers, their small counterparts - who cannot afford such things as sales staffs, warehouses and computers - are in even worse shape.
And that problem is intensifying as the number of small publishers rises.


FOR MORE INFORMATION ON HARRIMAN SOCIETY
LEAD: As a follow-up to the article, ''Harriman Society Lists Goals''  [ July 12 ] , please be advised that anyone interested in additional information concerning The Harriman Society should telephone 723-4210.
OLGA TOLL
Secretary
The Harriman Society
Scarsdale


WHAT'S NEW IN BOOK DISTRIBUTION
LEAD: ERIC KAMPMANN started with three clients almost seven years ago, but now his company is the biggest, most respected distributor of books by small publishers.
His 60 clients include publishers in California, Idaho, New Mexico and Florida, and three from England.


FLORIDA: WEIGHING THE REASONS TO GO
LEAD: AFTER 42 years of living in Scarsdale, sending our four children through the entire Scarsdale school system, serving on committees that brought Scarsdale a swimming pool, ran the Christmas Carol Sing, helped a variety of funds hit that red ball at the top of the bar-chart poster, my wife and I had to face the cruel fact that a house that accommodated a family of six was now oversized for just two of us.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  JADE AND FIRE.
By Raymond Barnett. (Random House, $19.95.) It is the Peking of late 1948, the twilight of the Nationalist regime.
The monks of the city's largest Taoist monastery burn their prior alive in the courtyard.
Bei Menjin, chief inspector of the Peking Municipal Police, tackles the case with a briskness and authority that recalls Thatcher Colt, Anthony Abbot's police commissioner, who solved similar public crimes in 1930's New York.


GAIL V. MINOR MARRIED TO PATRICK E. SHOUVLIN
LEAD: Gail Vance Minor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lance Cabell Minor Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., and Patrick Evans Shouvlin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael P. Shouvlin of New Canaan, were married yesterday at St.
Aloysius Roman Catholic Church in New Canaan.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Vincent Callahan, who was assisted by the Rev.


INSIDE
LEAD: Bork and Watergate
Robert H. Bork's role and motives in Watergate's ''Saturday night massacre'' provide some insights into the Supreme Court nominee.
Page 23.


Trains
LEAD: To the Editor: Did Virginia Van der Veer Hamilton have me in mind when she wrote ''Of Time and the Train,'' (Travel, May 31)?


Tough Losses for Mets and Yankees; SCHULZE HIT HARD AS ASTROS WIN
LEAD: Just when they seemed to be getting it back, just when they needed to be getting it back, the old magic eluded the Mets again yesterday afternoon as they rallied twice but still lost to the Houston Astros, 7-5.


Cuomo Promotes Fryer To a New Press Position
LEAD: Governor Cuomo has promoted his chief spokesman with the press on most issues to the title of counselor and press secretary to the Governor, Mr.
Cuomo's office announced today.


Yorkshire's Ancient Abbeys
LEAD: Along the edge of the north Yorkshire moors, among the beauty and seclusion of the dales, lie the sites of four abbeys that were once among the most important in England.


Question Of the Week; Are Knicks Back on Track Now?
LEAD: Being die-hard Knicks fans from way back in the forgotten glory days, we're still waiting to see.
With the off-court hierarchy finally in place, it's still to be proven whether a winning work attitude can be instilled in players who for three long years have been also-rans.
If Gulf and Western is really serious - and it looks as if it is this year - then a good bloodletting is in order.


Votes in Congress; Last Week's Tally in Key Eastern States
LEAD:  Senate  1.
Spending Cuts: Vote on an amendment to a bill authorizing an increase in the debt ceiling that would have given the budget-balancing law a new automatic mechanism for making spending cuts.
Rejected 71 to 25, July 23.
1
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Y
Weicker (R)
N


Bush's Presidential Bid Shaky Despite His Lead, Poll Finds
LEAD: Despite a clear lead in public support and even bigger advantages in money and organization, Vice President Bush's bid for the Republican Presidential nomination remains shaky, according to interviews with party leaders and the latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll.


Visiting India
LEAD: To the Editor: There is another very satisfactory alternative to traveling like a maharajah (''A Maharajah's Rail Journey in Rajasthan,'' Travel, June 28).
I covered the same distances and sites and was free to wander by myself through palaces and markets, to stay in Agra to see the Taj in different lights and spend a few nights in the Lake Palace in


The Brighter Side
LEAD: At the end of these past two weeks of the Iran-contra hearings, the mood in Washington is much better than it was at the beginning.
Secretary of State Shultz lanced the poison.
He told an alarming story of corruption at the top of the Government, and by letting it all out he somehow managed to restore a sense of truth and purpose to the proceedings.


KARIN ALEXIS WED TO AN ECONOMIST
LEAD: At Emmanuel Lutheran Church in Vienna, Va., Karin May Elizabeth Alexis, the daughter of May-Britt Alexis of Bethesda, Md., and Carl O. Alexis of Lincoln, Neb., was married yesterday to Christopher John Frenze, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley B. Frenze of Philadelphia and East Hampton, L.I., by the Rev.


DAY GRYMES WED TO ALLEN KEEL JR.
LEAD: Day Joanne Grymes and Allen Tison Keel Jr. were married yesterday at the Lamington Presbyterian Church in Bedminister, N.J.
The Rev.
Leon B. Gladdish performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
George Zabriskie 2d, an Episcopal priest and an uncle of the bride.


Indian History Alive at New York Site
LEAD: Three hundred years ago this month, French soldiers destroyed the Seneca village of Ganondagan in central New York State as part of the fight for control of the lucrative North American fur trade.


Wedtech Scandal Brings Civil Suit
LEAD: The widening net of the Wedtech scandal has so far brought criminal indictments to 19 people associated with Government favors for the South Bronx military contractor.
Last week, it encompassed another kind of action, a civil suit for $3.3 million, against E. Robert Wallach, a San Francisco lawyer and friend of Attorney General Edwin


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:  ALIVE AND WRITING: Interviews With American Authors of the 1980s.
Conducted and edited by Larry McCaffery and Sinda Gregory. (University of Illinois, $22.50.) As presented here, the reflections of Ann Beattie, Ursula Le Guin, Thomas McGuane, Edmund White and nine others offer an intriguing but one-sided view of American writing today.


A Woman, Fatally Stabbed, Falls or Is Pushed From Car
LEAD: A New Jersey woman was killed early yesterday when she fell or was pushed from a car after being stabbed once in the heart in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, the police said.


Cody Displays Art and Relics Of the West
LEAD: It is fitting that the Buffalo Bill Historical Center, an eclectic center of artworks and memorabilia inspired by the Western landscape and culture, is in Cody, Wyo.
For just out the door of the building, and a short drive up the road, the expansive, dun-colored Western plains rise up to meet the heavily timbered, wildlife-rich Yellowstone National Park.


Recent Sales
LEAD: Branford, Conn.  $205,000  39 Oak Hollow Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; cul-de-sac, finished basement with fireplace, 0.88 acre; taxes $1,531.
Guilford, Conn.  $180,000  2180 Durham Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old split level; 1.5 acres bordering river; taxes $1,582.


THE CAREFUL SHOPPER
LEAD:  Gems, Baby Gifts And Figurines  In celebration of its 60th year in New Rochelle, Talner Jewelers Roadside China (Roadside China was a store name in Yonkers for 30 years) is having an inventory sale through Saturday with 20 to 50 percent off regular prices.
Diamond rings, pendants, necklaces, bracelets and earrings are included in the one-fifth off category and the half-price cuts change the tags on Piaget watches, costume jewelry and costume pierced earrings.


A Sunset Park 'Fortress' Rescued From Destruction
LEAD: THE castlelike stationhouse of the old 18th Police Precinct has long been a landmark on Fourth Avenue in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn.
When it was vacated in 1970, deterioration of the 1892 building accelerated, and a fire in 1980 seemed to have sealed its fate.
But the Sunset Park School of Music purchased it at auction in 1984, after landmark designation, and it is now painstakingly collecting the $2.5 million it needs to restore the building.


TRANSPORT IS A HOT TOPIC IN FINLAND AND IRELAND
LEAD: Stamp issuing nations are flooding the philatelic market with hundreds of new issues.
Alert worldwide collectors should exercise discretion with regard to exploitative material, but there are many interesting and worthy new issues.


SRI LANKA AND INDIA TO SIGN PACT INTENDED TO END TAMIL REBELLION
LEAD: President J. R. Jayewardene said today that he would sign an agreement here next week with Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India that would end the Tamil separatist fighting.


City to Test Partial Midtown Ban on Bicycles
LEAD: Mayor Koch, who installed bicycle lanes in Manhattan in 1980 and then had to scrap them because they did not work, moved another step away last week from his one-time dream of turning New York into a cyclist's Beijing.
In an effort to preserve the lives and limbs of pedestrians, he said, bicycles will be banned from Park, Madison and Fifth Avenues between 31st and 59th Streets from 10 A.M.


Keys That Open The Locks to Worlds of the Past And to Distant Cultures
LEAD: KINGDOMS HAVE KEYS, cities have keys.
Omar Khayyam, searching for an answer, came up against a door to which there was no key; Sam Weller in ''The Pickwick Papers'' had the key to the street - which is another way of saying that he knew his way around; T. S. Eliot's narrator in ''The Waste Land'' heard the key turn in the door once and once only.


CATCHING THE WORLD
LEAD:  HAPPY HOUR  By Alan Shapiro. 45 pp.
Illinois: The University of Chicago Press.
Cloth, $16.
Paper, $7.95.
FORESEEABLE FUTURES  By William Matthews. 50 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Cloth, $13.95.
Paper, $8.95.
THE END OF BEAUTY  By Jorie Graham. 99 pp.
New York: The Ecco Press.


SEEING RAYS OF HOPE IN MIND'S DARKNESS
LEAD: ''IT ought to be a tough day today,'' Marion Berliner said to her staff at the 9 A.M. meeting.
The four counselors offered no comment, but the visitor looked up from his note-jotting.
Ms.
Berliner addressed him. ''For folks who haven't been here before,'' she said, ''after a three-day holiday -well, Monday is bad enough, but Tuesday after a three-day holiday is worse.


Settlement Is Granted Over O'Keeffe Estate
LEAD: A judge approved a final settlement today for the disposition of the estate of the artist Georgia O'Keeffe that includes the formation of a foundation to distribute many of her paintings to museums.


The New G.E.: Broadcasting but No Electronics
LEAD: The remaking of the General Electric Company tells a story about the nation's transition to a service economy: G.E. acquired a television network not long ago, and now it will no longer make television sets - or any other consumer electronics products.


A Call for Tenants To State Incomes
LEAD: To the Editor:


SALARY REVIEB OF 9,000 COUNTY JOBS BEGINS
LEAD: HOPING to avert a potential employment crisis in county government, the county has begun a $469,394 job-compensation study that will include a review of all 9,000 county jobs and is designed to develop a more equitable pay program for employees.


THE THINKING MAN'S CITY
LEAD:  NEW YORK INTELLECT  A History of Intellectual Life in New York City, From 1750 to the Beginnings of Our Own Time.
By Thomas Bender. 422 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Stranger Knocks, and a Thriller Begins
LEAD: ASTRANGER at the door is the catalyst for Ugo Betti's play ''Crime on Goat Island,'' translated from the Italian by Henry Reed.
The Arena Players Repertory Theater, which is staging the Betti play at its Main Stage, is also offering ''Victim,'' by another Italian, Mario Fratti, at its Second Stage theater, and it too opens with a stranger at the door.


Habitat: A Lonely Leader in Housing
LEAD: TWENTY years ago, at Expo 67 in Montreal, the architect Moshe Safdie presented Habitat, an experimental dwelling with an extraterrestial appearance.
Seven million visitors walked through it and perhaps 100 million more saw it on television, or read about how it might be the answer to urban housing crises all over the world.


Reagan's Top Aides Paint Conflicting Presidential Portraits By R. W. APPLE Jr.
LEAD: THE Congressional committees studying the Iran-contra affair will not hear testimony from President Reagan, so they will not have a chance to form a firsthand picture of his role in the controversy.
But Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter, two men who know him well and who met him often during the period in question, have drawn portraits of the


Ms. Puglielli and Peter Struzzi, Lawyers, to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Riccardo R. Puglielli of Rocky Hill, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lorella Puglielli, to Peter Henry Struzzi, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruno P. Struzzi of Jericho, L.I.
The wedding is to be April 16.


Trying to Save A House of Metal
LEAD: IT is not a big house - at 29 by 30 feet and three stories high - but it is made of aluminum and glass and was put together with nuts and bolts like an object fashioned from an Erector set.
Many experts say it is the country's first prefabricated house.


Credit and Credibility in Science
LEAD: After a steady trickle of fraud in academic science, there now comes a serious case of misrepresented data.
Charles J. Glueck, of the University of Cincinnati, reported that children can effectively be fed a low-cholesterol diet to prevent heart disease.
But the prescription may be false: a university committee found that the study was based on data that ''barely existed.


Kathleen Teichgraeber Wed to Godfrey Merrill
LEAD: At the First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich, Conn., Kathleen Teichgraeber, a daughter of Bernard E. Teichgraeber of Greenwich and the late Barbara Gehring Teichgraeber, was married yesterday to Godfrey David Merrill, the son of Stanley Merrill of Hertford, England, and the late Mrs.
Merrill.
The Rev.


Protecting Rights Of Wild Horses
LEAD: THE case in Federal court boiled down to this: Was the Government violating the rights of wild horses?


Faith in Newark
LEAD: Any number of New Jersey communities would covet a state center for the performing arts.
Governor Kean's endorsement of downtown Newark as the site for the $200 million project therefore makes a strong statement.
It demonstrates faith in a city more accustomed to cynicism, hope for a community more familiar with despair.


WHEN OUTS ARE IN, WHAT'S UP?
LEAD: BARBARA KRUGER SAYS SHE didn't have to think twice about it.
Sherrie Levine says it was like coming home.
But the decisions by the two artists to join the high-powered Mary Boone Gallery has unsettled the downtown art world.
The tremors filled the air in May, when the gallery showcased Kruger's photomontages for the first time, and they will reverberate anew in September, when an exhibition of


Bay Ridge
LEAD: THE breeze off New York Bay blows gently over scenes of the new and the old in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn.
In Dyker Beach Park, a group of elderly Italian men play boccie on a Sunday afternoon.
Blocks away, Asian immigrants, newcomers to Bay Ridge, window-shop along 86th Street.


Hot Turk Bites Howling Dog
LEAD: A heat wave gripping Turkey disturbed Kemal Pala, a gunsmith, so much that he bit his neighbor's howling dog, named Lassie, three times, the semi-official Anatolian News Agency said.The dog's owner, Mehmet Ahcioglu, reported the matter to the police in the western town of Biga.


On Arms, Moscow Has a Winning Image
LEAD: MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV has again shown his flair for the dramatic, casting himself as a dynamic leader willing to make important concessions on arms control.
And with his announcement last week that the Soviet Union is prepared to accept a worldwide ban on American and Soviet medium-range and short-range missiles, Mr.


Stage: Modern 'Visions of Don Juan'
LEAD: In ''Visions of Don Juan,'' Matthew Maguire's performance collage loosely inspired by the Don Juan legend, fragments of the plot and score of ''Don Giovanni'' are swirled together with references to 18th-century revolution, the lives of Mozart and his librettist, Lorenzo da Ponte, and contemporary erotic imagery to make a frantic jumble of a play that wants desperately to say something fresh about sex and revolution.


U.N. Striving for Tact in Its Fight on Drugs
LEAD: When the United Nations issued a report this year linking drug smuggling to terrorism and arms trafficking, it followed the rule of thumb for antidrug efforts here: never name names.


Kramer Is Arrested
LEAD: TOMMY KRAMER, the Minnesota Vikings starting quarterback, was arrested late Friday night and charged with drunken driving, authorities in Bloomington, Minn., said yesterday.


DAWN MURRAY IS A BRIDE
LEAD: Dawn Ellen Murray, a daughter of Bruce Wellington Murray of Rowayton, Conn., and the late Sandra Halley Murray, was married yesterday to Douglas Thomas Crumley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Thomas Crumley Jr. of Bon Air, Va.
The Rev.
John Livingston performed the ceremony at the United Church in Rowayton.


Parks Plan: a Brooklyn-Queens Path
LEAD: An ambitious plan to link parks, museums and other cultural and recreational centers in Brooklyn and Queens by way of a 40-mile bicycle and pedestrian path is one step closer to becoming a reality.


Companies are Racing To Recycle Cycles
LEAD: THE COMPACT DISK HAS made complete or sort-of-complete cycles of all kinds of things very fashionable, as record companies plumb the depths of their catalogues for items to entice collectors.
We have been seeing extensive reissues of Rubinstein, Callas, Toscanini, Walter and Furtwangler, among others.


The Risk of Insuring Drivers
LEAD: Like other professional sports stars, top-flight racing stars are as much businessmen as athletes.
Long gone are the days of the happy-go-lucky, greasy-fingernailed vagabonds closing bars in the early morning hours and then racing off their hangovers to the accompaniment of high-decibel exhaust notes.


DAVIS CUP REPRIEVE FOR U.S.
LEAD: The United States team, which had fully expected to come into this afternoon's doubles match at least even in its Davis Cup duel with West Germany, instead discovered itself on the brink of elimination from 1988 Cup contention after John McEnroe and Tim Mayotte dropped singles matches.


DOWN WITH IGNORANCE, LONG LIVE ONOTOLGY
LEAD: FOR a while we have had the extraordinary spectacle of two serious books that are highly critical of American life at the top of the nonfiction best-seller list, places usually held by humor, inspirational books and extraterrestrial experiences.
As of this issue of The Book Review, Allan Bloom's ''Closing of the American Mind'' is in first place and E.


A Degree of Detachment
LEAD: IT'S 10:15 ON A TUESDAY MORNING.
I'm at my desk, dictating out a stack of X-rays, when the phone rings.
It's Carol, our C.T. (computed tomography) scan technologist. ''Dr.
Shragg, we're ready to do the biopsy.'' ''I'll be right over,'' I tell her.
A woman has a tumor in her pancreas.
Her internist has asked me, the radiologist, to do a needle biopsy.


Ballet Leaps Over Borders
LEAD: DO NATIONAL STYLES IN BAL-let really exist?
This season has demonstrated the question to be thornier than ever.
As the annual tidal wave of visiting ballet companies from abroad begins to ebb, the differences rather than the similarities in their dance styles come to the fore.
No one would mistake the Bolshoi for anything but a Soviet company.


DATA UPDATE: July 26 1987
LEAD:
*4*HOUSING COSTS: N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
June
May
June 86
Rents [1]
131.9
0.5
7.4
Homeowner's costs [1]
132.5
0.5
7.2
Fuel and utilities [2]
374.5
3.0
-5.1
*Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.


CHILDREN CAN TEACH GARBAGE STRATEGIES
LEAD: ''GARBAGE BARGE'': Quite frankly, I got tired of reading about the six million pounds of garbage looking for a port.
For months, government officials tried to find a solution to this problem.
It really wasn't necessary to go down south to Louisiana or to exotic Belize to find the answer when it was much closer to home.


The Next Stop for a Spruced-Up Au Printemps
LEAD: WITH sidewalk chefs in their toques blanches pitching cookwear, demonstrators pushing vacuum cleaners, and a cacophony of voices hawking cheap cardigans, the scene in front of the Au Printemps department store sometimes looks like a Gallic parody of a Middle Eastern bazaar.


TWO-BIT SCAM IMPERILS FREE CASINO QUARTERS
LEAD: Those free rolls of quarters now being used to lure the small gambler to Atlantic City may soon become a thing of the past.


Headliners; Thinking Big
LEAD: Molly Yard swept into office as president of the National Organization for Women last weekend with no shortage of large goals.
The 70-ish Ms.
Yard - she refuses to disclose her exact age - said NOW would, among other things, work to block the Supreme Court confirmation of Judge Robert H. Bork, attempt to win the Democratic Presidential nomination for Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado, and muster a million marchers in support of an equal rights amendment to the Constitution.


KAREN RIEGER TO WED ERNEST TRACY 3d
LEAD: The engagement of Karen Bailey Rieger to Ernest Bell Tracy 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tracy Jr. of New York and Old Black Point in Niantic, Conn., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Harry G. Rieger Jr. of Haverford, Conn.


Telstar
LEAD: To the Editor:


MAKING IT IN BIG-TIME BRIDGE
LEAD: IF THE TITLE OF BEST BRIDGE PLAYER in the world existed, the strongest claimant to it would be an easygoing, cool-eyed Texan named Robert Hamman.
Over the past 10 years, Hamman has compiled the best record in the pressure-filled world of international tournament bridge.
Close behind is his longtime partner and fellow Texan, Bobby Wolff.


ELEGANT FRENCH IN STAMFORD
LEAD: WHEN the restaurant at the Inn at Mill River opened in Stamford some two years ago, its esthetically delightful presentations, inventive menu and culinary finesse merited an enthusiastic three stars.


49ers Acquire Hill
LEAD: THE San Francisco 49ers have fattened up considerably at wide receiver in the past two days, outbidding the Los Angeles Rams for free-agent Tony Hill only a day after trading for Johnny (Lam) Jones from the Jets.
In fact, the position may be a little fatter than desirable - the Dallas Cowboys waived


A HERO GONE OUT OF FASHION
LEAD:  SARTRE  A Life.
By Annie Cohen-Solal.
Edited by Norman MacAfee.
Translated by Anna Cancogni.
Illustrated. 591 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $24.95.


POLITICS LCANDIDATES' SPENDING BECOMES ISSUE
LEAD: WITH the legislative races drawing closer, some lawmakers are talking about trying to limit the amount of money that candidates can spend this year.


Patenting Life
LEAD: 'We've approved the patenting of plants in 1930, seeds in 1970, microbes in 1980, and now we've moved to considering patenting animals.
Next is human beings.
We need to look at this and consider some ground rules for proceeding down this path.'


Tough, Tight Race In the 4th District Seen by Both Sides
LEAD: WITH little time to savor their primary election victories last Tuesday, Christopher H. Shays and Christine M. Niedermeier began a four-week sprint last week toward a special election on Aug. 18 to fill the vacant Congressional seat in Connecticut's Fourth District.
Politicians in both parties rated it as an intense and potentially close race.


An Assertive Fed Awaits Greenspan
LEAD: ALAN GREENSPAN has impeccable credentials in economics.
But his talent as consensus-builder might prove to be the New York consultant's biggest asset when he takes over, as is expected, as chairman of an increasingly free-spirited Federal Reserve.


Another Day, Another Record
LEAD: Sunbathers with their chairs at water's edge yesteday at Orchard Beach in the Bronx as the temperature rose, for the fifth time in the week, past 90 degrees to a record-high 95.
Relief is due tomorrow. (NYT/Jim Wilson)


An East Village Comic Moves Uptown
LEAD: THERE IS A CERTAIN POETIC justice in Ann Magnuson's being invited to perform at Alice Tully Hall.


SEEKING MR. RIGHT
LEAD: Jack Kemp has one solution for all of the country's problems, from teen-age pregnancy to school prayer: cut taxes (''Is Jack Kemp Mr. Right?'' by Maureen Dowd, June 28).


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  MUSICAL MIX  In its weekly concert series at the Bayard Cutting Arboretum, the Islip Arts Council usually showcases groups or individuals who specialize in one musical genre or another: classical, jazz or pop.
But today One Alternative does it all.
Composed of Mark Oppenlander and Peter Sittler, guitarists, and Jill Haley, oboist and English horn player - in itself an unusual mix - the trio blends classical, jazz, pop and folk to create a sound that one member calls ''acoustic fusion.


Concert: Iso and the Bobs In Dance and Song Show
LEAD: THE concept of Serious Fun!, the name of Lincoln Center's adventurously eclectic performing arts series at Alice Tully Hall, could not have been illustrated more perfectly than in its Wednesday night program, which brought together two quartets - one dancing, the other singing.


Record 28 in a Row
LEAD: The Salt Lake Trappers tonight established the longest winning streak in the history of organized baseball by winning their 28th consecutive game, 13-3 over the Pocatello Giants in the Pioneer League.


Sports of Nature
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Recalling Kiviat
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Miss Haydock to Marry John Tibbetts
LEAD: Caroline Prioleau Haydock and John Rogers Tibbetts plan to marry in September, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Kent Haydock of Darien, Conn., have announced.
Mr.
Tibbetts is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul D. Tibbetts, also of Darien.


Texas Kicks Its Oil Dependency at Last
LEAD: IT took parliamentary contortions worthy of Rube Goldberg and the largest increase in state taxes in the nation's history, but Texas legislators last week finally adopted a spending and revenue blueprint that staved off financial chaos.


MARY E. HARRIS
LEAD: Mary E. Harris, an editor, producer and director of radio and television shows for many years, died of a heart attack in her Manhattan apartment on July 19.
She was 73 years old.


New Orleans Jazz With a Scholarly Beat
LEAD: THE URGE TO CREATE JAZZ repertory ensembles has been bubbling up sporadically for the last 20 or 30 years.
Orchestra U.S.A., the National Jazz Ensemble, the New York Jazz Repertory Company and the New York Jazz Repertory Orchestra have come and gone, although the American Jazz Orchestra is just completing its first year.


Worthy Guides By Small Presses
LEAD: The airport shop does not display every useful travel book out there with its murder mysteries; some valuable resources come from small presses or membership organizations and must be ordered in advance.
Here are some of this season's helpful materials.


In Canada's North, Spread of AIDS Is Feared
LEAD: If the uninhibited sexual mores of young Eskimos lead to an AIDS epidemic in Canada's far north, it will not be because Nader Barsoum didn't try to prevent it.


GRILLED CHICKEN, PLAIN AND SIMPLE, AS A SUMMER CENTERPIECE
LEAD: BECAUSE it is so versatile, chicken is the most popular meat for summer cooking.


Woman Slain in Hotel; Husband Is Detained
LEAD: A 37-year-old Manhattan woman died after having been beaten by her husband in a midtown hotel room early yesterday, the police said.


NORWALK ASKS CITIZENS TO COMPLAIN
LEAD: A NEW citizen's memo system in Norwalk makes it easy for residents to take their complaints to the top, and hundreds of them have already availed themselves of their opportunity.


Worlds in Collision: From Barrio to Harvard to Jail
LEAD: When Jose Razo entered Harvard University in the fall of 1985, he seemed to blend in easily.
Like most members of the freshman class, he had a bright, inquiring mind and had earned straight A's in high school.


Prosecute Unstable Owners Who Abuse Pit Bulls
LEAD: To the Editor:


DOCUMENTARY
LEAD:  Vietnam: Legacies - Volume 7  Chief correspondent, Stanley Karnow; producer, Elizabeth Deane; executive producer, Richard Ellison.
Sony Video Software. 60 minutes. $19.95.
The legacies of the 10-year war in Vietnam - longer than World Wars I and II together - are illustrated in the final film in the series, ''Vietnam: A Television History,'' originally presented by WGBH-Boston as a 13-hour series on public television.


SALMON REACH THE HOLYOKE DAM
LEAD: The June 28 issue carried a very fine article on the progress being made with the restoration of Atlantic salmon in the Connecticut River  [ '' '87 Is Termed an Upswing Year for Salmon Restoration'' ] .
However, it contained one glitch.
The article erroneously said that no salmon have ever reached the top of the Holyoke dam across the Connecticut River.


When an Economy Goes Underground
LEAD: For years, Latin American economists have attributed underdevelopment to ''dependency'' and the unfair ''exchange terms'' of third world primary goods for manufactured products from the advanced nations.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''A large number of Americans now see the Sandinistas as a very unfortunate Government.


STATE LINKS RISING DRUG DEATHS TO HEROIN MIX
LEAD: STATE health specialists are concerned about an abnormally high number of deaths among intravenous drug users taking a highly addictive mixture of heroin, which might be purer than usual, and cocaine.


THE BATTLE TO WIRE THE CONSUMER
LEAD: IN the old days, the only way to find out how many people were watching a network television show was to check the Nielsens.
CBS, ABC and NBC, along with advertising agencies and a few consumer products companies, paid tidy sums for access to the Nielsen ratings.
They used them to decide which shows would live to see another season and how much commercials on those shows would cost.


Nicholas Gravante Jr. Marries Evelyn Kling
LEAD: At St.
Edward the Confessor Roman Catholic Church in New Fairfield, Conn., Evelyn Edwards Kling, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Kling of Pittsford, N.Y., was married yesterday to Nicholas Andrew Gravante Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gravante of Brooklyn and New Fairfield.
The Rev.
Brian Gray performed the ceremony.


No Olympics In North Korea
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


For Congress, Iran-Contra Hearings Offer Chance to Seek More Say in Foreign Policy
LEAD: What the nation has been reading about and watching on television these last weeks is not, in the strictest sense, a Congressional investigation.
Had the only purpose been to gain insights into what went wrong and to provide legislative remedies for the problem, that could easily have been done in private.


Susan Hodes Plans to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Hodes of Katonah, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Dean Hodes to Richard Hope O'Leary, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James J. O'Leary of Oyster Harbors, Mass. and John's Island, Fla.
A September wedding is planned.


Headliners; Moving On
LEAD: After 10 years as the senior minister of the Riverside Church, the Rev.
William Sloane Coffin has chosen another sort of pulpit.
At services last Sunday, Dr.
Coffin announced that he was resigning to become head of a Washington-based disarmament organization called SANE/Freeze.
Dr.
Coffin, who was outspoken in his support of civil rights and in his opposition to the Vietnam War while he was the chaplain at Yale University from 1958 to 1976, said his decision to leave Riverside had to do with ''the shadow of Doomsday.


France Charges 2 Lebanese Questioned on '86 Bombings
LEAD: Two of three Lebanese being questioned about a series of bomb attacks in Paris last year were charged today with involvement in guerrilla attacks.


; What Radio Is Saying . . .
LEAD: NOTHING INVIGORATES the mass media the way reality does.
When we watch Jesse Orosco pitching in the World Series, when we watch a terrorist holding a gun to the neck of a T.W.A. captain or even when we watch a winner on ''Wheel of Fortune'' jumping for joy - the television set is suddenly injected with a special drama.


TYRANNY OF THE BEEP
LEAD: I AM a writer, and I work at home.


Selling the Sidewalk Frank
LEAD: ''HERE we go, first dog of the day,'' Louie Stathopoulos said jubilantly.
He flipped open a silver lid and snatched a roll.
He stabbed a dog off the grill and stuffed it into the bun.
After swabbing on some mustard, onions and sauerkraut, he wrapped the whole thing in a napkin and handed it over. ''O.K.,'' he said.


BEATRICE S. DOERING TO MARRY C. L. SHEA
LEAD: Beatrice Suzanne Doering and Christopher Lane Shea, a son of Nancy Bowditch of New York and Peter L. Shea of New York and Locust Valley, L.I., plan to marry Sept. 26, the parents of the future bride, Dr. and Mrs.
Eckart G. Doering of Riverside, Conn., have announced.


Submarine Ball
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reagan Assails House Bill To Cover Major Illness Cost
LEAD: President Reagan today assailed a bill passed by the House to protect the elderly against the costs of catastrophic illness, saying it would impose a heavy new tax on the elderly and could bankrupt the Medicare trust fund.


DON'T COOK MOTHER GOOSE
LEAD: NURSERY rhymes, Walter de la Mare wrote, ''call for as little in the way of introduction as . . .
Santa Claus'' and are ''surer of perpetuity than the Pyramids of Egypt.'' They ''free the fancy, charm tongue and ear, delight the inward eye, and many of them are tiny masterpieces of verbal craftsmanship.


Business Park With Designing Computer
LEAD: A BUSINESS PARK under construction off Route 68 in Wallingford will offer tenants an optional service that they may share at a fraction of the cost to an individual buyer.


GOVERNORS ASSERT KEY TO PROSPERITY IS A GLOBAL OUTLOOK
LEAD: In a major initiative, the nation's governors today outlined a new philosophy, as well as specific proposals, for improving America's competitive economic position and reducing gaps in prosperity among regions of the country.


Shifting Gears in Pursuit of Equality
LEAD: THE National Urban League had billed its 77th annual convention, held here last week, as one of its most important ever.
Thousands of participants gathered to develop fresh approaches to the persistent problems facing black Americans.
But after four days of speeches and meetings, the organization's president, John E.


'Remarkable' Theater Comes To West Berlin
LEAD: EACH YEAR IN WEST BER-lin, the Theatertreffen (Theater Discoveries), a three-week festival of stage productions culled from theaters throughout German-speaking countries, offers a reliable, if unofficial, barometer of the type of drama currently popular in this part of the world.
The event includes 12 major productions: new versions of classic works; foreign plays, old and new, and original works that have been judged important enough to be invited to this prestigious festival.


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


POSTINGS: St. Thomas Choir; A Larger School
LEAD: The boys' choir of St.
Thomas Church will soon have a new boarding school in which to practice its Kyrie eleisons, far larger and more elaborate than the old one on West 55th Street between Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue.
The 15-story structure, at 202 West 58th Street off Seventh Avenue, designed by Buttrick, White &amp; Burtis of Manhattan and almost finished, grew out of a real estate deal between the church and Fisher Brothers, a


DIRECTOR IS SERIOUS ABOUT COMEDY
LEAD: MARSHALL BRICKMAN is hooked on gadgets.


Opera: Richard Leech As Gounod's Faust
LEAD: SERGIU COMISSIONA'S first season as music director at the New York City Opera is if anything an exercise in variety.
He is conducting three familiar items of widely differing style.
The ''Cavalleria Rusticana'' and ''Pagliacci'' double bill and Mozart's ''Magic Flute'' are two, and Friday night he dipped into French Romanticism and Gounod's ''Faust.


Roberta Linda Greenberg To Wed Mark D. Shapiro
LEAD: Dr.
Julian Greenberg of Elmont, L.I., and Highland Beach, Fla., and Dr.
Betty Z. Greenberg of North Woodmere, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Roberta Linda Greenberg, to Mark Desmond Shapiro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hym Shapiro of Johannesburg and Sydney, Australia.
The couple plan to marry Oct.


Art
LEAD: The 16th show in the lobby of One Penn Plaza (33d Street and Seventh Avenue) is one of several exhibitions that have recently been organized on geometric abstraction.
It is called ''Romantic Science.'' The curator is the painter and critic Stephen Westfall, one of today's most reliable guides to abstract painting.


The Smoking Cannon
LEAD: Secretary of State Shultz put a critical piece of a still-incomplete Iran-contra puzzle into place last week. ''I don't know where anybody got that idea,'' he said, ''that the President just sits around not paying attention.


ONE OF THE GRANDEST SIGHTS
LEAD: What a nice, old-fashioned feeling amazement is.
Here is Amos T. Root in 1905, describing ''the first circling flight ever made by a heavier-than-air machine.'' It is quoted in ''Wilbur and Orville: A Biography of the Wright Brothers'' (Knopf) by Fred Howard.


JEWELER DELIGHTS IN MULTIFACETED LIFE
LEAD: IN the eyes of Ralph Destino, chairman of Cartier Inc., not all gems are equal.


Swiss Vow to Try Hijacker Despite Terrorism Risk
LEAD: Switzerland's President said today that a captured Lebanese hijacker would be put on trial, despite fears that the people of this peaceful and neutral country might face Arab terrorist reprisal.


Texas Judge Picked for F.B.I.
LEAD: AFTER a four-month search and a reported half-dozen refusals, Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d last week found for President Reagan a man who will accept nomination as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation: William S. Sessions, 57, chief judge of the Federal District Court of the Western district of Texas.


TALES OF PART-TIME TEACHING
LEAD: Marian Chatfield-Taylor's article  [ ''The Sorry Success of a Part-Time Teacher,'' Opinion page, June 21 ]  summoned still-vivid memories of two experiences I had with Norwalk Community College three years ago:


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  SILHOUETTES  Does the name Etienne de Silhouette ring a bell?
Only the last part, right?
He was a controller general in the court of Louis XV who whiled away his retirement by cutting paper into landscapes and the shapes of people.


WELFARE RENT IN BRIDGEPORT
LEAD: I am writing to bring to your attention several factual errors in the June 7 article entitled ''Suit Challenges Welfare Rent'' by Sharon L. Bass.
Ms.
Bass states that ''a single person receives $157.72 a month for shelter and $251 for food, utilities and clothing.'' In fact, in the city of Bridgeport they would receive a maximum of $118 a month for rent for an unfurnished apartment, and a maximum of $310 a month for a furnished apartment.


New Ideas In Housing The Aged
LEAD: THE Fullerton Retirement Inn, a Spanish-style building of rental apartments in this community about an hour's drive south of Los Angeles, is the oldest of eight such complexes operated by Retirement Inns of America.
It was built 10 years ago.


Classical
LEAD: Singers and instrumentalists seldom venture outdoors alone.
The weather (when right) can be an excellent accomplice, but the haphazards of an uncontrolled environment - plus the problem of hearing one's self properly without surrounding walls and ceiling - remain very real.


RESIDENTIAL RESALES
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended July 11  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $405,000  7 East 20th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,117-sq.-ft. loft condo in a renovated prewar building; windowed kitchen, high-ceilings, living/work area; common charges $562, taxes $1,716 (Broker:


Sudan Declares Emergency Amid Wide Economic Crisis
LEAD: The Government, plagued by a 4-year civil war, today declared a nationwide state of emergency and said it was necessary because of a rapidly deteriorating economic situation.


The Story Unfolds
LEAD: Sentiment on the Iran-contra committees swung during the week from general skepticism and disapproval of Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter's final testimony on Tuesday to acceptance and praise of Secretary of State George P. Shultz's candor at week's end.
Highlights of the week's developments follow.


The Grateful Dead, Most Alive on the Stage
LEAD: IN THEORY, THE GRATEFUL Dead are irresistible.
Here's what they do: They roll into town, set up, play for about four hours and move on.
What they play depends on the six musicians' moods.
It might be a song they just finished, anything they've recorded in the last 20 years, an affectionate version of something by Buddy Holly or by Merle


U.S. Fears Soviet Use of New Nicaraguan Airfield
LEAD: Administration officials say the Nicaraguan Government has almost completed work on the longest airfield in Central America, which they fear the Soviet Union might use to extend its reconnaisance missions in this hemisphere.


SCOTT PRESTON SPECTOR TO MARRY HOLLY WARD
LEAD: Betty Holland Ward of New Orleans has announced the engagement of her daughter Elizabeth Holland Ward to Scott Preston Spector, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome Spector of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
The couple plan to marry Aug. 22.


Kristin Chase Has Wedding
LEAD: The wedding of Kristin Ann Chase, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Weldon Alvah Chase of West Simsbury, Conn., to Donald Beales Taylor, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Sedgwick Taylor of Locust Valley, L.I., took place yesterday at the First Church of Christ in Simsbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Nancy S. Taylor, a


Helistat Is Gone; Its Concept Lives
LEAD: ONE of Frank N. Piasecki's big ideas, the Helistat - part airship, part helicopter - went up in flames a year ago this month.
Another idea has risen from the ashes.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE MAN WHO ROBBED THE PIERRE: The Story of Bobby Comfort.
By Ira Berkow. (Atheneum, $17.95.) It was a caper out of a Hollywood production of the 1930's: five dinner-jacketed thieves walk into a deluxe Manhattan hotel, handcuff 19 employees and guests and walk out with more than $10 million in jewels and cash.


Justice Blackmun Treated for Cancer
LEAD: Justice Harry A. Blackmun of the Supreme Court is undergoing treatment for prostate cancer and has an ''excellent'' prognosis, the Mayo Clinic said last week.
The clinic reported a ''small and localized recurrence'' of cancer that led to surgery 10 years ago.
The clinic described the treatment as ''not incapacitating,'' and a Court spokeswoman said Justice Blackmun was preparing for the next term.


The Job Market Opens Up for the 68-Cent Woman
LEAD: Not long ago women's groups distributed buttons reading ''59 cents,'' the amount that working women were paid, on average, for each dollar earned by a man.
The good news and the bad news, according to a study issued last week by a Congressional group, is that the figure is now 68 cents.


The 19th Century in Its Seaside Glory
LEAD: Today the seaside promenade is concrete and the lantern posts are topped by electric lights.
But it doesn't take much to imagine Biarritz in the 19th century: ladies in long dresses sweeping down the wooden boardwalk, pausing at one end of the curving Grand Plage to gaze up at the stately palace of Napoleon III and Empress Eugenie, spinning on their heels with parasols tilted toward the summer's late sunset and walking slowly under the gas lanterns toward the flickering lights in the restaurants and hotels at the far end of the beach while the twin flashes of the St.


Some Close Calls At the Plate
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


The North Beyond the Grit
LEAD: ''Where does the North of England begin?'' I was asked the other day at a meeting in the quiet Lincolnshire town of Boston, which is itself placed uncertainly about halfway up the map, just beyond the Wash, but south of the great conurbations that lie on either side of the Pennines.
None of us had an answer, though one woman declared that the North was a state of mind; if you're born with it, you can never escape.


West Africa Becomes Route for Heroin Trade
LEAD: Pakistani heroin increasingly reaches the streets of the United States and Britain by an unexpected route - West Africa.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  PUZZLES IN YONKERS


GULF MINES SIGHTED SOUTH OF AREA OF FRIDAY BLAST
LEAD: Merchant vessels in the Persian Gulf reported a new sighting of mines today, off the Saudi Arabian coast and south of the area where a Kuwaiti tanker flying the American flag and escorted by American warships struck a mine on Friday.


S.D.S. With Blinders?
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Accepting Labor as a Legitimate Partner
LEAD: PROFITS, productivity and technological change are not fighting words for most American union leaders, provided workers are given the opportunity to share in the benefits of economic advance and as long as economic progress is achieved through strategies that respect worker rights and needs.


Soviet Explorers of the New World
LEAD: AS THE MEMBERS OF THE Taneyev Quartet prepared to visit the United States, where they will make their American debut in New York on Friday at a free concert at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine and at the Music Mountain festival in Connecticut on Saturday and Sunday, they wanted to know one thing: where in the New York area they could obtain music by Aaron Copland, Samuel Barber, Charles Ives and other


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  IN THE LONG RUN.
By N. J. Crisp. (Viking, $16.95.) Competent thrillers may be a dime a dozen in the world of figurative speech, but in the airport bookshop they cost considerably more.
That's why most of us frequent fliers look for something beyond the swift plot and pungent dollops of sex and violence that are standard in the genre.


SEPTEMBER WEDDING FOR LINDLEY BENNETT
LEAD: Edith Coopersmith Bennett of McLean, Va., and Frank C. Bennett Jr., the American Consul General in Melbourne, Australia, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lindley Elizabeth Bennett, to Leonard Weinberg 2d, a son of Robert L. Weinberg and Lois M. Halle, both of Baltimore.
A September wedding is planned.


Tyson and Tucker Stir Little Interest For Unified Title
LEAD: THE fight is for the unified heavyweight title, and ordinarily that sort of matchup would be a hot ticket.


HENDERSON HURT AND LEAVES GAME
LEAD: The Problem With Rickey, a theme that created impatience in the Yankee clubhouse this week, may have moved several steps toward mutual understanding today.
Unfortunately for Rickey Henderson and his Yankee teammates, the steps he took this afternoon were painful ones.


Businessmen and Apartheid
LEAD:  To the Editor:


BOUNDARY ISSUE AT L.I. BEACH
LEAD: THE New York State Supreme Court has been asked to rule on whether anglers have a legal right to fish from a stretch of privately owned beach on East Island in the city of Glen Cove on Long Island.


SARA JOHNSTON A BRIDE
LEAD: The wedding of Sara Cushing Johnston to Alexander John Skene Jr. took place yesterday at the Lyman estate in Waltham, Mass.
The Rev.
Timothy Ashton of the Unitarian-Universalist Association performed the ceremony.
The bride's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
James Gilchrist Johnston of West Boothbay Harbor, Me.


STEPHANIE ARLIS IS MARRIED TO ROWLAND BROOK MAYOR
LEAD: Stephanie Lynn Arlis and Rowland Brook Mayor, third-year medical students at the Jefferson Medical School and the University of Pennsylvania, respectively, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
George Passias performed the ceremony at St.
Nicholas Greek Orthodox Church in Flushing, Queens.
The couple's parents are Mr.


Officials Cite 24 Food Outlets
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 24 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


Child vs. Unleashed Dog in the Park
LEAD: For the last several years residents near Laurel Canyon Park, a four-acre patch of green in an affluent area of Los Angeles, have been divided over who should take precedence: playing children or unleashed dogs.


Meatpacker Gets Record OSHA Fine
LEAD: IBP Inc., the nation's largest meatpacking company, was accused last week of engaging in the worst case of poor record-keeping on record in matters of worker safety and health.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration proposed to fine the company a record $2.59 million for ''willfully failing'' to record 1,038 job-related injuries an illnesses at an plant in


WHAT'S NEW IN BOOK DISTRIBUTION
LEAD: WHEN Warner Books, a power in paperback publishing, started publishing hardcover books a few years ago, it wanted to establish immediate credibility with booksellers.
So, in an agreement drawn up on a napkin in a midtown Manhattan restaurant, it struck a deal with Random House, an old pro in the business.


THERE ONCE WAS A HOUSE, A HANDYMAN'S SPECIAL...
LEAD: THERE was the house rising in dilapidated splendor high on a hill.
Worn and peeling from neglect, it cried for gallons of paint.
The lopsided shutters trembled with each passing breeze, and rusted hinges groaned over their burden.
The grounds were fields of hay waving lazily as though beckoning each passerby to intrude in its massive sanctuary.


Setting Baseball Record Straight
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


NEW FROM SEOUL: PRINTING THE NEWS
LEAD: As portrayed in local newspapers and in television newscasts until the end of June, South Korea was a land of ribbon-cuttings, official visits, sports, harmony and not much else.


Miss Gilbert Plans to Wed Paul J. Wallice on Sept. 26
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
George J. Gilbert Jr. of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., and Dataw Island, Beaufort, S.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter Stacie Gilbert to Paul Joseph Wallice, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Wallice of Huntington Bay, L.I.
The wedding is to be Sept. 26.


A Mine Sends Shock Waves Through U.S. Policy in Gulf
LEAD: LESS than three months after an Iraqi missile killed 37 American Navy sailors aboard the frigate Stark, the United States was plunged anew last week into a critical debate over the scope, purpose and prospects of its role in the Persian Gulf and its credibility throughout the Arab world.


NEW YORK NURSE PRACTITIONERS WONDER ABOUT FUTURE AFTER A DEFEAT
LEAD: A major legislative defeat this summer has left New York's 3,000 nurse practitioners -nurses with advanced training in diagnosis and treatment - wondering if their calling has a future in the state.


. . . And Why Radio Still Sings
LEAD: WHAT'S GOING ON? A banker outside of


Taneyev Quartet At Music Mountain
LEAD: THE cultural doors between East and West are opening.
On a recent trip to the Soviet


SHE HAD HER LIFE TO LIVE OVER
LEAD:  THE SEARCH FOR OMM SETY  A Story of Eternal Love.
By Jonathan Cott with Hanny El Zeini.
Illustrated. 256 pp.
New York: Doubleday &amp; Company. $17.95.


MAKING OUR SCHOOLS BETTER THROUGH INVOLVEMENT
LEAD: OUR nation needs outstanding public schools.
If we are to have them, we know that we need to attract talented, bright people to become teachers and administrators.
But there is another fundamental need we often overlook.
We need local townspeople to become involved.
We need people who are willing to consider running for the local board of education.


TRADING ONE TRYANNY FOR ANOTHER
LEAD:  CUZCATLAN  Where the Southern Sea Beats.
By Manlio Argueta.
Translated by Clark Hansen. 255 pp.
New York: Aventura/Vintage Books.
Paper, $7.95.


Scouts Crisscross The State
LEAD: THE tools of their trade are ''ray'' and ''jug'' guns and stopwatches.
But, unlike most scouts, Tony Marrucco of Stamford never uses the ''guns'' to calculate the velocity of a potential major league baseball prospect's fast ball.


Question Of the Week; Are Knicks Back on Track Now?
LEAD: In order for the Knicks to be back on track, the philosophy of upper-level management must change.
Arthur Barron and Dick Evans, are you listening?


Group Working to Reunify Americans With Soviet Spouses
LEAD: They are, by their own admission, people with an obsession, a handful of Americans scattered across the United States who have waged lonely and often fruitless battles to get permission for their Soviet spouses to leave the Soviet Union.


Janet Wolf and Neil Seiden Are Married in Jersey
LEAD: Janet Wolf, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Wolf of West Orange, N.J., and Neil Alan Seiden, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Seiden of Forest Hills, Queens, were married last evening at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Cantor Theodore Aronson performed the ceremony.


FARM'S SWEET CORN AND MEMORIES
LEAD: ''ANOTHER small farmer bankrupt.'' ''Developers gobbling up farmland.'' -Newspaper headlines, June 1987.
Was all this about me?
No.
My farm story was different.
What good memories I have.
Selling fresh-picked sweet corn and other Long Island vegetables in season from a farm stand on the edge of busy Route 25A in


FORREST E. KENDALL
LEAD: Forrest E. Kendall, a professor emeritus of biochemistry at Columbia University, died of a heart attack yesterday in North Shore University Hospital, in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 88 years old and lived in Douglaston, Queens.


Police Psychologist Helps Peers Cope
LEAD: A FEW weeks ago, Dr.
Julia Ramos-McKay's telephone rang at midnight.
It was the police.
They needed her help in a hostage situation.


Dozens Reported Dead in Haiti Land Disputes
LEAD: Peasants demanding land reform and crowds of people working for landowners have battled with machetes in a clash that may have killed 50 and wounded many more, radio stations reported today.


Under International Law, Reflagging Doesn't Fly
LEAD: To the Editor:


Treasure Hunters Dive 2 1/2 Miles to the Titanic
LEAD: The crew searching for treasure from the Titanic dived to the sunken liner today in a small submarine, accompanied by a robot craft named Robin.


Asian Viewpoint
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Steaks
LEAD: To the Editor: In January 1985 you had an article about the ''best steaks in Great Britain.'' I kept it, thinking I might be near Edinburgh some time.
Recently I was there looking for a good place to eat.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  THE FLOOD.
By Carol Ascher. (Crossing Press, $16.95.) Carol Ascher's first novel attempts to set in motion some powerful themes.
The Hoffmans, Jewish refugees from World War II Vienna, have settled in Topeka, Kan., where father David is a doctor at a psychoanalytic hospital.
The time is the early 1950's, and Topeka's Brown v.


Broadway's Grand Cinemas Are Fading Away
LEAD: WITHOUT sweeping searchlights, white-gloved ushers, mighty Wurlitzer organs - indeed, without any fanfare or protest or notice at all - Broadway is losing almost every vestige of its moviegoing past.


John DeLuca Is Dead at 43; Vice President for Primerica
LEAD: John R. DeLuca, vice president of health care business development for the Primerica Corporation, died of bone marrow cancer on July 18 at Memorial-Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 43 years old and lived in Weston, Conn.


IT'S HARD TO GAUGE EXPOSURE AT THE BEACH
LEAD: Keeping cameras out of harm's way isn't the only problem photographers face at the beach.
There's the small matter of taking pictures.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Strategy For Olympics In Calgary


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Burning Up the Course: Robert Wrenn, who started play yesterday with the lowest 36-hole total on the PGA Tour this season, shot a five-under-par 67 for a six-stroke lead after three rounds of the Buick Open at Grand Blanc, Mich.
Wrenn was at 21-under-par 195.
Ken Green, the 1985 champion, shot 69 on the 7,014-yard Warwick Hills Golf and Country Club course and was in second place.


Johannesburg Township Celebrates a Birthday
LEAD: Fifteen months ago, this impoverished township adjoining Johannesburg's affluent suburbs witnessed grim street battles between black youths and policemen.
But today, Alexandra erupted into a joyous 12-hour celebration of the 104th birthday of the Rev.
Alson Dlamini.
Accompanied by his 101-year-old wife, Jessie, Mr.


COMMERCE SECRETARY BALDRIGE DIES IN RODEO ACCIDENT IN CALIFORNIA
LEAD: Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige died at a hospital here today hours after a horse he was riding in a calf-roping event fell on him.


Telstar
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q. &amp; A.: RAISING SAGGING BEAMS
LEAD: Q. Our 25-year-old house has a large living-dining area with an attractive hardwood floor that is in good condition.
However, although we did not notice the problem originally, in the past few years we have discovered that there is a decided sag to this floor in the middle of the room - it seems the floor beams or joists have sagged or warped, creating a dip.


Charges Dismissed
LEAD: A Federal judge in Memphis has dismissed two of 11 criminal charges filed against the former Memphis State basketball coach, Dana Kirk.
The charges were dismissed because of a recent ruling by the United States Supreme Court that has redrawn the legal definition of mail fraud, said United States Attorney Hickman Ewing Jr.


Hikers Mark Beginning Of the Appalachian Trail
LEAD: For 50 years, the 2,096-mile Appalachian Trail has successfully dodged developers, fought off shopping centers and ducked highways from Maine to Georgia.
Today hikers, trail volunteers and park officials gathered here to mark where the grand lady of American hiking trails began.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  THE ART OF SOUTH NORWALK  South Norwalk's Washington Street has undergone major changes since the first SoNo Summer Arts Festival was held 11 years ago.
Organized by a small group of artists who had found cheap living quarters in the neighborhood, the festival became a yearly tradition.


When Troubled Companies Offer Rights
LEAD: LAST Monday, the BancTexas Group, a beleaguered Dallas-based holding company, completed a huge financial restructuring that swung its net worth from a negative $98 million to a positive $90 million.
The mechanics included a $150 million infusion of capital from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the forgiveness of substantial debt, and - perhaps most bewildering to the average investor - the use of a little-known financing technque called a rights offering, which enables existing stockholders to purchase additional shares at a discount from the market price.


CLARIFYING JEWISH LAW ON INTERFAITH MARRIAGES
LEAD: The recent article ''Interfaith Bridals: Chapels in Demand'' gives the impression that there is a ''clerical stable'' of clergy - including many rabbis who will officiate at interfaith weddings.
That is not the reality on Long Island.


WHO'S THE BOY AT THE COUNTER? THE BOSS
LEAD: JOHN ANDREWS has become accustomed to new customers at the J&amp;J Bait and Tackle Shop along the Clinton waterfront asking him the whereabouts of the owner.
That is not surprising, because John is 12 years old and, at 4 feet 11 inches, can barely see over the counter.


Business Climates
LEAD: To the Editor:


A WRATHFUL 'CORIOLANUS' IS AT DREWN
LEAD: HOW does one describe the Roman general Caius Marcius, otherwise known as Coriolanus?
Was he:


BABY M COURT CASE IS DEBATED ANEW
LEAD: ''A CONTRACT is a contract, and she should have to live up to it.''


No Rush for the Mitchell-Lama Buyouts
LEAD: ON July 18, Jamie Towers in the Castle Hill section of the Bronx became the 59th housing project in New York State's Mitchell-Lama program to reach its 20th anniversary and thereby become eligible to leave the middle-income government subsidized housing program.


MAKING NURSING MORE APPEALING
LEAD: I was pleased to read the article by Peggy McCarthy on state planning to increase the number of practicing nurses  [ ''State Plan Urged to Gain Nurses,'' June 21  ] .
That Dr.
Norma Foreman Glasgow, the Commissioner of Higher Education, is calling for a broad and concerted effort to make the profession more attractive is encouraging.


U.S. SAID TO BRACE FOR IRANIAN RAIDS
LEAD: A senior Government official said this week that the United States was bracing for Iranian attacks as a possible response to United States naval protection of Kuwaiti tankers.


MUSIC
LEAD:  Classical Images: A Concert in Nature  New Philharmonic Masterpiece Orchestra.
Kultur. 45 minutes. $29.95.
Stormy surf crashing to the strains of ''Swan Lake''; icicles melting to the melodies of Mozart; ducklings paddling, in slow-motion circles, to Schumann: ''Soothing'' is the word Kultur International uses to describe this program of outdoor scenes and classical favorites.


BTTLING BUGS AND WEEDS
LEAD: WEEDS usurp valuable soil moisture and nutrients; pull them up and add to the compost pile.
Divide and replant established clumps of the early daylilies and bearded irises.
Set out traps for slugs since they devour valuable garden plants.
Keep after Japanese beetles which favor roses, grapevines, corn silk, zinnias and many summer annuals.


North Star
LEAD: To the Editor: The letter on Newport (Travel, June 14), calling attention to the Museum of Yachting, was illustrated by a picture of a yacht alleged to be Commodore Vanderbilt's North Star.
The vessel pictured was not the original North Star belonging to the Commodore but one also named North Star that belonged to the Commodore's great-grandson, Cornelius


A Boost for Deprived Areas
LEAD: Ten of New York State's most economically depressed communities had reason to cheer up last week.
Governor Cuomo announced that the communities would be the first to be eligible for a broad set of tax breaks and other subsidies aimed at attracting new businesses.


The Two Faces Of Adelaide
LEAD: Picture San Francisco without the hills, or Cambridge, Mass., without the river, or Savannah without the azaleas.
That's Adelaide, which too has enlightened restoration of its 19th-century architecture, good food and spectacular scenery.
But there is more: just one step from the outback, Adelaide embodies


Hispanic Pupils' Plight Cited in Study
LEAD: Hispanic children around the country are increasingly attending segregated schools, and New York is the most segregated state of all for the students, according to a study of Federal data on school enrollment by researchers at the University of Chicago.


Rev. S. R. Garratt Wed to Miss Niles
LEAD: Margaret Niles, an associate in the law firm of Garvey, Schubert, Adams &amp; Barer in Seattle, and the Rev.
Stephen Richard Garratt, the assistant to the rector of St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Seattle, were married yesterday.
Bishop Robert H. Cochrane of the Diocese of Olympia, Wash., performed the ceremony at St.


Penny Levitt Wed To David Bennett
LEAD: Penny Aleen Levitt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian Levitt of Mountainside, N.J., was married yesterday to David McDowell Bennett, a son of Mrs.
Alfred M. Bennett of Norwalk, Conn., and the late Dr.
Bennett.
The Rev.
Elmer Talcott, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Stronghold Mansion on the campus of the Gill-St.


Dance: Creative Time Gives Mixed Bill in Park
LEAD: AS usual, any performing situation in the great outdoors of Central Park has its special dimension.
The weekly dance concert presented by Creative Time as part of Central Park's SummerStage series was provided with extra drama Friday night when lightning accompanied three pieces by Ann Carlson.


Report From the Interior
LEAD:
Unlike architecture, much in interior design history is fleeting and unrecorded.
In contrast to architects, decorators have not traditionally written philosophical treatises on their work -perhaps, C. Ray Smith suggests, because they've never had a philosophy.
Then there is the matter of pioneering female decorators like Ruby Ross Wood who, owing to vanity, never divulged their birth dates; all this makes the historian's job trying, at best.


O'Brien Holds Out As Jets Open Camp
LEAD: The advance contingent of the largest collection of football hopefuls ever invited to a Jet training camp began the countdown to the 1987 season today.


In Bethlehem, Focus Is on Wood
LEAD: AN EASILY overlooked exhibition space among the tourist attractions in one of New Jersey's neighboring cities - historic Bethlehem, Pa. - is a gallery in the Luckenbach Mill. which houses the local Visitors Center.


Next Week; Will Taylor's Drug Story Hurt Giants?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


MISS GRAVES WED TO DAVID SAVAGE IN MASSACHUSETTS
LEAD: Sara Evans Graves, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Graves of New York and Chilmark, Mass., and David Savage, a son of Sarah Olwyn Savage of Royal Leamington Spa in Warwickshire, England, were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents in Chilmark by John Alley, a justice of the peace.


At a Fresh Air Fund Farm, Many Joys of Summer
LEAD: Peter Torres swung high on the fish-net hammock strung between the maple and butternut trees. ''Just look around,'' he said, smiling. ''No cars, no pollution, no noise.'' And then, pausing for a moment, he added, ''Why can't it be like this in the city?''


Shane Emerson Planning to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Joe Silas Emerson of Bells, Tenn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Shane Emerson, to John Kingsley Loomis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aubrey Kingsley Loomis of Windsor, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.


Elizabeth Kerney Wed To William W. Zuehlke
LEAD: At the Pittsford (Vt.) Congregational Church, Elizabeth Hamilton Kerney, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Caldwell Kerney of Chittenden, Vt., was married yesterday to William Woodfill Zuehlke, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard William Zuehlke of Wakefield, R.I., by the Rev.
Richard T. McDonnell.


Vote Innovation Helps Hispanic Woman Win
LEAD: A 35-year-old Hispanic businesswoman has been elected to the Alamogordo City Commission, apparently assisted by a new voting system that is intended to help members of minority groups win public office.


WHAT'S NEW IN BOOK DISTRIBUTION
LEAD: RECENT headlines about the book industry have been telling tales of consolidations and mergers.
But, quietly all across the land, small publishers have been springing up.
Book publishing, after all, is easy to enter.
All it takes is a title or two.
But it is one thing to publish a book, another to get it into bookstores and into the hands of readers.


POSTINGS: On West End Ave.; Hotel Going First-Class
LEAD: The 14-story Esplanade Hotel on the Upper West Side, which is is half transient and half residential and now under new ownership, is in the midst of a thorough renovation that will eventually turn it into a first-class operation, with first-class rates.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.72
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.19
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.60
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.52
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


New Views Emerge Of Bork's Role in Watergate Dismissals
LEAD: Fourteen years after the immense drama of the ''Saturday Night Massacre,'' the handling of that constitutional crisis amid the Watergate scandals is emerging as an issue that could shape the emotional constitutional questions of today.


NEW PIPELINE ROUTE FACES NEW HOSTILITY L&gt;By CHARLOTTE LIBOV
LEAD: MANY of the faces were different, but the sentiments remained the same.
A proposed natural-gas pipeline got a cold reception last week as residents living in towns along the plan's new preferred route got their first major opportunity to air their views.


Anti-Semitic Group in Shadow of Kremlin
LEAD: THIS spring, a Russian nationalist group emerged from the political shadows to test Mikhail S. Gorbachev's campaign for ''glasnost,'' or openness, in Soviet society.
For weeks, it seemed that all of Moscow was talking about the group, called Pamyat, which means memory, and its brazen public demonstrations.


Character, Truth and Television
LEAD: A PARADOX OF TELEVISION IS THIS: IT is intrinsically more balanced, fair and open than print, but unlike print, it can determine its own agenda.
Television is one on one: Someone speaks; we react, and no one gets in the way.
Obviously, this is more straightforward than print, where readers must rely on reporters.


Princeton
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q. &amp; A.: RAISING SAGGING BEAMS
LEAD: Q. Our 25-year-old house has a large living-dining area with an attractive hardwood floor that is in good condition.
However, although we did not notice the problem originally, in the past few years we have discovered that there is a decided sag to this floor in the middle of the room - it seems the floor beams or joists have sagged or warped, creating a dip.


Poles Print a Poet's Lament on Insensitivity
LEAD: In a despairing 42-year-old letter that has just come to light, Czeslaw Milosz, the Nobel Prize poet, deplored what he saw as insensitivity in his fellow Poles.


DVORAK IN THE NEW WORLD
LEAD:  SPILLVILLE  By Patricia Hampl.
Illustrated by Steven Sorman. 107 pp.
Minneapolis: Milkweed Editions.
Cloth, $25.
Paper, $9.95.


Question Of the Week; Are Knicks Back on Track Now?
LEAD: Before we judge whether the Knicks are back on track, let's give Rick Pitino a chance to do what he has done everywhere he has been: 1.
Win. 2.
Produce a team that plays an exciting, fun-to-watch game of basketball.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article July 12 on Tuscan hill towns gave an incorrect phone number for the Hotel Villa Belvedere, near Monteriggioni.
The correct number is 920966.


AMERICANS IN CUBA ACCUSED OF SPYING
LEAD: With relations with the United States at one of the lowest points in years, the Cuban Government is charging in an extensive television and newspaper campaign that many American diplomats here have been spying and plotting to assassinate President Fidel Castro.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  PERMANENT CONNECTIONS  By Sue Ellen Bridgers. 264 pp.
New York: Harper &amp; Row. $13.95. (Ages 12 and up)


China Bolstering Its Non-Communist Ties in Asia
LEAD: The prolonged war in Cambodia between Chinese-backed resistance forces and Vietnamese troops is giving Beijing the opportunity to strengthen and expand its influence in Southeast Asia, regional officials and others say.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, JULY 26, 1987
LEAD:  International 3-19  The outlook for more contra aid has not been improved by the Iran-contra hearings, some key members of Congress say, despite the Reagan Administration's view that it has.
Page 1  President Reagan was involved in a discussion last November that appeared to be intended to obscure key details of the arms sales to Iran after disclosures of the sales began to emerge, according to notes of a high-level White House meeting.


Gay Man Named To AIDS Panel
LEAD: When President Reagan called last month for the creation of an advisory panel on AIDS, White House officials made it clear that they felt no obligation to appoint a homosexual.
To the dismay of gay rights advocates, Gary L. Bauer, the President's domestic policy adviser, said he ''would be very surprised if an Administration opposed to making appointments on the basis of race or sex would agree to make an appointment based on bedroom habits.


Major Arts Center Urged for Newark
LEAD: The nation's two largest centers for the performing arts will be little more than a tunnel apart if New Jersey's Governor Kean is successful in carrying out the plan he proposed last week.
Before his present term ends in 1990, he said, he wants to see a performing-arts complex in downtown Newark that would be second in size only to Lincoln Center, across the Hudson in New


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Foreign Developers; Learning Just How the Game Is Played in the States
LEAD: EIGHT years ago, Brazil's largest development company, Gomes de Almeida, Fernandes, selected Manhattan for its first overseas outpost.
Next month, the company will complete its first Manhattan building - a narrow, granite-and-glass tower at 590 Fifth Avenue, near 48th Street.


3 Manhattan Women Among Bridge Victors
LEAD: A favored team celebrated victory in one major event at the American Contract Bridge League's summer national tournament here today while two long-shot groups fought for victory in another.


NET-WIELDING CENSUS TAKERS STALK THEIR FLUTTERING QUARRY
LEAD: THEY were getting tired of stout-bodied skippers; they wanted satyrs and painted ladies, too.
The five people recently searching a meadow at the Pequotsepos Nature Center in Mystic carefully recorded them all, each butterfly they could identify - numerous skippers, a few wood satyrs, a little painted lady, a swooping swallowtail and others, for a total of 64 individuals of 19 species.


House Votes Insurance Against Catastrophic Ills
LEAD: Few members of Congress would disagree with the assessment of Representative Claude Pepper, the 86-year-old Democrat from Florida who is the leading advocate on Capitol Hill of programs for the elderly.
The measure that passed the House last week protecting 31 million elderly and disabled people against many costs of catastrophic illness, Mr.


Karen Benson and Peter Ruben Plan Fall Wedding
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Benson of Kings Point, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Hilary Benson, to Peter Norman Ruben, the son of Mrs.
Mark Olivetti of Rutherford, N.J., and Harris Ruben of Berkeley Heights, N.J.
The couple plan to marry in November.


GRILLED CHICKEN, PLAIN AND SIMPLE, AS A SUMMER CENTERPIECE
LEAD: BECAUSE it is so versatile, chicken is the most popular meat for summer cooking.


More Trouble For Rajiv Gandhi
LEAD: Moving to crush a potential rival, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, expelled his former Finance Minister, Vishwanath Pratap Singh, from the ruling Congress Party last week.


PRESSURED BY 'THE SQUEEZE,' THE MIND GIVES IN
LEAD: WE PROFESSIONALS GO TO the movies ready to pay hawklike attention to anything that happens on the screen.
It's the result of years of on-the-job training, and it's also force of habit after a while.
In a perfect world, this would be the best way for anyone to watch films, but the world is not perfect, as is demonstrated weekly by each new batch of summer releases.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Art or 'Trash' In Philadelphia


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Amityville  $178,000  217 South Bay Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace; 2d 1-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old ranch on property; taxes $2,700.
Bellport  $135,000  36 New Jersey Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 26-year-old ranch; basement, 2-car garage, walk to stores; taxes $1,500.


An Irishman Leads Entering Final Day
LEAD: Twenty-five days after it started and one day before it officially finishes, the Tour de France came down today to a two-man duel between the only riders who still had a chance to win the bicycle race.


THE ROOM WHERE SCOTT DIED
LEAD: I DON'T THINK I CAN do it,'' I said to the assistant producer, Cindy Wall.
She had called me from Washington to say, ''We would like to film you in the room where Scott Fitzgerald died.'' She was speaking for The Film Company in the nation's capital, a maker of documentaries about American writers who lived and died in the 19th and 20th centuries.


DON'T MAKE TWO-FAMILY HOMES ILLEGAL
LEAD: VIRTUALLY 1,000 out of 1,000 owners of one-family homes, through the legislative efforts of their elected county, town and village officials, are doing everything humanly possible to discourage the conversion, modification and construction of two-family homes.
This is currently taking place on Long


The 'Glasnost' Tree Bears A Rich Musical Harvest
LEAD: NOT SO LONG AGO, THE LIST of American musicans performing each year in the Soviet Union was as brief as a Russian summer.
That was before a new Soviet-American cultural exchange agreement was signed in Geneva in late 1985 - and before Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost.
Now, performers are tripping over each other in their eagerness to board the bandwagon bound for Moscow, and hardly a week passes without media appearances by musicians returning from a tour of duty on the Russian front, having bathed in the enthusiasm of Soviet audiences.


Queen Anne Sunday
LEAD: The sound of voices singing a hymn drifts from the open windows of the plain white-frame building and out across the stillness of an August morning.
A light breeze from nearby Narragansett Bay bends the tall grasses that edge the adjacent small field of weathered tombstones.
Inside, sunlight streams in through the gracefully arched windows onto the bowed heads of worshipers and the bewigged head of the man in the high, wineglass pulpit, just as it must have done two and a half centuries ago when this church was new.


CD'S ARE DEFYING ADAM SMITH
LEAD: THE LAW OF SUPPLY AND demand seems to have lost some of its teeth.
A glut of CD's is just around the corner, yet no price cut is in sight.


True Confessions: A Pitcher Tells How to Cheat
LEAD: EARLIER in the season, Mike Scott of Houston and Rick Rhoden of the Yankees headed the major leagues' Scuffball Suspects list.
The scrutiny of those two successful pitchers has eased, but the subject of illegal pitches is never far from the surface.
Probably with good reason.
One pitcher who admits privately to doing funny things with baseballs said each pitching staff has at least one pitcher who scuffs, cuts or moistens some of the balls he throws.


COUPLE GUIDE 2 OF COUNTY'S MOST ENDURING MUSIC INSTITUTIONS
LEAD: IT is 11 o'clock on a summer Friday morning, and in a modest house in Hartsdale Howard Herring, managing director of the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts, is on the phone.
While he works out the details for a weekend of concerts, his wife, Laura Calzolari, executive director of the Westchester Conservatory of Music, helps their 5-year-old daughter,


Pop Music
LEAD: Youssou N'Dour, the Senegalese singer and bandleader, has been touring the world with Peter Gabriel, playing the sorts of places he's used to at home - arenas and stadiums.
But this Wednesday and Thursday, he will be dropping in to Sounds of Brazil (204 Varick Street at Houston Street; 243-4940) for club-size concerts that shouldn't be missed and that are bound to sell out.


You Can't Tell the Genre by the Label
LEAD: AT THIS LATE DATE IN OUR musical history, interesting new compositions can come from any source, conventionally classical or otherwise.
Especially in that shifting landscape formerly dubbed ''downtown'' music, meant to separate it from stiffer, more formal forms of Establishment contemporary composition, genre distinctions mean next to nothing.


THE TRIBE THAT WEARS WHITE
LEAD:  BECOMING A DOCTOR  A Journey of Initiation in Medical School.
By Melvin Konner. 390 pp.
New York: Elisabeth Sifton Books/Viking. $19.95.


True Colors of a Classic Canvas
LEAD: IT IS AMONG THE GREAT ITALIAN Renaissance paintings, a bacchanal, portraying earthy, pagan deities at revel.
And it is the work of not one, but two of the most celebrated Venetian colorists. ''The Feast of the Gods,'' housed at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, was completed by Giovanni Bellini in 1514 and repainted in part by his student, Titian, between 1519 and 1529.


Undecided Democrats Reported on Increase
LEAD: Despite the intense early campaigning of Democratic Presidential hopefuls, the percentage of Democrats undecided about their party's choice is growing, the latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll shows.
It also found the Rev.
Jesse Jackson still the only candidate with more than 10 percent support.


Twins Seek Buckner
LEAD: BILL BUCKNER, released by the Boston Red Sox, will sign with the Minnesota Twins next week if he clears waivers, according to his wife, Jody.
The 37-year-old first baseman expects to be the Twins' designated hitter, The Minneapolis Star and Tribune reported yesterday.


Question Of the Week; Are Knicks Back on Track Now?
LEAD: The championship is as good as theirs.


A. A. LEWIS WED TO VIRGINIA BOONE
LEAD: At St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I., yesterday Virginia Kathryn Boone, the daughter of Kathryn Virginia Boone of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, and William Harrison Boone of Manhasset, L.I., and Stuart, Fla., was married to Andrew Arthur Lewis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.


Data Bank: July 26, 1987
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
I Q'87
IV Q'86
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,796.0
$3,735.2
$3,665.7
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.6
4.4
1.1
Corporate After-Tax Profits
I Q'87
IV Q'86
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$136.6
$144.5
$126.9


NEW JERSEY JOURNAL
LEAD: Flight of Thunder Bird THE ROAR of an aircraft's engines over Teterboro Airport earlier this month was cause to stop and notice, even though such sounds are commonplace there.
But the sounds were distinct and reminiscent of another era, a time when aircraft leaving Teterboro for Europe fought a raging war in addition to poor weather.


MISS WATERS WED TO GEORGE ORR JR.
LEAD: The wedding of Edna Mae Waters, a daughter of Mrs.
Leighton Kinsley Waters of Rumson, N.J., and the late Mr.
Waters, to George Joseph Orr Jr., a son of Mr.
Orr of Beverly, N.J., and Mrs.
James E. Downs of Baltimore, took place yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Nativity in Fair Haven, N.J.


Q. &amp; A.: RAISING SAGGING BEAMS
LEAD: Q. Our 25-year-old house has a large living-dining area with an attractive hardwood floor that is in good condition.
However, although we did not notice the problem originally, in the past few years we have discovered that there is a decided sag to this floor in the middle of the room - it seems the floor beams or joists have sagged or warped, creating a dip.


Glance Outrunning the Years
LEAD: Sprinting is supposed to be a passion - and a practice - of youth: compression, explosion, quick bursts, acceleration and fast finishes.
Indeed, by the time most sprinters turn 30 years old, a new generation of sprinters - or time itself - has passed them by.


Miss Kaufmann Engaged to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Cecelia Lodi Kaufmann to David Lapham Mead has been announced by the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
John Hollis Kaufmann of Somerset, Bermuda.
Mr.
Mead is the son of Stephen Mead of Boston and Mrs.
Carl Pescosolido of Ipswich, Mass.
A November wedding is planned.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: A GIRL OF FORTY, by Herbert Gold. (Laurel/Dell, $4.50.) The ''girl'' of Herbert Gold's novel of laid-back, contemporary life in San Francisco is trendy Suki Read, a character that The Times's reviewer, Herbert Mitgang, last year called ''a California Holly Golightly.'' The novel's ''dialogue and scenes are so accurate and, at the same time, satirical that at first a reader tends to overlook the depths of Mr.


Westerlies Prevail
LEAD: It would be hard to think of two activities that are further apart, in terms of the alphabet, the equipment, the setting, or the type of effort, than bridge and yachting.
The connection used to be the person of Harold Stirling Vanderbilt who brought contract bridge to the world via Newport, R.I., in the 1920's and was a triple winner of the America's Cup in the 1930's.


L. T.'s Chilling Book
LEAD: THE WORD for Lawrence Taylor's book is not ''controversial.'' The word is ''confessional,'' but without much repentance.


Bicycling To the Job Is on Rise
LEAD: It is said to be quicker than the subway, cheaper than a taxi, provide better exercise than a health club and give more of a pick-up than a cup of coffee.


Boston Is Prohibiting Liquor At Clubs That Discriminate
LEAD: The Boston Licensing Board has adopted a rule prohibiting liquor licenses for business and professional clubs that discriminate in their membership.


Sweet Bread
LEAD: To the Editor: As a native of Fall River, Mass., and a lover of Portuguese sweet bread (massa) and doughboys (malassadas), I greatly enjoyed reading ''Sweet Bread, Portuguese Style'' (Travel, May 17).
Not mentioned was what I consider to be the best sweet bread bakery in New England - Faria's Bakery on Wickenden Street, near the Brown University campus in Providence.


The Radon Raiders: Turning Perils Into Profits
LEAD: SHORTLY after Stanley J. Watras walked into work at the Limerick, Pa., nuclear power plant in late 1984 and triggered a radiation detector, he discovered that he had set off much more than a monitoring device.


THE LIGHT AT THE END OF THE NOVEL
LEAD: SINCE the early years of this century, writers have been plagued by fundamental doubts about their craft.
In individual or collective manifestoes, the most oddly assorted literary types have announced to their startled colleagues that it's no longer possible to tell stories; that the hero no longer serves as a focus of the action; that plot, character and psychology belong in the dustbin of history; that writing should cease altogether.


Miss Hanna Bride Of Stephen Morss
LEAD: Elizabeth Gorham Hanna, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Hanna Jr. of Old Chatham, N.Y., was married yesterday to Stephen Williams Morss, a son of Shelley Christine Morss of Concord, Mass., and Charles Anthony Morss Jr. of Lincoln, Mass., at the Church on the Hill of the United Church of Christ in Lenox, Mass.


YONKERS POPS AT UNTERMYER FESTIVAL
LEAD: ''CULTURE at your doorstep'' is the motto of the Untermyer Performing Arts Council, and according to the flier of the 1987 Festival, which is under way in Yonkers' Untermyer Park, ''performances bring friends and neighbors together while historic treasures, elaborate fountains and river views provide exciting backdrops.


AN OLDER WOMAN
LEAD: When I read Edward Harper's article ''All Eyes on Her'' (About Men, May 24), and the subsequent letters to the editor regarding that article (June 21), I understood how he felt and I identified with him.


RETIREMENT: IT'S EASIER SAID THAN DONE
LEAD: I AM SITTING on an aluminum chair under a beach umbrella that's stuck in the hole of a large wooden spool that once held a roll of wire.


MEMORIALS SALUTE VIETNAM VETERANS
LEAD: MORE than 10 years after the fighting ended, a memorial to Vietnam veterans is being constructed in Danbury.
The memorial is a statue of an infantryman carrying a Vietnamese child in one arm and his rifle in another.


THE GUIDING STAR OF A FIRM FRIENDSHIP
LEAD: We all live under the same sky, but each of us sees a different horizon.
I am reminded of this after reading Pat Bard's excellent article, ''Mining Older Skill and Wisdom''  [ Opinion Page, June 28 ] .


Man Found Fatally Stabbed Near a Road in Central Park
LEAD: A man was found stabbed to death early yesterday near West Drive in Central Park, the police said.


Boy Dies in a Hit-Run Accident
LEAD: A 10-year-old boy was killed Friday afternoon in Brooklyn by a hit-and-run driver, and a 19-year-old unlicensed driver was charged with leaving the scene of the accident after he surrendered yesterday, the police said.


Marc J. Gold, Teacher, Weds Alison Ruth Paul
LEAD: Alison Ruth Paul, the director of education at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers, and Marc Jason Gold, a social studies teacher at Tenafly (N.J.) High School, were married yesterday aboard the yacht Paco Rabanne in New York Harbor.
Justice Robert Stolarik of New York State Supreme Court in Rockland


Change of Heart
LEAD: The lives of millions of people in Asia, the Pacific and Latin America have been touched, deeply and for the better, by a turnaround in American foreign policy.


THE CHANGING HOME
LEAD: Carol Vogel summed up the developments in building and suburban styles over the last several decades in a piece that was well researched, carefully thought out and very readable (''Clustered for Leisure: The Changing Home,'' June 28.) It's good to see The Times showing as much interest in the way Americans are living as it has always had in life styles of more exotic countries abroad.


Smoked Fish From Maine
LEAD: In 1806, William L. Daggett built two big brick smokehouses on Central Wharf in Portland, Me.
Sixty feet tall, their walls three feet thick, they were in continuous use until 1982.


ENGINEERS AND MANAGERS
LEAD: Faith Jermon St.
Claire's recent article, ''Conflict of Engineering vs.
Management''  [ Opinion page, June 14 ] , hit on a question that has been very much on our minds here at Union Carbide since Bhopal.
Despite the fact that Bhopal was clearly a case of sabotage, probably by an employee, the tragedy also led us to re-examine the relationship between the individual engineer and our organization with regard to safety issues.


Q &amp; A
LEAD:  Flip Tax  Question: I recently sold my one-bedroom co-op apartment and have bought another apartment in the same building.
The co-op board informed me that I would have to pay a flip tax on the sale of my apartment.
Since I am purchasing another apartment in the same building I want to know if it is legal to charge me this tax.


GARDENING
LEAD:  Groundcovers  Morris Video. 2730 Monterey Street 105 Torrance, Calif. 90503. (800)843-3606 60 minutes. $19.95.
Northeastern gardeners should keep their own climate in mind while viewing this video.
It was filmed in the Pacific Northwest, where just about anything will grow.
Ed Hume, a TV personality and garden columnist for The Seattle Times, is a knowledgeable host.


Marli Rachman Wed To Bruce Somerstein
LEAD: At Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., Marli Frances Rachman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David Jay Rachman of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Bruce Somerstein, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Saul Somerstein of Manhasset Hills, L.I., by Rabbi Michael Kramer.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:  PAINTED IN BLOOD: Understanding Europeans.
By Stuart Miller. (Atheneum, $17.95.) The premise of this short and breezy book is that Europeans differ from Americans because of their ''background of collective violence'' - their history, according to Stuart Miller, is ''painted in blood.'' ''We must think,'' he suggests, ''of a vast South Bronx of a continent, repeatedly devastated not for ten or twenty years but, as men experience time, forever.


TERESA MARSHALL WEDS
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York yesterday, Teresa Lee Marshall, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald I. Marshall of Manila, was married to Thomas Richard Watkins 3d, a son of Clare Jenkins Lambert of Washington and Mr.
Watkins Jr. of New Orleans.
The Rev.
Timothy B. Brown performed the ceremony.


The Making of Government Good Guys
LEAD: THE insider-trading scandal has hit a lull.
In Washington, the Securities and Exchange Commission is starring only in the confirmation hearings of David S. Ruder, President Reagan's nominee to replace John S. R. Shad as S.E.C. chief.


PHILIP MORGAN SMITH WEDS SUSAN SHERMAN
LEAD: At St.
Paul's Episcopal Cathedral in Buffalo, Susan Sherman, the daughter of Mrs.
Morton J. Sherman of Cleveland Heights, Ohio, and the late Mr.
Sherman, was married to Philip Morgan Smith by the bridegroom's father, the Very Rev.
Dr.
Elton O. Smith, Dean of St.
Paul's and of the Central City Parishes of the Diocese of Western New


Vienna
LEAD: In a formerly drab neighborhood in the eastern part of Vienna some photography addicts climb the utility poles or crouch on top of the cigarette vending machine at the corner of Keilgasse and Lowengasse, to get that special shot of the Hundertwasser House.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last week on raising money for ''Les Miserables'' misstated the name of the attorney for Cameron Mackintosh, the show's producer.
He is Paul Woerner, not Peter Woerner.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''As car sales grow weaker, it will take a lot of blood, sweat and tears on the cost-cutting side to maintain positive year-to-year comparisons.''


MOVIES
LEAD:  The Manhattan Project  Starring John Lithgow, Christopher Collett, Cynthia Nixon, Jill Eikenberry, John Mahoney.
Directed by Marshall Brickman.
HBO Video. 120 minutes. $79.95.


City Hall Notes; Okra, Armadillo Races, the Alamo and Koch
LEAD: Jim Hightower, the Texas Agriculture Commissioner known for populist politics and a razor-sharp wit, visited New York last week to promote the cuisine of the Lone Star state.
Mr.
Hightower dropped by City Hall for a brief talk with the Mayor.


Hooked on 'Sot-Weed'
LEAD:  To the Editor:


A Classicist via Rock
LEAD: IT WAS PROBABLY INEVITA-ble that as the generation nurtured on rock and roll came of age, some of its budding composers would attempt to create a hybrid music, blending the formal skills they learned in music school with certain rock-derived rhythmic moves, and scoring their rock-inspired works for the nonclassical timbres of electric guitars, drums, amplified keyboards and other instruments from the pop landscape.


The Infamous 'Protocols of Zion' Endures
LEAD: MEMBERS of an organization of Russian traditionalists called Pamyat are motivated in part by a conspiracy theory that was invented in France almost a century ago.
Like many reactionaries in the United States, followers of Pamyat equate satanism with rock music and relativism with evil, and they believe that Zionists are scheming with, of all people,


Taking First Step on Road to Olympics
LEAD: For the next 12 months, amateur athletic competition in the United States will intensify as thousands of athletes compete for precious few berths on the 1988 Olympic team.


Offbeat Romance
LEAD:  Something Wild  Starring Jeff Daniels, Melanie Griffith.
Directed by Jonathan Demme. 1986 HBO Video. 116 minutes. $89.95.


Slick Powerboats Add Safety, Speed
LEAD: Powerboat racing has adopted space age technology, and nowhere is that technology more likely to get a thorough testing than at the national offshore circuit's fifth competition of the season today in Atlantic City.


Showing Distaste For Panama Chief
LEAD: Heartened by the movement toward democracy in the Philippines and South Korea, the United States was doing its bit last week to loosen yet another military leader's grip on power.
Administration officials said all aid to Panama had been suspended in an effort to pressure Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, who controls Panama's military and its Government.


FOR IMMIGRANTS, THE DREAM IS STILL ALIVE
LEAD: THE streets may not be paved with gold, but immigrants are still setting down the career path in America, hoping to strike it rich.


The Undressing Of the Titanic
LEAD: While several members of Congress stopped just short of calling them grave-robbers, a French crew dived yesterday for the treasures of the Titanic.


Maine Town's Quiet Shattered by Strike
LEAD: Until last month, this town of 5,000 people and the paper mill that is its dominant economic force coexisted peacefully for more than 30 years.
Then 1,200 paper makers at the International Paper plant walked out over a company plan to revise work rules, and the tranquillity was shattered.


Notes Indicate Reagan Helped Hide Iran Data
LEAD: President Reagan was actively involved in a discussion last November that appeared to be intended to obscure details of the arms sales to Iran after the sales were disclosed, according to handwritten notes of a high-level White House meeting.


Private Nukes?
LEAD: It seems as if private initiative in Pakistan extends even to securing materials for, and producing, nuclear bombs.
That at least is what Pakistan would have the U.S. believe, in the latest and most creative of a string of alibis designed to render palatable a decade-old addiction to secret nuclear pursuits.


'To the Sargasso Sea'
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Giants Top Cards on Brenly Hit
LEAD: Bob Brenly, who hit a home run earlier in the game, had a run-scoring, two-out single in the seventh inning to give the San Francisco Giants a 5-4 victory over the St.
Louis Cardinals today.


'WHY DID YOU DO WHAT YOU DID TO ME?'
LEAD:  BABY HOUSTON  By June Arnold. 268 pp. Austin: Texas Monthly Press.$16.95.


For the One-of-a-Kind Lamp Accessories
LEAD: SUSAN LAWRENCE and Harriett Long see lamp bases wherever they go.


Jersey Limits Liability Suits
LEAD: Governor Kean has signed a bill making it more difficult for consumers to sue manufacturers when their products are suspected of being harmful.
It shifts the burden of proof to the consumer, who now must show a safer design was feasible at the time the product was made.
The new law also makes it more difficult to collect punitive damages, forcing the victim must prove ''actual malice'' on the part of the manufacturer, instead of ''reckless disregard.


LIZ CARPENTER: BACK ON THE TRAIL AGAIN
LEAD: When Liz Carpenter talks, she looks at you straight in the eye and fires away in a deep Texas drawl that has roots predating the fall of the Alamo.


DAY OF FAME FOR HUNTER, WILLIAMS
LEAD: Billy Williams, the Sweet Swinger from Whistler, Ala., and the iron man of the Chicago Cubs, won't have to worry about his place in the baseball Hall of Fame after this weekend.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Libel Suit Dismissed ''WE won, we won; it's a big victory,'' said Donna Gallo of East Patchogue. ''This will show other civic-minded individuals that they have a right to speak out for their neighborhoods without fear of libel or slander.''


WILD AND CRAZY 'SUGAR BABIES'
LEAD: AT An Evening Dinner Theater, the director Charles Repole's speedy production of the wild and crazy burlesque musical ''Sugar Babies'' is a winner on most counts.


POSTINGS: Conservation Covenant; The Untouchables
LEAD: In a new 162-unit condominium development planned for 76 acres in Kent, N.Y., just north of Carmel in Putnam County, the developer has slipped a covenant in the deed saying that eight of the acres, zoned for commercial use, may never be touched. ''We could have built a strip center or an office building, but this will insulate the community and protect its serenity,'' said Jack C.


TALKING: Deposits; Handling Contract Disputes
LEAD: IN THE DAYS before the sale price of a home started to resemble a lottery jackpot prize, the amount that a buyer had to pay a seller as a contract deposit never seemed particularly significant.


Okamoto Uses Accuracy for 1-Shot Lead in Open
LEAD: Ayako Okamoto of Japan used her finesse with the short golf strokes to counter the thundering distance of Laura Davies on the last two holes today and gain a one-stroke lead over the English golfer going into the final round of the 42d United States Women's Open.


Opera: A New Rodolfo
LEAD: ONE of the things the New York City Opera works hardest at is the development of American talent.
Michael Sylvester, for example, has been singing on the company's last three tours across the country and, now adjudged ready, the young tenor made his New York house debut as Rodolfo in ''La Boheme'' on


Opera: Mozart's 'Finta Giardiniera'
LEAD: ''La Finta Giardiniera,'' with which the 18-year-old Mozart triumphed in Munich, is undergoing fresh evaluation.
Mostly Mozart audiences heard it in concert last year, and several European houses have brought it to the stage.
The Berkshire Opera Company, which hopes to establish intimate opera as a part of the summer's plentiful artistic life here, chose the piece to open its third season last week.


Deregulation Of Rents Opposed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tartars Stage Noisy Protest in Moscow
LEAD: A group of 300 Tatars, calling for the right to return to the Crimean homeland from which they were deported in 1944, staged a noisy demonstration for several hours near the Kremlin Wall this evening as dozens of police and soldiers looked on.


D. F. MacMaster Weds Miss Carey In Pennsylvania
LEAD: The wedding of Frances Whelen Carey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Carey of Whitpain, Pa., to Donald Francis MacMaster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas J. MacMaster Jr. of Whitemarsh, Pa., took place yesterday.
The Rev.
Richard T. Hawkins performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas' Episcopal Church in Whitemarsh, assisted by the Rev.


Images That Express Essential Human Emotions
LEAD: ''THE RE-EMERGENT FIG-ure: Seven Sculptors at Storm King Art Center'' is a surprise.


Giants Address Big Questions
LEAD: THE Giants, who won Super Bowl XXI six months ago, will open their training camp tomorrow under a cloud.


Big Field for Cane Pace
LEAD: Racing Machine, who usually does well at Yonkers Raceway, is one of the favorites heading into the $581,540 Cane Pace Sunday night, the opening leg of pacing's triple crown for 3-year-olds.


WAR HAS MADE THE DIFFERENCE
LEAD:  A HISTORY OF ISRAEL  Volume II: From the Aftermath of the Yom Kippur War.
By Howard M. Sachar.
Maps. 319 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $19.95.


A Pugnacious Policy
LEAD: LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, the Scrapper of the United States!


FOSTERING EFFECTIVE PARENTING
LEAD: YOU wake suddenly and see that it is 3 A.M.
The outdoor lights are still on, and you realize that your 15-year-old son hasn't come home.
Fear and anger turn your legs to lead; he promised to be in by midnight.
As you lie there, wondering what to do, you hear the door.
He is back.


AS FAST AS A FLYING CLOUD
LEAD:  THE CHALLENGE  By A. B. C. Whipple.
Illustrated. 320 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.95.


Music: Gutierrez and Bell Play Mozart
LEAD: JOSHUA BELL has a straight-on, modest style that reveals his Midwestern roots.
His playing is neither coy nor self-aggrandizing, his sound is neither glossy nor slick.
You can tell he thinks about how to shape a phrase, how to translate what he feels, and he can win over listeners by the sincerity of his convictions.


CHILDREN
LEAD:  The Elephant's Child  From Rudyard Kipling's ''Just So Stories.'' Narrated by Jack Nicholson.
Music by Bobby McFerrin.
Illustrated by Tim Raglin.
Produced by Rabbit Ears Productions and Random House Home Video. 30 minutes. $14.95.
If Rudyard Kipling were with us today, he might be charmed by the felicitous way that some of his stories for young people have made the journey to video cassette.


Marsha Diamond to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Marsha Diamond to Dr.
Marc Jeffrey Salzman, a son of Bobi Salzman of Vail, Colo., and Dr.
Robert Salzman of Miami has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley A. Diamond of Squirrel Hill, Pa.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Diamond, a New York University graduate, is director of research at Camelot Entertainment Sales, a television advertising sales company in New York.


Mark Stephen Aramburu Is to Wed Jennifer Travers
LEAD: The engagement of Jennifer Hartman Travers to Mark Stephen Aramburu has been announced by the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Michael K. Travers of Ridgewood, N.J.
The future bridegroom is the son of Anthony Aramburu of North Collins, N.Y., and Mrs.
Ronald Stulak of Blasdell, N.Y.
An Aug.


BEST SELLERS: JULY 26, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
5
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
(Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $18.95.) A brutal murder
creates a crisis among a big city's politicians.
2
1
8
MISERY, by Stephen King.


Looking Back on England's Power
LEAD: Slowly, the northern cities of England are being transformed.
The mills and factories, which, in the 19th century, clattered and smoked to make Britain the world's foremost industrial power, are being saved from decay to find new grandeur as industrial museums and monuments to the Industrial Revolution.


Pamela B. Rubin Is to Wed in Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic P. Rubin of Old Westbury, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Beth Rubin, to Jon Robert Carter, the son of Arthur L. Carter of New York and Roxbury, Conn., and Linda Gordon of Newfane, Vt.
An October wedding is planned.


O. P. Nicholson to Wed Miss Smitter in August
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Leila Eliott-Burton Hadley of New York of the engagement of her daughter Caroline Allison Faith Smitter to Oliver Philip Nicholson, a son of the late Dr. and Mrs.
George Nicholson of Tiverton, Devon, England.
The couple plan to marry Aug. 31 in Scotland.


THE CHANGING HOME
LEAD: Carol Vogel's article has confirmed one of my worst fears: it seems many of the affluent elite and, in many cases, the most powerful members of our society would rather soak in three-man Jacuzzis than confront the problems that exist beyond their meticulously maintained yards.


Waiting, Once Again, for Democracy
LEAD: THINK of a man who has been married several times and several times his marriage has collapsed like a house of cards.


India and Australia Advance
LEAD: India yesterday became the first country to advance to the semifinals of the 1987 Davis Cup, defeating Israel with a doubles victory.


EXPLANATIONS ABOUT A BLIND DATE
LEAD: I MET Ruth on a blind date, introduced to her by Harry, a colleague of mine who got around to his accounts very efficiently, in spite of a game leg.
We were working on a joint project in the accounting office of a large company, comparing notes about girls, real and fancied. ''How would you like to meet one in the flesh, a neighbor of mine, real pretty?


Lucy Mize Wed To T.H. Brown
LEAD: Lucy Shackleford Mize, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David W. Mize of Chelsea, Vt., and Cairo, was married yesterday to Timothy Howell Brown, a son of Elizabeth Simmons Brown of Lewistown, Pa., and the late Dr.
Richard S. Brown.
Sylvia Sprigg, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Chelsea home of the bride's parents.


Q. &amp; A.: RAISING SAGGING BEAMS
LEAD: Q. Our 25-year-old house has a large living-dining area with an attractive hardwood floor that is in good condition.
However, although we did not notice the problem originally, in the past few years we have discovered that there is a decided sag to this floor in the middle of the room - it seems the floor beams or joists have sagged or warped, creating a dip.


Rebels Gain While Duarte Flounders
LEAD: THE Salvadoran guerrillas are practicing what they call ''prolonged popular war'' with a vengeance, as the country slides into its eighth year of civil conflict.


SHORTAGE OF NURSES: PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS
LEAD: The article ''Shortage of Nurses Vexes Hospitals''  [ June 28 ]  did an admirable job of presenting the shortage of nurses in Long Island hospitals.
However, several inaccuracies created a distorted picture of the Molloy College nursing department.


Q and A
LEAD:  Spa Search  Question: How do I find a list of American spas?
Is there an association?
I am interested in a weight-losing, physically active vacation. -P.
K.
V., Hermosa Beach, Calif.
Answer: Jeffrey Joseph, the president of Spa-Finders, says it was the lack of an association of health spas and an up-to-date and comprehensive source book on the subject that prompted him to form his company.


Question Of the Week; Are Knicks Back on Track Now?
LEAD: No, the Knicks are not back on track.
Two things must still happen.
First, each player must decide that he is coming to Madison Square Garden not to play a basketball game, but to win a basketball game.
Second, Gulf and Western must sell the Knicks to a group of individuals who know and love the game of basketball.


A Time to Settle Up With Uncle Sam
LEAD: THE Internal Revenue Service is putting the pressure on taxpayers to settle continuing disputes.
In late May, the I.R.S. began a formal program to clear up a backlog of tax-shelter cases by offering 75,000 investors a one-shot chance to settle.
And in all cases, taxpayers are finding it is increasingly expensive to fight: Last year the penalty for substantial understatement of tax jumped to 25 percent of the tax owed from 10 percent.


Making it Easy to Fax From a PC
LEAD: FAX, or facsimile transmission, by which documents containing both pictures and text can be transmitted practically instantaneously over telephone lines, has come to the world of personal computing.


GRILLED CHICKEN, PLAIN AND SIMPLE, AS A SUMMER CENTERPIECE
LEAD: BECAUSE it is so versatile, chicken is the most popular meat for summer cooking.


Sweet Bread
LEAD: To the Editor: New Yorkers who enjoyed the article on sweet bread need not travel to Rhode Island to enjoy Portuguese culinary delights.


Guest Appearance
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North during game Friday night at Memorial Stadium in Baltimore.
He sat in a special box near the Orioles' dugout and watched the Orioles extend their winning streak to 10. (AP)


A DEFENSE METHOD THAT CALLS FOR QUICK THINKING
LEAD: There is no necessity to play a tactically demanding game, but if that's your choice, you must follow it through to the end.


Under International Law, Reflagging Doesn't Fly; We Are Vulnerable
LEAD: To the Editor:


ARCHITECTURAL WATCHES
LEAD: Last year the Japanese architect Masayuki Kurokawa got together with two designers, Issey Miyake and Shiro Kuramata, to upgrade mass-market watch designs.
Two of Mr.
Kurokawa's designs are the first in the collection.
The Rabit has subtle raised lines instead of numbers.
The Delhi has a more industrial look.


UP FROM SALSA
LEAD: Ruben Blades has a lot going for him, but in the history of salsa, he is just another talented name, not a creator (''Ruben Blades: Up From Salsa,'' by Anthony DePalma, June 21).


NIGHT LIFE, DAY TRIPPING, DUNE TROUBLES
LEAD: THE sun beat down on Pam Glick of Manhattan last weekend as she tried to push her bike through sand drifts several feet deep, once a paved portion of Dune Road.
Only the week before, Westhampton residents had been allowed back on the oceanfront road, closed since November because of severe erosion.


BREEZING ALONG
LEAD: THERE ARE SOME people who make entertaining a houseful of weekend guests seem no more strenuous than swinging in a hammock.
A few extra people may drop in for lunch, and the table gently expands to fit them.
One guest rises at 6 A.M., another at noon, and each is greeted with a hot breakfast.


Comfort Is As Comfort Does
LEAD: Martha Miles was attempting, apparently, to be amusing in her article ''Too Close for Comfort''  [ About Long Island, June 28 ] .
I found, however, nothing remotely humorous in the author's patent disregard for nature.


'ONE OF OUR BIGGEST PROBLEMS IS LONLINESS'
LEAD: ONE in six people in the state is older than 60.
By the turn of the century, the proportion may be closer to one in four, and Connecticut will have more frail elderly - older than 85 - than any other New England state.
Not surprisingly, therefore, issues of the elderly - and those who must care for them - are increasingly occupying the thoughts of public officials.


Russian on Space Trip Has a Heart Problem
LEAD: A Soviet astronaut who has spent nearly six months in space has developed a potentially serious heart problem and will be brought home next week, Soviet officials said Friday.


Where Maoist Slogans Fade, Tiny Factories and Farms Thrive
LEAD: Dawn stirs gently here through bamboo groves and waist-high fields of rice.
With languid ease, the pale cloud boas draping nearby hilltops unravel as a solitary farmer shooshes a water buffalo along a gravel path still damp with dew.


Rock: The Replacements In Songs From 3 Decades
LEAD: AT a circus, one act always wows the audience: an unsteady character teeters and stumbles his way across the high wire.
Thursday's concert by the Replacements, at the Beacon Theater, had that kind of slapstick suspense.


Under International Law, Reflagging Doesn't Fly; Embargo Oil, Not Arms
LEAD: To the Editor:


VISIONARY CURATOR, CAUTIONARY TALE
LEAD: IF, AS PHILIP JOHNSON ONCE said, ''The first law of architecture is 'get the job!' '' the first law of American museum directorship is ''get along with the board of trustees!'' You may be scholar, connoisseur and master of forward planning.
You may run a tight ship, with the love and support of your staff.


Bostonians Hail Ebb of a Sex District
LEAD: When the contents of the Pussy Cat Lounge, a strip joint, were auctioned here several weeks ago, the past and future of the city's adult entertainment zone were equally on display.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  A SIGN OF THE EIGHTIES.
By Gail Parent. (Putnam, $17.95.) In this bittersweet comic novel, Gail Parent displays her knack for transforming social trends into fiction.
At the age of 35, Shelly Silver runs a successful upscale catering service, uses a personal shopper at Bloomingdales and sees herself as successful in every way but one: she is still single.


A Midtown Hospital's $450 Million Project
LEAD: PLANNING is moving forward on a $450 million rebuilding program for St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center that would bring 1,000 new apartments, as well as 100 more hospital beds, to the Columbus Circle area of Manhattan.


POSTINGS: For N.Y.U. Students; Union Sq. Housing
LEAD: Two of three new apartment buildings rising on the west side of Union Square, collectively called Carlyle Court, will soon be teeming with college students rather than the young professionals increasingly drawn to that neighborhood.


Moscow Pokes at Multispeak
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev seems not to be above a light and mischievous touch in his new diplomacy.
In this case, the target was the well-known phenomenon of Reagan Administration multispeak.


PORT CHESTER FEARS TRUCKS AVOIDING I-95 WEIGHT SITE
LEAD: ''REMEMBER when the Mianus River Bridge went down? - it's going to be just like that again,'' said Mayor Peter Iasillo of Port Chester.


F.B.I. CRIME INDEX ROSE BY 6% IN 1986
LEAD: The national crime index published by the Federal Bureau of Investigation rose 6 percent last year to the highest point since 1981, the Government reported today.
Some researchers say the development may signal rising crime levels for the rest of the decade.


LITA B. WICKSER ENGAGED TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Roy Dikeman Chapin Jr. of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich., and Geyserville, Calif., have announced the engagement of her daughter, Lita Bisbee Wickser, to John Gerard Toland, a son of Mrs.
John M. Toland of Toms River, N.J., and the late Mr.
Toland.
An August wedding is planned.


Villager Casts Off Poverty and Strikes It Rich
LEAD: Li Shiji propped his shoulder against a stone pillar that arched across the brick-lined corridor of the old Li ancestral hall.


Mexico Becomes Hub for Wildlife Smugglers
LEAD: Mexico has become the hub for the smuggling of millions of dollars worth of rare and often endangered wildlife into the United States.


Tigers Win in 10th On Whitaker's Homer
LEAD: Lou Whitaker's two-out home run in the 10th inning gave the Detroit Tigers a 5-4 victory over the Cleveland Indians today.


Increase in Mortgage Fees Set
LEAD: SPOKESMEN for the state's Department of Banking and the mortgage-loan industry say they do not know how much more borrowers might have to pay in mortgage-loan fees this fall.


Correction
LEAD: The Week in Business on July 12 incorrectly described Alan Greenspan's affiliation with the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company.
He was a director.


The Higher Dutch Culture
LEAD:  To the Editor:


WEEK IN BUSINESS   * ; G.E.'s Radio Days Come to an End
LEAD: G.E. is getting out of some of the businesses it has been in since it was founded.
In two major deals, it agreed to sell its consumer electronics business for about $800 million to Thomson of France, which has had some troubles in that field in recent years and needs a boost.
In return, Thomson will give G.E.


ANNE E. JANSON MARRIES LAWYER
LEAD: At Trinity Episcopal Church in Shelburne, Vt., yesterday, Anne Elizabeth Janson, a daughter of Ellen G. Janson of Shelburne and Dr.
Richard H. Janson of South Burlington, Vt., was married to John Hunnewell Hasen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Hasen of New York and Greensboro, Vt.


Aquino's Decree On Land Reform
LEAD: Since the end of Spanish colonial rule in 1898, many Philippine leaders have tried to bring about land reform and failed.
Both the appeal and the pitfalls of redistribution were demonstrated last week when Corazon C. Aquino issued a decree aimed at breaking up some of the country's vast plantations and giving private plots to some of the millions of landless farm worker.


Wisconsin
LEAD: To the Editor: Susan Herrmann Loomis's excellent article ''Savoring Fish in Wisconsin'' (Travel, June 21) was marred by inaccurate directions.


How Can Democracy and Covert Action Be Reconciled?
LEAD: THE Iran-contra hearings have raised fundamental questions about the formulation and conduct of foreign policy by a democracy, but they have provided few answers.
These questions included whether it is possible, as Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter has argued, to justify lying to and misleading Congress, circumventing the foreign policy process, and keeping the Cabinet members and even the President in the dark about major decisions to preserve secrecy.


Waquoit Wins 5th Straight in Brooklyn Handicap
LEAD: Waquoit, the pride of Massachusetts racing, earned his fifth triumph without a defeat this year by scoring a three-length victory over Bordeaux Bob in the $415,800 Brooklyn Handicap yesterday at Belmont Park.


When Suburban Sprawl Meets Upward Mobility
LEAD: THEY ARE NOT ''THE NEW downtowns,'' as some critics have called them, and they are not the suburbs, either, these strange clusters of office towers and shopping malls and hotels and condominiums that are away from downtowns but seem, at least in many cities, to have more energy swirling about them than the real downtowns.


100 Killed in Iranian Flood
LEAD: Torrential rain flooded a river in northeastern Iran, killing at least 100 people and injuring 36 others, the official Iranian press agency reported today.
The river Boojhan overflowed its banks Friday in Neishabour and nearby villages, the agency said.
It quoted an official of the Red Crescent relief agency in Neishabour as saying intense rescue and relief operations were under way.


CAIRO, IN SHIFT, FOLLOWS ISLAMIC TREND
LEAD: The National Democratic Party of President Hosni Mubarak, in which the several contending factions range from socialists to free-wheeling capitalists, has increasingly begun to embrace Islamic symbols.


Lebanese Hijacker Captured After Killing Passenger
LEAD: Hoping to gain the release of two brothers imprisoned in West Germany on terrorism charges, a Lebanese gunman hijacked an Air Afrique jet on Friday, apparently planning to take it to the Middle East.
The 21-year-old Shiite Moslem commandeered the plane, which was bound from Brazzaville, Congo, to Paris, after a stop in


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  MUSIC, MUSIC, MUSIC


TIMOTHY DALTON FINDS A HAMLET IN THE HERO
LEAD: FOR TIMOTHY DALTON, JAMES Bond is a fascinating paradox: a killer who loathes killing, a vulnerable and sensitive man-machine, an introverted extrovert, a cynical man of principle, a warm and chivalrous lover doomed to reject the women who venture into his sexual force-field.
But then Timothy Dalton is a bit of a paradox himself.


SHORTAGE OF NURSES: PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS
LEAD: The article misses the point of why there's a shortage.
After interviews of several hospital administrators, their opinion is passed along that the hospital nurse shortage is due to declining nursing school enrollments.
Those declining enrollments, however, are the symptom, not the cause: The shortage is being caused by the administrators themselves.


Bolo Ties, Favorite Of the West
LEAD: Once a curiosity even among Westerners, the bolo tie has moved beyond the land of barbed-wire fences and spread around the nation and the world.
At least two states - New Mexico and Arizona - have made the bolo tie their official neckwear.
Bolos adorn New Yorkers, Berliners and models in fashion magazines.


MAN THE RAMPARTS! JELLYFISH ARE HERE!
LEAD: THIS is a war story, a tale of the battle that faces Long Islanders each summer as battalions of pinkish-red jellyfish take over our bays.


RUSSIA'S RESTLESS YOUTH
LEAD: ON THE STAGE OF THE MAXIM GORKY House of Culture, beneath a red banner urging all good citizens of the Soviet Union to ''fulfill the decisions of the 27th Party Congress,'' Anatoly Krupnov, the lead singer of Black Obelisk, is howling out the lyrics to ''Disease.'' Bare-chested except for a guitar and chain, he struts through a cloud of artificial smoke.


Malcolm Baldrige, Cabinet Member; Businessman With a Love for Rodeo
LEAD: Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige, who died today in a rodeo accident in California, was a man of deeply contrasting shades who gained prominence in the Reagan Administration for his leadership on trade issues.


WELCOME URBANITY ON NORTH FORK
LEAD: THE restaurant is called Bonnies by the Bay.
The bay is the Peconic and the place is the epitome of rural North Fork Long Island: the sleepy little fishing village of New Suffolk.
You might expect Bonnies by the Bay to be a quaint dining spot.
Not on your life!
It's urbane, sophisticated and trendy.


Trade Bill's Fate in 'Yes, but' Hands
LEAD: WHEN 19 Republicans joined 52 Democrats in voting for the sweeping trade bill that passed the Senate last week, the Senate and House leadership was buoyed.
The more than two-thirds majority, the Democrats said, was a strong rejection of President Reagan's renewed veto threats.


Insurers and Gay Groups Angered by Dukakis Move on AIDS Tests
LEAD: When Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis decided earlier this month to reverse a state policy that barred AIDS testing by insurance companies, he hoped his position would satisfy insurers while protecting the rights of homosexuals and lesbians.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Madison  $416,000  6 East Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; hardwood floors, porch, 2-car garage; taxes $4,867.
Randolph  $146,000  8 Elm Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2 bath, 28-year-old split level; full basement, family room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $2,062.


Under International Law, Reflagging Doesn't Fly; The Panay Incident
LEAD: To the Editor:


'FIDDLER' IN NEW FAIRFIELD
LEAD: THE Candlewood production of ''Fiddler on the Roof'' is scheduled to run a week longer than the playhouse's other summer musicals, three weeks instead of two.
May it live and be well for 120 years.


Broadcast TV
LEAD: Sharing the quality of excellence and the honor of having been chosen to open the New York Film Festival, two of the more memorable films of the decade - ''The Big Chill'' and ''Ran'' - are scheduled for broadcast this week.


Putting an End to Adversarial Unionism
LEAD: CAN unions halt their membership slide?
This year, a heavy bargaining year that gets under way in earnest tomorrow with the opening of the auto industry talks, could be a turning point.


Listening With Both Eyes
LEAD: SHOULD SOME MUSICAL PERFORMERS BE heard and not seen? I am not being frivolous.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:  HARVEST OF BITTERSWEET.
By Patricia Penton Leimbach.
Illustrated by Jack Homesley. (Harper &amp; Row, $16.95.) Patricia Penton Leimbach has a double career: alongside her husband of more than 35 years she has operated End o' Way, a grain and vegetable farm near Vermilion, Ohio; her column, Country Wife, selections from which make up a portion of ''Harvest of Bittersweet,'' is published in the Elyria, Ohio, Chronicle-Telegram.


Headliners; No Penalty
LEAD: Lawrence Taylor said he got into a lot less trouble for abusing cocaine than other professional athletes who have been caught with the drug.
In his forthcoming biography, ''LT: Living on the Edge,'' excerpts of which appeared last week, the star linebacker of the New York Giants said his drug use was well known during the 1985 season.


Max Fortunoff, 89, Is Dead; Headed Specialty Store Chain
LEAD: Max Fortunoff, founder and chairman of the New York specialty stores that bear his name, died yesterday at his home in Old Westbury, L.I., after a long illness.
He was 89 years old.


Question Of the Week; Are Knicks Back on Track Now?
LEAD: Only time will tell, but give Evans and Co. an A for diligence and effort.
But why wasn't the same diligence and effort there when a new general manager was picked for the Garden's other team last summer?
Ranger fans have good reason to wonder.
WALDO HUTCHINS 3d
Glen Head, L.I.


SHE DIDN'T CHEAT ON CHEKHOV
LEAD:  THE PERFECT SONYA  By Beverly Lowry. 242 pp. New York: Viking. $16.95.


BRASS BANCROFT GOES TO WAR
LEAD:  EARLY REAGAN  By Anne Edwards.
Illustrated. 617 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $21.95.


Hungry Fans Irk McEnroe
LEAD: It is the peculiar genius of John McEnroe to reach back into the mists and discover his magic corkscrew shots again, yet to remember mainly the fleeting backs of his fellow Americans, whose hunger outweighed their patriotism.


Linda J. Pitbladdo Is Married
LEAD: At St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Corning, N.Y., yesterday Linda Jane Pitbladdo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Bruce Pitbladdo of Corning and Hammondsport, N.Y., was married to Paul David Barnett, the son of Mayes Wishart Barnett of Bronxville, N.Y., and Belize, and Lawrence F. Barnett of Westport, Conn.


THE CHANGING HOME
LEAD: For years, I have been amazed at the growing popularity of exorbitantly priced attached and semiattached development homes, marketed under euphemistic labels such as ''planned communities'' and ''townhomes,'' when they are basically glorified Levittowns, with no individuality or privacy.


GRILLED CHICKEN, PLAIN AND SIMPLE, AS A SUMMER CENTERPIECE
LEAD: BECAUSE it is so versatile, chicken is the most popular meat for summer cooking.


Job Security at Top of U.A.W. Agenda
LEAD: THE Ford MOTOR COMPANY earned $3.3 billion last year, the fattest profit in its history, and as last week's report of $1.49 billion in second-quarter earnings indicates, is doing even better this year.
General Motors Corporation had an off year in 1986, but still managed a profit of almost $3 billion and, in its second quarter this year, $977.7 million.


Jaimie L. Spector Engaged To David Field, a Student
LEAD: Jaimie Leigh Spector and David J. Field are planning a December wedding, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall Spector of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced.
Mr.
Field is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Field of Bala Cynwyd, Pa.


Elizabeth Reis Plans September Wedding
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Reis of Branford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Sarah Reis, to Matthew Dennis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Dennis of La Habra, Calif.
A September wedding is planned.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: JULY 26, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $4.95.) A
rich orphan comes of age as she travels the world.
2
2
RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley,
$4.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians.


Puzzles Make Magical Exhibit
LEAD: MECHANICAL PUZ-zles - brain teasers that have engaged the curious for centuries -are the subject of an exhibition described by its organizers as the largest such historical survey ever assembled.
The show, titled ''Puzzles Old and New: Head Crackers, Patience Provers and Other Tactile Teasers,'' opens today at the Hudson River Museum, where it remains through Sept.


DIFFICULTY IS LURE OF SALTWATER FLY FISHING
LEAD: SALTWATER fly fishing isn't wildly popular in the Northeast, but some of those who do turn to it lose interest in all other forms of angling.


RYAN IS QUICK TO STAND BEHIND AN ABSENT O'BRIEN
LEAD: Pat Ryan, the aggressive veteran the Jets trusted to start last season's two playoff games, insisted today that the absent Ken O'Brien still is the club's No. 1 quarterback.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, JULY 27, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-6  U.S. ability to detect mines and destroy them in the Persian Gulf will be increased, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger said.
The United States is capable of retaliating against whatever side laid the mines, he said.
Page A1


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  Personal Income June  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  New-Home Sales May  Leading Indicators June  Friday


U.S. ARMS AIRLIFT TO ANGOLA REBELS IS SAID TO GO ON
LEAD: A secret airlift of American arms to Angolan guerrillas continues through southern Zaire, two Western diplomats stationed in Zaire said today.


Navajo Seeks Industries
LEAD: The chairman of America's largest Indian tribe urged private businesses to ''bring us your bottom line'' before pursuing business ventures in developing nations.


Family Who Lost a Child Will See Another Tried for Murder
LEAD: Glenn Evans had drunk five, maybe six bottles of beer when he slipped behind the wheel of his 1971 Plymouth Duster and set off with three teen-age girls for a drive one hot August night last year.


DAVIES GOES FOR IT
LEAD: AT the United States Women's Open, the 17th hole flows out to an up-slope, levels off and then dips down into a swale in front of a green surrounded by three bunkers.
It is 493 yards long, a par 5 where, according to the hole-by-hole description of the Plainfield Country Club, ''only the very long hitters will be able to reach the green in two shots.


Danish Skydiver Dies in Fall
LEAD: A member of the Danish national skydiving team plunged to his death Saturday after being knocked unconscious in an aerial collision with another skydiver.
The coroner's office identified the dead skydiver as Allan Bergstein, 27 years old.
The other skydiver, Mads Larsen, 33, suffered a broken leg.


SWEDEN AND SPAIN GAIN
LEAD: Sweden defeated France and Spain topped Paraguay yesterday in quarterfinal matches of Davis Cup play.


Volcker and Smoke
LEAD: Paul Volcker, the departing chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, made a final appearance before the Senate Banking Committee last week.
And although many lawmakers praised his contributions to the nation's economic policy, Senator William Proxmire, Democrat of Wisconsin, said he would definitely not miss the smoke from Mr.


300 Fault O'Connor Role On AIDS Commission
LEAD: Yelling ''Shame!'' and pointing their fingers at the great bronze doors of St.
Patrick's Cathedral, some 300 demonstrators yesterday protested President Reagan's choice of John Cardinal O'Connor to serve on the national commission charged with stemming AIDS.


Photos With North
LEAD: A popular thing for tourists to do in the capital is have their picture taken next to a life-sized cardboard cutout of President Reagan.
This week, a cardboard rival appeared on the Pennsylvania Avenue sidewalks in front of the White House: a 6-foot-tall portrait of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, all sparkling medals and square shoulders.


WRENN'S VICTORY IN HIS FIRST ON TOUR
LEAD: Robert Wrenn finished with a near-record 26-under-par 262 today for his first PGA Tour victory in the $600,000 Buick Open at Warwick Hills Golf and Country Club.


FEMALE UMPIRE AWAITS FAVORABLE CALL FROM MAJORS
LEAD: WHEN Pam Postema dresses for work, she changes her clothes in a corner of a concrete locker room shared by three male co-workers.
At Rosenblatt Stadium here, where the Class AAA Omaha Royals are about to face the Iowa Cubs with Postema umpiring behind the plate, her working conditions are better than in most of the other stadiums on the minor-league circuit:


Business and the Law; Hunts' Tactics May Pay Off
LEAD: THE William Herbert Hunt trust estate, the largest privately held trust to seek Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, has repeatedly used extraordinary legal tactics.
The reorganization plan filed last Wednesday by the trust's attorneys was more of the same, according to lawyers involved in the case.


Heart Donations Must Be Asked For
LEAD: To the Editor:


Work of Seven Artists At the Cork Gallery
LEAD: ''Independent Arts,'' an exhibition of work by seven artists associated with the Queens Independent Living Center is to go on display Thursday at the Cork Gallery, at Lincoln Center.
The center is devoted to helping artists with physical disabilities to become part of the main art community.
The gallery, which is accessible to physically handicapped people, is on the lower concourse level of Avery Fisher Hall, Broadway and 65th Street.


ROCHE VICTORY CAPS STRONG COMEBACK
LEAD: Capping a remarkable comeback year, Stephen Roche swept into Paris today as the winner of the Tour de France bicycle race.


THE ALLURE OF LONGER HAIR
LEAD: A QUICK flick through magazines, a brief glance around the street or a short walk through a hair salon confirms that once again longer hair is ''in'' for women.
Most men insist it never should have gone out.
If hair, as psychologists say, is a medium of communication between the sexes, then a woman's longer hair may ease the introductions.


BORK AT YALE: COLLEGUES RECALL A FRIEND BUT A PHILOSOPHICAL FOE
LEAD: Harry H. Wellington, professor and former dean at Yale Law School, longtime faculty colleague and next-door neighbor here of Robert H. Bork, recalled the day he heard of his friend's nomination to the Supreme Court.


Advertising; Rolls-Royce Appeals To the Reader's Nose
LEAD: The July issue of posh Architectural Digest magazine went on sale June 10 with a special insert from Rolls-Royce that had a leathery look to carry its leathery smell.
That's right, with the help of Della Femina, Travisano &amp; Partners, the magazine published a scent strip with the smell of a new Rolls at a cost of about $125,000.


Plane Flaw Ends Cuomo Trip
LEAD: An airplane carrying Governor Cuomo made an emergency landing on one engine today after a warning light indicated the other engine was on fire.


Japanese Exporting to Japan
LEAD: Thanks to the lower value of the dollar against the yen, some Japanese companies are finding it profitable to export to Japan from plants in the United States.


Advertising; Spy Magazine Raises Rate Base and Rates
LEAD: Spy magazine, started as a local phenomenon, is preparing its eighth issue, with a new advertising rate base as of July.
It has gone to 40,000, from 25,000, and the rates are being increased as well.


Co-stars Get Acquainted
LEAD: Mayor Koch petting a sow yesterday at City Hall before the filming of a segment of ''An Empire of Reason,'' a television drama on the ratification of the U.S.
Constitution.
The issue being filmed dealt with whether the city should have garbage collectors or continue using pigs to eat their trash. (The New York Times/Chester Higgins


History and Hope Given Their Due At Cooperstown
LEAD: In this bucolic little town where one Abner Doubleday did not invent baseball, and where a lovely piece of fiction was allowed to grow into a legend, three men who performed real, and extraordinary deeds, were officially proclaimed here today as legends themselves.


Marie Daly Price Wed To Robert Crandall Jr.
LEAD: Marie Daly Price and Robert Wilson Crandall Jr. were married yesterday at the Warren, Vt., home of the bridegroom's mother, Mrs.
Crandall, who also lives in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
The Rev.
David Geib, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
Mr.
Crandall's father is deceased.


Lasers and 'Red Force:' Realism in War Games
LEAD: The Red Force of 130 tanks and armored personnel carriers, looking for all the world like a Soviet regiment, roar out of Afghanistan through the Bowling Alley and across the Shelf to drop into the Valley of Death and assault the Blue Force of 150 American infantrymen and four tanks.


Tempers Add to Danger Of Roads in California
LEAD: A man in a sports car fired a gun at a pickup truck in heavy traffic today in the latest of eight highway shootings that have left two people dead and one critically wounded this summer.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Backstage White House


Long Family Tie Cited By Buyer of Kodak Unit
LEAD: Carl D. Newton 3d, who is waiting to complete his purchase of the Fox Photo retail unit from the Eastman Kodak Company, says that the decision to buy the stores was based on more than just business.


Miss Rowse and J. B. Spero Wed in Massachusetts
LEAD: The wedding of Ellen Rowse, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Rowse of Acton, Mass., to Joshua B. Spero, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Spero of Great Neck, L.I., took place yesterday in Littleton, Mass.
Rabbi Allan Press and the Rev.
Robert Hadley, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the home of Dr.


What if the Contras Are More Popular?
LEAD: Fifty percent against the Administration's policy toward Nicaragua, and about 25 percent in favor - that's been roughly the public opinion scorecard for years.
Now, after the emotional pleas of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North, there's been an evening out.
It's probably a blip.
But what if the surge in support for the Nicaraguan rebels holds?


Jersey Hospital Costs Lower Than Average
LEAD: The cost of a stay in a New Jersey hospital was 13 percent less than the national average in 1985, and the state showed the lowest five-year increase in daily Medicare charges, according to a New Jersey Hospital Association report.


CONCERT: THE KRONOS QUARTET AT SUMMERFARE
LEAD: The Kronos Quartet has earned its present eminence primarily through its remarkable repertory of contemporary music of every kind, and secondarily through the excellence of its performances.
But another part of this San Francisco group's very carefully crafted image has been its theatricality - heavily stylized costumes that change from concert to concert, usually flavored with bohemian-punk raffishness.


Nation's Governors Push for Welfare Reform
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts joking with Gov.
Garrey Carruthers of New Mexico, left, and Gov.
Madeleine M. Kunin of Vermont at Governors' meeting in Traverse City, Mich.
Page A8. (AP)


STAGE: 'THE ROVER,' FEMINIST COMEDY FROM 1677
LEAD: From the moment Christopher Reeve swaggers on stage in 17th-century cavalier finery, shirt open and sword at the ready, it's clear why the Williamstown Theater Festival has chosen to revive ''The Rover.'' This infrequently staged Restoration comedy, written by Aphra Behn in 1677, gives Mr.
Reeve and his dashing companions - Stephen Collins, Harry Groener, Edward


Leibrandt's 2-Hitter Ends Oriole Streak
LEAD: Charlie Leibrandt pitched a two-hitter and the Kansas City Royals ended Baltimore's 11-game winning streak today by beating the Orioles, 4-0.


Why New York Extended Milk Shelf Life
LEAD: To the Editor:


Antipollution Plan Stirs Ire of Colorado Motorists
LEAD: By now, most residents here are accustomed to restrictions on wood-burning stoves, tough standards on automobile emissions and other measures of recent years to control the severe air pollution along the eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains.


ADMINISTRATION MOURNS BALDRIGE, SKILLED MASTER OF ITS TRADE POLICY
LEAD: The Reagan Administration found itself handicapped today by the death of Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige at a time when it is trying to work with Congress on critical trade legislation.


Mattingly Museum
LEAD: In his fourth full season with the Yankees, Don Mattingly has already made it to Cooperstown.
Then, again, all the Yankees will be there today when they play the Atlanta Braves in the Hall of Fame exhibition game at 9,980-seat Doubleday Field.


Brazil Seeks $7.2 Billion Of Interest-Free Loans
LEAD: Only weeks after major banks in the United States declared that a quarter of their Latin American loans were probably worthless, Brazil has asked its bank creditors for $7.2 billion in new money at zero interest.


Crisis for Bombay's Exchange
LEAD: Two years ago, India's premier stock exchange here was swept by an unprecedented buying boom.
Hundreds of thousands of new investors flooded the market as public enthusiasm grew for the liberal and pro-business policies of the new Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi.


They Are Not Heard On Capitol Hill
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHITE SOX NEARLY PERFECT
LEAD: The sun was shining on the South Side this afternoon.
Saturday's oppressive heat was gone, and a comfortable breeze was blowing, and the White Sox were threatening to remove the Yankees from first place.


French Salvage Crew Brings Back First Objects From Titanic: Dishes
LEAD: French explorers today retrieved dishes from the wreckage of the Titanic, the first objects ever recovered from the luxury ocean liner that sank 75 years ago, killing 1,513 passengers.


TRADE DEBATE TAKES A ROLE IN CAMPAIGNS
LEAD: Although trade is hardly ever mentioned when poll takers ask Americans to name the nation's most important problem, it has emerged as the first issue to rouse serious debate among the 1988 Presidential contenders.


Man Charged in Sex Attacks On Three Women in Queens
LEAD: A convicted rapist and kidnapper, released from prison two months ago, was charged yesterday with 3 of 13 sexual assaults on women that have stirred fear and anger in Central Queens, the police said.


Bronx Officials Face Churches' Power
LEAD: Similar events for Presidential candidates have been dubbed ''cattle shows.'' For candidates running for boroughwide office in the Bronx, an appearance yesterday on the steps of the county building before a coalition of church groups was termed an ''accountability assembly.''


Home Buying Drops Sharply In the Suburbs
LEAD: The surging market for homes in the suburbs of New York City has abruptly shifted gears.
In many suburban communities, where real-estate prices have more than doubled since 1980, industry experts say there is a huge inventory of unsold homes, and a sudden paucity of buyers.


NIKOLAIS AND LOUIS, A DANCE PORTRAIT
LEAD: CHRISTIAN BLACKWOOD'S ''Nik and Murray,'' on Channel 13 tonight at 9 o'clock, is a valentine to the 38-year professional and personal relationship of Alwin Nikolais and Murray Louis.
The documentary suggests ways in which the work of these two major modern-dance choreographers developed.
But it does not give us an idea of their place in


POP MUSIC: JON HASSELL AND FARAFINA
LEAD: THE challenge of cross-cultural collaborations such as the encounter Friday between Jon Hassell, an American composer-musician, and the African percussion group Farafina at Alice Tully Hall, is that next to the elemental integrity of the traditional music, the Westerner's contributions may simply seem irrelevant.


Bridge: Unheralded Team Captures Spingold Knockout Victory
LEAD: An unheralded foursome snatched a victory here Saturday night in one of the most exciting Spingold Knockout finals in the event's 63-year history.


Seoul Journal; His Dream Is Democracy; His Nightmare, a Coup
LEAD: These days, when Kim Dae Jung takes an afternoon nap as his driver goes along the Han River here, the road behind him is clear.


Bolshoi Scheduled to Perform in Israel
LEAD: The Bolshoi Ballet and Red Army Chorus have scheduled performances in Israel, it was announced today.
Their appearance would mark a significant upgrading of Soviet-Israeli cultural ties.


Give Welfare Consensus a Chance
LEAD: Welfare reform - over decades of debate, the words have sparked combat among liberals and conservatives, affluent taxpayers and families mired in poverty.
Welcome, therefore, a new consensus on linking welfare to work.


MINERS FOUND TO HAVE HIGHEST DEATH RATE ON JOB
LEAD: The Federal Government's first compilation of occupational deaths in the United States has found that mining and construction jobs are the riskiest.


In Albany, Assembly Turns Debate Over to the Public
LEAD: It is perhaps a tribute to the spirit of democracy in New York State that when the Assembly opened its chamber to the public this weekend for an open debate, many participants did not hesitate to use their time at the microphone to condemn their hosts.


Kuwait Debt Proposal
LEAD: The Kuwait Finance Minister Jasim Muhammad al-Khurafi said today that the country was considering a public debt issue to finance its budget deficit and expand its domestic investment opportunities.
He told Kuna, the Kuwaiti news agency, that numerous ways of financing the deficit were being studied.


Jane Baker Becomes Bride
LEAD: Jane Linda Baker, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Baker of Demarest, N.J., and H. Roger Segelken, a son of Mrs.
H.
Clifford Segelken of Phoenicia, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Segelken, were married yesterday at Shotwell Memorial Park in Skaneateles, N.Y., by Linda Lavery, a justice of the peace.
The bride, a former reporter for The Syracuse Herald Journal, graduated from Syracuse University and is a freelance writer.


Julie Hartenstein Wed in Syracuse
LEAD: Julie Hartenstein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Hans Hartenstein of Syracuse, was married yesterday to Jonathan W. Meyersohn, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rolf Meyersohn of New York.
Judge Minna Buck of Family Court in Syracuse officiated at the home of the bride's parents.


Question Box
LEAD: QUESTION: What's the best season record for a major league team that failed to win a pennant or a division title?


CASTRO WARNS AGAINST TRAITORS
LEAD: Still badly shaken by the defection two months ago of a hero air force general, President Fidel Castro tonight lashed out at ''miserable and repugnant traitors'' who, he said, betray the Cuban revolution.


ASTROS CREATE LATE NIGHTMARE
LEAD: The Mets lost the pennant yesterday.
Not the one that's decided in October; the one that flies on the center-field flagpole in Shea Stadium, just below the American flag.
Somebody sneaked over the fence between 8 and 9 o'clock yesterday morning, lowered the pennant and took it away.


Advertising; Head of Muller Jordan Adds Creative Title
LEAD: Jane Maas, president of Muller Jordan Weiss, started out in the business as a copywriter and, although she later got into account management, she never really gave up the writing.


Winning Streak Reaches 29 Games
LEAD: The Salt Lake Trappers, an independent collection of players rebuffed by the major leagues, continued to add to the longest winning streak in professional baseball history today by beating Pocatello, 8-6, for their 29th straight victory.


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: * Family Media has reassigned Discover magazine to John Emmerling Inc.


NEW FINDINGS TIE BLACK HOLES TO THE FORMATION OF GALAXIES
LEAD: Immense concentrations of mass that appear to be black holes, each with the gravity of 10 million to 100 million suns, have been detected at the cores of the two spiral galaxies closest to ours, astronomers announced yesterday.


Protesters March Against Gandhi in New Delhi
LEAD: Policemen holding back demonstrators outside Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's residence in New Delhi.
The protesters, from a right-wing opposition group, said they were demonstrating against reported corruption in the Gandhi Government and attacks on politicians opposed to the Prime Minister. (AP)


GUIDED ASTRONAUTS TO MOON
LEAD: Charles Stark Draper, a pioneer in advanced guidance technology for aircraft and missiles and developer of the navigation system that steered Americans to the moon and back, died Saturday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 85 years old.


A ROCKING BILLY JOEL BREAKS THROUGH SOVIET RESERVE
LEAD: Billy Joel brought his rock-and-roll here today and won the souls of those in a stony Soviet audience, leaving them cheering, dancing on chairs and looking around in fearful wonder as they followed the music and not the rules.


REPORTING EXACTLY WHAT IS SAID
LEAD: It was an entrepreneur's dream: a market ripe for the picking.


Family Is Awarded $380,000 In Cemetery's Burial Mix-Up
LEAD: A jury awarded a family $380,000 Thursday after a cemetery mix-up separated a couple who had wanted to be buried next to each other.


Carolyn Ronda Bernstein Weds Dr. Brian Waldron
LEAD: Carolyn Ronda Bernstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Bernstein of Edenton, N.C., and Dr.
Brian Joseph Waldron, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Waldron of Brooklyn, N.Y., were married yesterday.
Mayor John Calabrese of Cliffside Park, N.J., performed the ceremony at the Palisadium in Cliffside Park.


Husband Is Charged In Wife's Death
LEAD: A Manhattan man was charged with first-degree manslaughter yesterday in connection with the beating death of his wife in a midtown hotel room, the police said.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE EUROPEAN TRIBE.
By Caryl Phillips. 129 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $15.95.


Karen Olin Wed To J. G. Heimann
LEAD: Karen Olin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton J. Olin of Livingston, N.J., was married yesterday to Joshua Gaines Heimann, the son of Margaret Fechheimer Heimann and John Gaines Heimann, both of New York.
Rabbi Leonard Beerman, an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N


FOR COUTURE, A FUTURE
LEAD: With his first collection under his own name, Christian Lacroix has been catapulted into fashion's hall of fame.
Like Christian Dior exactly 40 years ago, he has revived a failing institution, the haute couture, or made-to-order branch of French fashion.
He has done it with verve, whimsy and a youthful air.


FOR BANGLADESHI OPPOSITION, A CRICIAL PERIOD
LEAD: The monsoon rains are at their most pitiless now in Bangladesh, a country regularly victimized by wind and water.


Irishman Wins Tour
LEAD: Stephen Roche, foreground, riding to victory in the Tour de France yesterday in Paris.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An Associated Press dispatch Friday from Santa Ana, Calif., about a bias lawsuit filed by a policeman, misidentified the group that the jury found had discriminated.
It was the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California, not the national organization.


Brenda Mendoza Married To Jonathan R. Friedman
LEAD: Brenda Marie Mendoza, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Radames Mendoza of San Juan, P. R., and Jonathan Roy Friedman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Friedman of New York, were married yesterday at the Hotel Casa Madrona in Sausalito, Calif., by Rabbi Jonathan Plaut.


The Editorial Notebook: Einstein's Papers, and Brain; The Physicist's Legacy Remains Veiled to Millions
LEAD: When Albert Einstein lay dying in Princeton Hospital, the nurse assigned to him spoke no German and the great physicist's last words passed uncomprehended.
Strangely, for a person of such interest and eminence, the rest of his legacy has long remained almost equally inaccessible.
Publication of his papers has begun only now, after a 30-year delay, and even then with an English translation supplied as a grudging afterthought.


BECKER STOPS MAYOTTE, U.S. IN CUP
LEAD: After John McEnroe produced a breezy singles victory that put the United States team into a tie with West Germany in the Davis Cup relegation round, it was left to Tim Mayotte to conquer Boris Becker to complete the comeback needed to keep the United States in contention for the 1988 cup.


Rodeo Comrades Pay Tribute To Baldrige, 'a Real Cowboy'
LEAD: Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige spent the final two days of his life pursuing what friends said he had loved most - the life of a cowboy.


STORM HITS OPEN, SUSPENDING PLAY
LEAD: A violent and damaging thunderstorm with wind gusts over 60 miles an hour struck the Plainfield Country Club shortly before noon today, forcing the United States Golf Association to suspend play in the final round of the 42d United States Women's Open until Monday.


Advertising; Ad Tax Challenge
LEAD: As they had promised they would, the Association of National Advertisers went to Circuit Court in Tallahassee, Fla., on Friday to challenge the constitutionality of Florida's 5 percent sales and use tax on advertising, which went into effect July 1.
The complaint cites the state Constitution on free speech guarantees and the United States Constitution on its free speech, commerce and due process clauses.


Tool Orders Rose 9.4% Last Month
LEAD: New orders for American-made machine tools rose 9.4 percent in June, after strongly encouraging increases in May, and shipments increased 11.9 percent, according to a report to be released today by the National Machine Tool Builders' Association.


CONCERT: CHARLES DUTOIT CONDUCTS AT TANGLEWOOD
LEAD: Charles Dutoit is not a hard-driving conductor.
His reputation, considerable and still growing, is based in good part on performances of the big orchestral showpieces - in particular a series of sonically and instrumentally brilliant compact disks on the London label with his Montreal Symphony.
But a great part of his appeal stems from the fact that he plays the blockbusters for their musical values, naturally, with blockbusting as an exciting but natural byproduct.


Sports World Specials
LEAD: It was Mookie Wilson's turn to conduct one of those summer sports clinics for New York youngsters, but when the Mets' outfielder got to the gym in the basement of a Bronx school one day last week, instead of facing a group of 150 budding baseball players eager for instruction, he found himself surrounded by a horde of pubescent news hounds on the scent of a scoop.


WELFARE OVERHAUL IMPERILED BY QUIBBLES
LEAD: A historic overhaul of the welfare system appears within reach by the end of this year, but disputes over details might torpedo any agreement, key figures from both parties said today.


Bolivians Fight Efforts to Eradicate Coca
LEAD: Joint Bolivian and American efforts to combat cocaine exports have run into strong opposition in recent weeks from organized peasant growers of coca, the raw material of the drug.


MUSIC: DOLLIE DE LUXE BLENDS IDIOMS
LEAD: THOSE among us who, in their spare time, seek the meaning of life reserve a special reverence for the connection-makers of this world.
When the historian Barbara Tuchman showed how closely the 14th century resembled our own, we shuddered a little at the significance of it all.
Point out resonances of El Greco in the painting of


The Pursuit of Sassafras in Central Park
LEAD: Like it or not, Britain's chief delegate to the United Nations will be dining this week at his Beekman Place residence on sheep sorrel, lady's-thumb, poor man's pepper, amaranth and lamb's-quarters - all wild plants and weeds picked yesterday in Central Park by his enterprising chef.


ISRAELIS GAINING GROUND IN RESTORING AFRICA TIES
LEAD: ''Shalom, Shamir'' chanted African dancers as the Israeli Star of David fluttered alongside the green-red-and-yellow flag of this West African nation.


DICK WELLSTOOD, A JAZZ PIANIST, IS DEAD AT 59
LEAD: Dick Wellstood, one of the younger jazzmen who kept the traditions alive in the years after World War II, died of heart failure Friday in Palo Alto, Calif., where he went to attend the Peninsula Jazz Party.
He was 59 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Business's Bottom Line: Ethics
LEAD: Ethical and moral lapses in the business and financial community, academia, politics and religion fill the daily press.
But the rash of insider-trading cases on Wall Street against recent graduates of top business and law schools seems particularly disturbing because the cream of the crop, with six-figure incomes and brilliant careers ahead, is being convicted.


GIANTS OPEN CAMP TODAY
LEAD: When the Giants open their training camp here Monday at Pace University's Westchester campus, most of their 14 drafted rookies will probably be on hand, their contracts signed.
Rookies and veterans alike must be signed to take part in training camp.


The Doldrums at NATO
LEAD: Lord Carrington has decided to retire as NATO's Secretary General next year.
The politicking to name his successor has begun and, typically, Peter Carrington, former British Foreign Minister, is too diplomatic to discuss the candidates.


Huston and the Man Who Might Be Traven
LEAD: To the Editor I agree with Hank O'Neal (letter, July 12) that Woody Allen and other critics of colorization of films would do well to remember that much of Hollywood's product is the result of unfettered tampering by movie makers with the art of others.
Mr.
O'Neal is mistaken, however, in naming John


IT'S STILL A LONG HALL FOR WOMEN IN BASEBALL
LEAD: WHETHER baseball is ready for the advancement of Pam Postema and the sprinkling of other women, most of whom toil in the front office in supplemental roles, is unresolved.


Meese Role in Meeting With North
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mayor to the Rescue In Boston House Fire
LEAD: When a fire broke out in a neighborhood he was visiting, Mayor Raymond Flynn raced to the scene ahead of the firefighters, kicked his way into a burning house and helped an elderly, handicapped man to safety.


Medical Resident: Life on the Crisis Shift
LEAD: At 2:30 A.M. the corridors of New York Infirmary-Beekman Downtown Hospital were dimly lighted and still.
But inside the intensive-care unit the respirators pumped and hummed as usual, sustaining fragile lives.


BACKSTAGE VIEW EMERGES OF THE PRESIDENT'S MISSTATEMENT ON THE IRAN-CONTRA AFFAIR
LEAD: The testimony of Secretary of State George P. Shultz last week and documents offered as evidence in the Iran-contra hearings provide a backstage look at why President Reagan made misleading statements about the Iran arms sales soon after they were disclosed.


Change in Ceremonies
LEAD: The two weeks of competition are expected to be stirring, and the daily opportunities for promoting international understanding will be extensive.
But when more than 4,000 athletes from 38 nations gather for the closing ceremonies of the 10th Pan American Games in Indianapolis Aug. 23, there will be a reminder that all is not sweetness and light in the


Storms Bring Relief, at Last, From the Heat
LEAD: There was a price to be paid - thunderstorms and some power failures -but the heat wave that grilled the New York region with 90-degree temperatures and worse for nine straight days came to an abrupt, and merciful, end yesterday.


Final Battles Shape Up On Major Banking Bill
LEAD: It is reckoning time in both the Congress and the Reagan Administration for the most far-reaching banking legislation in more than seven years.


Action Awaited on U.S. Debt Ceiling
LEAD: The outlook for Treasury financings remains cloudy this week, as securities dealers and investors wait for Congress to pass legislation raising the Federal debt ceiling.


PANEL CRITICIZES FIRE DISPATCHERS IN HARLEM BLAZE
LEAD: Efforts to fight a blaze in a high-rise Harlem apartment building that killed seven people in March were hampered by fire dispatchers who mishandled calls and by firefighters at the scene who created an atmosphere of confusion, Mayor Koch said yesterday.


George O'Day Is Dead at 64; Designer and Racer of Boats
LEAD: George O'Day, a sailboat designer and racer who captured an Olympic gold medal in yachting, died of colon cancer today.
He was 64 years old.


Advertising; Family Circle's New Pitch
LEAD: THE first Family Circle ad campaign from Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton breaks today in the trade press, showing off a new theme line: ''For the Women of Today Raising the Generation of Tomorrow.''


Frederick Gilland Henry Marries Sylvia Reynolds
LEAD: At Knowles Memorial Chapel at Rollins College in Winter Park, Fla., Sylvia Ruth Reynolds, the daughter of Judge and Mrs.
George S. Reynolds of Lawrence, Kan., was married yesterday to Frederick Gilland Henry, a son of Mrs.
John A. Henry of Orangeburg, S.C., and the late Mr.
Henry.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert L.


Riot Police Quell Disturbance
LEAD: Law-enforcement officers in riot gear used tear gas to break up a disturbance early today after 1,500 to 2,000 youths, in town to watch hydroplane races, began throwing bottles and rocks at police officers.


Metro Matters; Race and Crime: Beyond Statistics To Find Answers
LEAD: When a Police Commissioner publicly blames most of the city's crime on an ethnic, racial or religious group, he had better be right.


Baptist Minister Orders Staff To Convert to Faith or Resign
LEAD: A Southern Baptist pastor here has told staff members at the church's day care center to convert to his faith or quit, prompting eight workers to resign.


WASHINGTON TALK: Profile: Evelyn Dubrow; A Capitol Hill Lobbyist Everyone Loves
LEAD: One person on Capitol Hill gets to share the Congressional doorkeepers' chairs outside the House of Representatives chambers, a good spot to catch the eye of an arriving or departing member of Congress.
Evelyn Dubrow and no one else.
No one protests.
This 4-foot 11-inch lobbyist for the International Ladies Garment Workers Union who began roaming the halls of Congress 29 years ago seeking support for a $1 minimum wage, and who still troops Capitol Hill in her size 4 shoes, has earned the privilege.


Advertising; Perrier Assignment For Altschiller Reitzfeld
LEAD: The Perrier Group has assigned three of its regional bottled water brands to Altschiller Reitzfeld.
Billings could reach $4 million, trade sources indicate.


Advertising; New Softness President
LEAD: Carol Brady Blades, 39, has been named president and chief operating officer at the Softness Group, a public relations firm, where she started in 1969 as an intern from New York University's journalism program.
Mrs.
Blades, who became an executive vice president at Softness 10 years later, has held every position within the account management division.


Dollar's Fall Helps U.S. Profits
LEAD: After screaming about being priced out of markets when the dollar soared in the first half of the decade, companies across the United States are beginning to see its decline translate into healthier earnings.


Salvation Army Opens a Center At Harlem Site
LEAD: With a parade, prayers and speeches by politicians, the Salvation Army opened an $8 million community center in Harlem yesterday, ending a 14-year struggle with community residents who favored the construction of housing at the site.


Cards Drop a Doubleheader
LEAD: Will Clark hit a pair of game-winning home runs today, and the San Francisco Giants won both games of a doubleheader from the St.
Louis Cardinals, 6-3 and 5-2, for a sweep of their four-game series.


Advertising; Jeffrey Clapp Leaving MacNamara Firm
LEAD: MacNamara, Clapp &amp; Klein will announce today that Jeffrey W. Clapp, its 49-year-old chairman, is resigning from the six-year-old agency to pursue other, unidentified goals.
An alumnus of both Norman, Craig &amp; Kummel and Ted Bates &amp; Company, he was the $42 million agency's top account man.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Robert H. Bork's role as Acting Attorney General in the Watergate scandals misidentified the wife of Ralph K. Winter, a Federal judge who was then a Yale Law School professor.
Mr.
Winter's wife is Kathryn Winter.
At the time Mr.
Bork was married to Claire Bork, who died in 1980.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, JULY 27, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


U.S. GOODS IN SOUTH AFRICA
LEAD: Nearly 10 years after Wang Laboratories Inc. pulled out of South Africa, the company's computers are still widely available.


Debra Dickman Wed
LEAD: Debra Lynn Dickman, the daughter of Mrs.
Alfred Dickman of Cranbury, N.J., and the late Mr.
Dickman, and Dr.
Lawrence Mark Ratner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Ratner of Lawrence, L.I., were married yesterday at Farrington Manor in East Brunswick, N.J., by Rabbi Steven Shaw, the bride's cousin.
The bride is a graduate of Hofstra University.


BIG THREE READY FOR HASKELL SHOWDOWN
LEAD: The three most accomplished 3-year-olds in the country are actually five different horses: Bet Twice, Alysheba, Alysheba (on Lasix), Lost Code and Lost Code (on Lasix).


Beth Goldstein Married To Neil Jay Weissman
LEAD: Beth Ellen Goldstein, who will enroll in the M.B.A. program at Fordham University in September, and Neil Jay Weissman, a fourth-year medical student at the Cornell University Medical College, were married yesterday at the Crest Hollow Country Club in Woodbury, L.I.
Rabbi Neil Kurshan officiated, assisted by Cantor Steven


Polo, the Sport of Britain's Princes, Now Beguiles the 'Castle Creepers'
LEAD: It took a few thousand years, but polo is now a busy new venue for social climbing in Britain, complete with ''castle creepers'' - social overreachers - and handsome, mercenary athletes racing past a pop-culture melange that was displayed today like designer daffodils along the borders of the greensward.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''Dukakis appeals to the part of the Democratic Party that worries about the price of BMW's and cappuccino machines.
Gephardt appeals to the part that worries about layoffs and plant closings.
They are button A and button B on trade and the other Democratic candidates are in danger of being submerged by that polarization.


Market Place; The Leading Bank Funds
LEAD: THE Bank of Boston's income equity fund easily outperformed all other bank common-stock funds in the second quarter, a period in which the average bank fund just about kept pace with the overall market.
The First Fidelity Bank in Newark also showed impressive gains, with funds that came second and third.


Long Island and Smoke
LEAD: Smoking also figured in a debate in the House of Representatives last week over an $11 billion spending bill that covers the Department of Transportation.


Lourdes Lopez of City Ballet Weds Lionel Saporta
LEAD: Lourdes Lopez, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Felix Lopez of Miami, was married yesterday to Lionel Rene Saporta, the son of Dr.
Mathilde Nicolaides Saporta of Montauk, L.I., and the late Rene Saporta.
The ceremony was performed at St.
Clement's Roman Catholic Church in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., by Deacon Daniel


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Rent Party


THE AVANT-GARDE: MOVING FROM CULT TO THE MAINSTREAM
LEAD: Clad in black, his face a mask of homicidal grimness, the noted avant-garde director Robert Wilson made a rare stage appearance at Alice Tully Hall recently in his ''Overture to the Fourth Act of Deafman Glance.'' Enacting a silent slow-motion scenario of ritual infanticide with his partner, Sheryl Sutton, Mr.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Righteous Bucks Wins Cane Pace
LEAD: Righteous Bucks rallied the last few yards and finished a half-length ahead of Golden Greek tonight to capture the Cane Pace, the first leg of the triple crown for 3-year-old pacers.


Tatars to Meet Gromyko Today Over Homeland
LEAD: Crimean Tatars who staged an extraordinary 24-hour demonstration at the gates of the Kremlin this weekend will meet Monday with President Andrei A. Gromyko, one of their leaders said today.


Auto Racing
LEAD: First for Piquet: Nelson Piquet of Brazil, driving a Williams-Honda, won the West German Grand Prix yesterday in Hockenheim.
It was his first victory of the season.
Piquet now has a 4-point lead in the Formula One world championship drivers' standing with 39 points.
Stefan Johansson of Sweden finished in second place, and Aryton Senna of Brazil took third.


Pearson to Buy Rest of Camco
LEAD: Camco Inc., a leading maker of oil production equipment, said yesterday that it would be taken private in a $29-a-share tender offer by Pearson Inc., the United States subsidiary of Pearson P.L.C. of Britain.


2 Bodies Recovered From Coney I. Creek
LEAD: A police scuba team yesterday recovered the bodies of two men who apparently drowned during a futile effort to rescue an 8-year-old Brooklyn boy who had fallen into Coney Island Creek Saturday afternoon, the police said.


Advertising; Nissan Winner Due
LEAD: The two agencies in the finals for the $150 million Nissan Motor Corporation U.S.A. account expect to learn of the winner on Friday.
Tatham-Laird &amp; Kudner, Chicago, is presenting on Wednesday, and Chiat/Day, Los Angeles, on Thursday.
The previous agency was the William Esty Company.


U.S. CAN RETALIATE FOR MINING IN GULF, WEINBERGER WARNS
LEAD: Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger said today that the United States would increase its ability to detect and destroy mines in the Persian Gulf, and was ''perfectly capable'' of retaliating against whatever force put mines in the way of merchant ships bound for Kuwait.


SIKH INTRUDERS ARE ALLOWED TO REMAIN IN CANADA
LEAD: Two weeks after 174 Indian nationals landed in Nova Scotia from a freighter, all but nine have been approved for temporary residence in Canada.


Strong Economy Is No Blessing for Boston House Hunters
LEAD: By some measures, Massachusetts has the strongest economy in the country and the strongest housing market.
As a result, according to state officials, it also has one of the biggest housing shortages for low-income families.


Tell Us if the Cheese On Our Pizza Is Fake
LEAD: To the Editor:


Attendance Marks Bring Satisfaction
LEAD: Shortly after the organization was awarded this year's United States Olympic Festival, a publicist for the North Carolina Amateur Sports predicted that the festival would be ''the greatest single event in North Carolina history.''


Mona Lisa's Mustache
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prosecutor to Deal With Subtler Crime
LEAD: Since 1980, Bruce A. Baird has spent most of his time chasing the Mafia.
He was the lead prosecutor in getting convictions against top members of the Colombo organized crime family, and since January he has been head of the narcotics unit in the United States Attorney's office for the Southern District of New


OFF L.I., A PIRATE RADIO STATION DEFIES F.C.C.
LEAD: Protesting what they called the stagnant state of rock-and-roll radio in New York City, a group of gadfly radio enthusiasts took to the airwaves last week from a rusty old freighter anchored five miles off Long Island's South Shore.


Questionable Municipal Bonds
LEAD: In December 1985 and again in August 1986, the municipal bond market was the scene of frantic deal-making, as bond attorneys and securities dealers worked around the clock with local government officials to complete financings that would soon be banned by changes in Federal tax laws.


Watch for a Historic Auto Pact
LEAD: The collective bargaining that begins today between the United Automobile Workers and General Motors and the Ford Motor Company could be the most critical labor talks in the last half century.


Employment Surges To a 16-Year High For New York City
LEAD: New York City stanched its loss of manufacturing jobs in the first half of this year and reached a 16-year high in overall employment while its suburban competitors faltered, the United States Labor Department announced yesterday.


Koch Joins Channel 31 for Program on AIDS
LEAD: For more than four hours tonight, New York-area television viewers can ask questions and receive information about AIDS on Channel 31, WNYC-TV.
Mayor Koch, Surgeon General Dr.
C.
Everett Koop and Dr.
Lloyd M. Moglen, a psychiatrist, will answer calls from viewers during ''AIDS in New York: An Open Dialogue.


Iran-Contra Lies Fester Within the Presidency
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alberto-Culver Bid
LEAD: The Alberto-Culver Company, a diversifed health-care marketer, said it was seeking to acquire the Minneapolis-based Lamaur Inc. for $22 a share.
But Lamaur's stock rose above Alberto-Culver's offering price on speculation that a higher bid would emerge.
The stock closed at $23, up $6.25, on New York Stock Exchange - the largest percentage gain yesterday.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD: Dancing on the Green Across the roadway from the Sheep Meadow in Central Park, on the site of a former sheep pen, is 53-year-old Tavern on the Green (873-3200).
It is a large restaurant, able to accommodate 1,000 people.


COMPAQ COMPUTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPAQ COMPUTER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
267,514,000
147,131,000
Net inc
30,668,000
9,267,000
Share earns
.80
.34
6mo sales
478,473,000
291,121,000
Net inc
50,828,000
17,958,000
Share earns
1.37
.64


Dallas Sells 2 Bond Issues
LEAD: Dallas sold two general obligation bond issues totaling $71.1 million, divided between two underwriting groups led by the Chase Manhattan Capital Markets Corporation and Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


New York to Add Foster Care For Youngsters With AIDS
LEAD: A second foster-care agency under contract to New York City will start recruiting parents to care for children with AIDS, Mayor Koch announced yesterday at a Congressional hearing.


CUMMINS ENGINE CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CUMMINS ENGINE CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
687,200,000
603,600,000
Net inc
10,300,000
3,300,000
Share earns
.77
.32
6mo sales
1,300,000,000
1,100,000,000
Net inc
24,600,000
7,100,000
Share earns
1.92
.70


Illuminating Co.
LEAD: The United Illuminating Company is offering $100 million of 12 percent debentures due in 2017 at a price of 99, to yield 12 1/8 percent through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The debentures, which are rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp;P., were offered to yield 3 1/4 percentage points more than 30-year Treasury bonds.


Will the Leopard Coat Return?
LEAD: Could leopard fashion make a comeback - coats and hats of real leopard skin, not the spotted prints now enjoying a certain chic?
Conservationists' nightmares were prompted by a new report that the African leopard is surprisingly robust.
Far from endangered, the scrappy animals even live inside several capital cities in Africa, said Rowan B.


PATCH OF BRONX WATERFRONT WARILY AWAITS RENAISSANCE
LEAD: Never mind the junked cars that ring the shore or the thunderous planes that soar overhead from nearby La Guardia Airport.
John Pache would not live anywhere but along the East Bronx waterfront.


Longshoremen's Union Elects Successor to Teddy Gleason
LEAD: The executive vice president of the International Longshoremen's Association, John M. Bowers, was elected president of the union last week at its convention in Bal Harbour, Fla.
He succeeds Thomas W. (Teddy) Gleason, who retired after 24 years in the post.


LOCAL JOURNALISTS LOOM LARGER IN THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN
LEAD: While Vice President Bush huddled with North Carolina Republicans in a Raleigh hotel, Bill Nigut, a television reporter, hustled down the road for some quick interviews in a bar decorated with college pennants and a life-size cardboard cutout of the actors who appear in Bartles &amp; James wine-cooler commercials.


Prof. Donald R. Cressey, 68, Expert on Sociology of Crime
LEAD: Dr.
Donald R. Cressey, one of the nation's leading experts on the sociology of crime, died July 21 in Solvang, Calif.
He was 68 years old.
As a professor of sociology at the University of California at Santa Barbara for 26 years, Dr.
Cressey wrote several highly regarded books on the causes and prevention of crime.


Four Theme Park Executives Are Ousted to Allay Fears
LEAD: Four executives at the Six Flags Great Adventure theme park have been ousted after several accidents this summer that left one person dead and two others injured, corporate officials announced today.


MACMILLAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACMILLAN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
217,518,000
187,732,000
Net inc
b14,472,000
c11,917,000
Share earns
.61
.52
Shares outst
25,185,000
22,954,000
6mo sales
382,634,000
328,322,000
Net inc
b11,999,000
c11,619,000
Share earns
.52
.51


PHILIPPINES OPENS NEW LEGISLATURE
LEAD: The first Philippine legislature of the post-Marcos era opened here today amid the chants of leftist protesters and the threat of a right-wing terrorist attack.


NORANDA INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORANDA INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,890,000,000
1,680,000,000
Net inc
103,100,000
b26,800,000
Share earns
.66
.12
6mo rev
3,550,000,000
3,190,000,000
Net inc
132,600,000
b48,200,000
Share earns
.80
.21


Bridge: Top-Seeded Team Is Winner Of Knockout Championship
LEAD: Form prevailed last week in the Women's Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals in Baltimore.
The title was won by the top-seeded group, all reigning world champions.


Our Towns; Agony of Patients Of Mental Health Is Finding a Bed
LEAD: In March 1986, Will Smith was medically ready to leave the Pilgrim State Psychiatric Hospital and move to a community residence home.
He was anxious to get a job, to start life again.
But there wasn't a bed for him in his home county, Nassau.


Surprised Again in the Gulf
LEAD: After the tanker Bridgeton was damaged by a mine in the Persian Gulf last week, the Navy's vulnerable escort ships lined up behind it in single file, since the tanker was better able to withstand further mines.
The inaugural voyage of Kuwaiti tankers bearing American flags thus ended in bizarre inversion, with the tanker protecting the warships meant to defend it.


Du Pont Net Climbs 10.5%
LEAD: E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, the nation's largest chemical concern, reported yesterday that its second-quarter profits climbed by 10.5 percent.
At the same time, the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, the nation's leading tire producer, announced a 30.6 percent gain.


OLIN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OLIN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
485,900,000
443,000,000
Net inc
22,300,000
31,500,000
Share earns
.95
1.38
6mo rev
958,600,000
904,500,000
Net inc
46,700,000
58,400,000
Share earns
2.00
2.56
Shares outst
23,400,000
22,800,000


CARNER, DAVIES, OKAMOTO IN TIE
LEAD: JoAnne Carner missed the chance to win her third United States Women's Open championship today when she three- putted the final hole for her only bogey of the round and fell into a tie after 72 holes with Ayako Okamoto of Japan and Laura Davies of England.


Advertising; Creating Names for Products
LEAD: AN Englishman named Murphy (saints preserve us!) was working for Dunlop Tire back home about 14 years ago when the challenge of naming a new product came up.
His ad agency could not quite handle it so he scouted the scene for a specialty firm and, as the story goes, came up empty-handed.


AUTO UNION AND G.M. OPEN TALKS ON CRITICAL CONTRACT
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers and the General Motors Corporation opened negotiations today on a new labor contract that both sides agreed would be critical to the future of the American automobile industry and the workers in its factories.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Jobs Program Falls Short


The Decency of Malcolm Baldrige
LEAD: Malcolm Baldrige, the Secretary of Commerce, who died in a rodeo accident Saturday, brought decency and a cool head to the upper reaches of politics.
In an Administration often marred by zealotry, he stood for soft-spoken reason.


Despite Setbacks, World Control of Trade in Wildlife Expands Influence
LEAD: DIPLOMATS from 86 nations have just banned international commerce in the world's largest parrot, the hyacinth macaw, as well as in the Corsican swallowtail butterfly, Ursini's viper, and the star cactus, among other endangered species.


TWO JERSEY OFFICIALS GRANTED A NEW TRIAL IN CORRUPTION CASE
LEAD: A Federal judge granted a new trial today to two convicted New Brunswick officials because a recent United States Supreme Court decision invalidated an important part of the case against them.


Broncos Lose Another Defender
LEAD: Louis Wright, a cornerback who appeared in five Pro Bowls during his 12 seasons in the National Football League, shocked the Denver Broncos yesterday by retiring.


7 Reported Killed as Israelis Raid South Lebanon
LEAD: Seaborne Israeli commandos killed seven Lebanese Moslem militiamen and wounded four others today in a predawn ambush near Sidon, the police said.


'Pygmalion' to Close
LEAD: ''Pygmalion,'' a revival of George Bernard Shaw's 1914 comedy starring Peter O'Toole, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Plymouth Theater.
Directed by Val May, the play will have run for 15 previews and 113 regular performances.


DeLeon Injured
LEAD: Jose DeLeon, a pitcher for the Chicago White Sox, suffered slight injuries to his jaw and back in a traffic accident yesterday and missed his starting assignment last night at Tiger Stadium in Detroit.
DeLeon was treated at Hinsdale Hospital in Chicago and released yesterday afternoon, said Stuart Wade, a White Sox spokesman.


Pennzoil Drops Its Texaco Plan
LEAD: J. Hugh Liedtke, chairman of the Pennzoil Company, said yesterday that his company had formally withdrawn its proposals to settle the $10 billion dispute with Texaco Inc. over Texaco's 1984 purchase of the Getty Oil Company.


A Hero's Welcome
LEAD: O'Connell Street, the most famous thoroughfare in Dublin, was packed yesterday as an estimated quarter of a million people welcomed home Stephen Roche, the first Irishman ever to win the Tour de France bicycle race.
The 27-year-old Roche, who beat Pedro Delgado of Spain by 40 seconds, was driven - on four wheels -through the Irish capital, his native city.


Speculation Widening On Baldrige Successor
LEAD: Deputy Commerce Secretary Clarence J. (Bud) Brown Jr. took over as Acting Secretary today in a department still in shock over the death Saturday of Malcolm Baldrige.


Elders Plans 4 New Units
LEAD: Elders IXL Ltd., the big Australian conglomerate, said today that it planned to restructure itself, creating four public companies in brewing, finance, agribusiness and investments.


Keep Democracy in Baseball All-Star Vote
LEAD: To the Editor:


On the Boardwalk: Panel Considers Access to Jersey Beaches
LEAD: Several lawmakers pulled out folding chairs in front of a snack stand today and sat along the boardwalk to find out how the public feels about its access -or lack of access - to New Jersey's 127 miles of beachfront.


Market Place; Likely Targets For Ford Cash
LEAD: THE Ford Motor Company has more than $9 billion in cash and an inclination to latch onto some earnings independent of the cyclical automobile industry.
But, like a careful car shopper, it has avoided impulse buying, particularly with the stock market at its current high level.


WESTERN UNION CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN UNION CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
206,507,000
228,759,000
Net loss
b990,000
c9,480,000
6mo rev
411,090,000
455,187,000
Net loss
19,835,000
c24,805,000
b-Includes a gain of $10.3 million on the sale of a cellular telephone subsidiary and income of $2.5 million resulting from the receipt of a payment in settlement of litigation.


DOLE SUGGESTS A WAY FOR PRESIDENT TO SEAT BORK BEFORE SENATE VOTE
LEAD: Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, added to the atmosphere of partisan confrontation surrounding the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court by suggesting today that President Reagan use a constitutional procedure to place Judge Bork on the Court without Senate confirmation.


PROGRESSIVE CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROGRESSIVE CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b25,886,000
c25,792,000
Per share
.89
.93
Shares outst
28,864,000
28,282,000
6mo net inc
b52,941,000
c39,529,000
Per share
1.83
1.45
Shares outst
28,881,000
28,052,000


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Czechoslovakia Advances: Hana Mandlikova and Helena Sukova won their singles matches yesterday as second-seeded Czechoslovakia defeated Sweden to advance to the second round of the Federation Cup women's team championship in Vancouver, British Columbia.
Mandlikova, coming back after a foot injury that forced her to miss Wimbledon, defeated Caterina Lindqvist, 6-3, 6-2, after Sukova won against Carina Karlsson 6-4, 6-4.


SHULTZ ASKS IRAQ TO HALT ATTACKS
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz met with the Iraqi Foreign Minister today and asked that Iraq take no new offensive actions in its war with Iran, State Department officials said.


Vast Effort Aims to Reveal Oceans' Hidden Patterns
LEAD: USING an observation method analogous to brain scanning, oceanographers are in the early stages of a bold new effort to chart the oceans' flow for clues to the world's future climate.


U.S. and Soviet Scientists Cooperate in Space
LEAD: WHEN a Soviet biological satellite is launched in mid-September, carrying 10 laboratory rats and two monkeys, American radiation-detection sensors will be on board and American scientists on the ground will study the effects of zero gravity and space radiation on animals.


Fluor Head Leaves
LEAD: The Fluor Corporation said its president and chief operating officer, John A. Wright, would step down to head a group bidding for the St.
Joe Gold Corporation, a Fluor subsidiary put up for sale in May.
Terms of the expected bid were not disclosed.
David S. Tappan Jr., Fluor's chairman, will assume Mr.


KIMBERLY-CLARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KIMBERLY-CLARK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,224,400,000
1,087,700,000
Net inc
83,800,000
68,800,000
Share earns
.94
.75
6mo sales
2,407,600,000
2,124,900,000
Net inc
158,900,000
142,100,000
Share earns
1.76
1.55


Titanic Survivor Sees Salvagers as 'Vultures'
LEAD: A survivor of the Titanic sinking said today that salvagers were greedy ''vultures'' for taking artifacts from the wreck, which became a grave for her father and 1,512 other people 75 years ago.


Exclusionary Zoning and the Small Developer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ford Tractor Plant
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company plans to retool its tractor plant in Romeo, Mich., to produce new engines by mid-1990.
Ford has completed feasibility studies on the project, expected to cost more than $900 million, and will begin conversion of the 1.4-million-square-foot plant in mid-1988, a Ford executive said.


HARTFORD BRACES FOR JAMS FROM 4-YEAR ROAD PROJECT
LEAD: One of New England's best-known highway mazes - where Interstates 84 and 91 intersect, but don't quite connect, in downtown Hartford - is being rebuilt, and businesses and commuters are preparing for four years of trouble.


Dollar, Mixed Abroad, Is Mostly Higher in U.S.
LEAD: The dollar drifted mostly higher in quiet, uneventful trading yesterday after turning mixed overseas.


INTERNATIONAL FLAVORS &amp; FRAGRANCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL FLAVORS &amp; FRAGRANCES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
199,871,000
162,141,000
Net inc
31,006,000
24,128,000
Share earns
.82
.65
6mo sales
378,822,000
310,107,000
Net inc
58,564,000
46,180,000
Share earns
1.55
1.24


Those to Whom a 'Battle Royal' Is Nothing New
LEAD: When Secretary of State George P. Shultz testified at the Iran-contra hearings, he described life in Washington as a ''battle royal,'' full of bickering, backstabbing, backbiting and unceasing conflict over policy.


No Court-Martial
LEAD: For Captain of Stark The Navy said it would reprimand, but not court-martial, Capt.
Glenn R. Brindel, captain of frigate on which 37 sailors died in Iraqi missile attack.
Page A7. (Reuters)


COSTLY, UNEASY KUWAIT
LEAD: At a smart hotel here, it is possible for a person of some wealth to be served Swiss food by a waiter from Southeast Asia costumed as an English fox hunter while a Polish trio plays string music of vaguely Viennese extraction.


NASA's Will to Fly Is Questioned
LEAD: The American space agency has become excessively cautious since the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger and ''has lost the will to fly men in space,'' says the editor of the 1987 edition of Jane's Spaceflight Directory.


GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,400,000,000
2,300,000,000
Net inc
125,100,000
103,500,000
Share earns
2.92
2.43
6mo sales
4,700,000,000
4,300,000,000
Net inc
230,500,000
173,600,000
Share earns
5.37
4.07


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, JULY 28, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-9


NATIONAL BANCSHARES OF TEXAS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL BANCSHARES OF TEXAS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b5,400,000
c1,000,000
Per share
-
.09
6mo net loss
13,000,000
c4,300,000
Per share
-
.34
b-After a non-recurring gain of $6.1 million from a land sale.


One Case, One Judge. Then What?
LEAD: A sensible way to judge the judges: that was how Chief Judge Sol Wachtler portrayed his new system of assigning cases.
Now, too quietly to affect much judicial behavior, he has released the first report card.
It offers useful information but not enough.
Judge Wachtler and Chief Administrative Judge Albert Rosenblatt merit only an


A Matter of Power
LEAD: THE newest I.B.M. personal computer, the PC Convertible Model 3, is the latest and best version of a machine that was initially introduced in April 1986 to mixed reviews.


General Noriega's Ugly Desperation
LEAD: The people of Panama gave a clear cry for freedom yesterday in a nationwide general strike.
The strongman, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, seeing it coming, acted brutally to snuff it out.
He closed the opposition newspapers hours before the strike.
Then his troops stormed the home of the army officer who had fingered him as the architect of a series of murders and frauds, and arrested the renegade colonel.


HAIG DISCLOSES LIST OF 79 'NATIONAL ADVISORS'
LEAD: Alexander M. Haig Jr. today announced a list of 79 ''national advisers'' to his campaign for the 1988 Republican Presidential nomination that was long on business executives and relatively short on prominent politicians.


PENNZOIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNZOIL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
443,225,000
484,506,000
Net inc
b7,366,000
25,170,000
Share earns
.08
.51
6mo rev
887,690,000
998,175,000
Net inc
19,429,000
9,032,000
Share earns
.28
.03


Continental Illinois Gets New Chief
LEAD: The Continental Illinois Corporation, the parent of the Continental Illinois Bank and Trust Company, yesterday named Thomas C. Theobald chairman and chief executive.


JETS LAUD ROOKIE; VICK STANDS OUT
LEAD: Who were those 100 people wearing Jets' uniforms today, flexing their muscles, growling and trying to look good?


New York Reneges on Job Promise to Many Students
LEAD: A Board of Education program that promised summer jobs to 3,500 New York City students has placed only several hundred of them.


NORTON CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
323,000,000
295,100,000
Net inc
b19,200,000
17,600,000
Share earns
.92
.86
6mo sales
617,000,000
588,300,000
Net inc
b32,300,000
34,600,000
Share earns
1.56
1.69


Nominee Airs Views on Debt
LEAD: David S. Ruder, the White House nominee for chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, told Congress today that he was not overly concerned about the level of debt building up on the balance sheets of American corporations.


June Spending Up 0.7% As Incomes Gained 0.4%
LEAD: Consumer spending climbed seven-tenths of 1 percent in June, the best showing in two months, even though Americans' incomes rose a much more modest four-tenths of 1 percent in the month, the Government reported today.


Time, High Noon; Place, Shaded Haven
LEAD: Part of the lunchtime crowd at Columbus Park in Brooklyn escaping the midday sun under a parasol of trees.
They can look forward to sunny weather again today, with temperatures reaching the mid-80's. (NYT/Dith Pran)


MACK TRUCKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACK TRUCKS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
496,841,000
481,355,000
Net inc
b11,568,000
c15,583,000
Share earns
.38
.52
6mo sales
937,744,000
878,606,000
Net inc
b16,172,000
c5,900,000
Share earns
.54
.17


Futures Agency Post
LEAD: Kalo A. Hineman, a commissioner with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, has been elected acting chairman of the agency.
He succeeds Susan M. Phillips, who left last Thursday.
Mr.
Hineman will serve as head of the commission until the President names a permanent chairman.
Industry and Congressional sources said that Mr.


New Disney Ride
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company said that a new 100,000-square-foot exhibit, billed as a ride through the human body, would open at the Epcot Center Disney World in Orlando, Fla., by 1989.
The company declined to disclose figures, but said the exhibit would be the most expensive ever built at the center.
The exhibit is similar to ''Star Tours,'' a $32 million attraction that opened this year at Disneyland in Anaheim, Calif.


FOUNDATIONS WIDEN EFFORTS ON AIDS
LEAD: The nation's philanthropies have substantially increased their support for AIDS patients and programs to combat the disease in recent months, according to foundation officials.


CRANE CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRANE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
337,261,000
310,763,000
Net inc
14,871,000
11,047,000
Share earns
.62
.48
6mo sales
616,917,000
570,053,000
Net inc
b30,215,000
15,278,000
Share earns
1.28
.69


RICHMOND HILL SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RICHMOND HILL SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,071,000
c2,236,000
Per share
.62
-
6mo net inc
b7,767,000
c5,345,000
Per share
1.17
-
b-After extraordinary credits of $1,667,000 for the quarter and $3,110,000 for the 6 months.


Stride Rite Picks President
LEAD: The Stride Rite Corporation, which makes children's shoes, has elected Michael W. Rayden president and chief operating officer, effective next Monday.


Long Meatpacker Strike Ends
LEAD: Members of the United Food and Commercial Workers will begin returning to work at the IBP Inc. meatpacking plant on Aug. 3 after a seven-month walkout.


NETWORKS TAKE TURNS IN COVERING HEARINGS
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 9 A.M. today on the NBC television network under the network rotation system.
The hearings will also be televised on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New York.


Stop Pushing Nicotine
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bankers Trust
LEAD: The Bankers Trust Company is offering $100 million of 8.35 percent deposit notes due in 1990 at a price of 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company as sole underwriter.
The notes are rated Aa-1 by Moody's and AA+ by S.&amp;P., and were offered to yield about 57-hundredths of a percentage point more than Treasury notes of similar maturity.


CALIFORNIA FIRST BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALIFORNIA FIRST BANK (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
9,535,000
7,763,000
Per share
.79
.66
6mo net inc
18,058,000
14,457,000
Per share
1.50
1.24


U.S. SAYS MILITARY CRACKDOWN MAY WIDEN PANAMA DISSENT
LEAD: American policy makers said today they were expecting opposition to military rule to increase in Panama as a result of the latest crackdown.


Fatigue 'Virus' Has Experts More Baffled And Skeptical Than Ever
LEAD: MEDICAL experts are struggling, with only limited success, to understand a mysterious illness that leaves its victims exhausted for months or years at a time.


Hero and Villain
LEAD: To the Editor:


BankAmerica Sale
LEAD: The BankAmerica Corporation said it would sell two investment subsidiaries that manage a total of $12 billion.
Terms were not disclosed, but the sale includes BankAmerica's BA Investment Management Corporation, with $10 billion under management, and BA Investment Management International, which manages $2 billion.


Navy Forgoes Courts-Martial for Officers of Stark
LEAD: The Navy said today that it would not court-martial the captain or other officers of the frigate Stark, on which 37 sailors were killed in an attack by an Iraqi jet in the Persian Gulf in May.


PANAMA MILITARY ARRESTS KEY CRITIC IN NEW CRACKDOWN
LEAD: Attacking with guns and tear gas, security forces in Panama arrested a leading critic of the military leader today, hours after the main opposition newspaper was shut down and all radio and television stations put under censorship.


A Trove of Faulkner Film Scripts
LEAD: William Faulkner worked on 17 film scripts in the 30's and 40's -originals, adaptations and collaborations with more seasoned screenwriters.
His Hollywood output added up to 2,500 typescript pages - the length of a very thick, unwritten novel.


EI DU PONT DE NEMOURS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EI DU PONT DE NEMOURS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,800,000,000
6,900,000,000
Net inc
504,000,000
456,000,000
Share earns
2.08
1.88
6mo sales
14,900,000,000
14,100,000,000
Net inc
895,000,000
860,000,000
Share earns
3.70
3.55


Jim Walter Offer
LEAD: The Jim Walter Corporation, among the nation's top home-building companies, said it was considering alternatives to a $2.03 billion takeover bid offered earlier this month by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the leveraged buyout specialists.
Jim Walter said that other parties, which it declined to identify, had expressed interest in acquiring the company.


MCA's Chief Returns
LEAD: MCA Inc.'s chairman and chief executive, Lew R. Wasserman, returned to work today after undergoing surgery June 24 at Cedars Sinai Medical Center.
Mr.
Wasserman, 74 years old, controls 15.3 percent of the stock of MCA, an entertainment and real estate conglomerate.


HUGH WHEELER, AWARD WINNING PLAYWRIGHT
LEAD: Hugh Wheeler, a playwright, novelist and screen writer who won Tony Awards for the books for the hit musicals ''A Little Night Music,'' ''Sweeney Todd'' and ''Candide,'' died of lung and heart failure yesterday.
He was 75 years old and lived in Monterey, Mass.


INTERPUBLIC GROUP OF COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERPUBLIC GROUP OF COMPANIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
249,556,000
215,339,000
Net inc
20,256,000
18,124,000
Share earns
.92
.82
6mo rev
452,071,000
383,262,000
Net inc
25,740,000
22,459,000
Share earns
1.17
1.02


Meese and Others On the Iran-Contra Affair
LEAD:  Nov. 25, 1986: ''The only persons in the United States Government that knew precisely about this - the only person -was Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North.
Admiral Poindexter did know that something of this nature was occurring, but he did not look into it further . . .
C.I.A.
Director Casey, Secretary of State Shultz, Secretary of Defense Weinberger, myself, other members of the N.S.C.


Sale by Goldsmith
LEAD: The British-French investor Sir James Goldsmith sold a major share of his press and retail group, Generale Occidentale, to the recently privatized French engineering giant, Compagnie Generale d'Electricite.
Under the agreement, Sir James's 51 percent of a holding company, Trocadero Participations, was sold, and the deal gave the French company 34 percent of Generale Occidentale.


LUBRIZOL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LUBRIZOL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
267,128,000
260,645,000
Net inc
23,779,000
18,952,000
Share earns
.60
.48
6mo rev
541,620,000
537,416,000
Net inc
49,754,000
47,031,000
Share earns
1.25
1.19


Seabrook Owner Plans Restructuring
LEAD: The Public Service Company of New Hampshire, pushed to the brink of bankruptcy by a $2 billion investment in a nuclear reactor that may never operate, announced today that its directors had approved a capital restructuring plan.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q. What are the two most distantly related species that produced hybrid offspring?
And which of the hybrids have produced fertile offspring?


JIM BISHOP, A COLUMNIST, DIES: POPULAR AUTHOR OF 21 BOOKS
LEAD: Jim Bishop, a reporter and columnist who wrote his way onto the best-seller lists with his hour-by-hour formula and you-are-there style, died Sunday of respiratory failure at his home in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 79 years old.


Each Sibling Experiences Different Family
LEAD: BEHAVIORAL scientists studying personality differences between siblings have discovered what they describe as the overriding influence of a unique ''micro-environment'' in the family for each child.


Goldome Sets Repricing As Demand Falls Short
LEAD: Goldome's well-publicized and costly campaign to convert from a mutual savings bank to stock ownership has apparently been met with apathy from key institutional investors.


SALOMON INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SALOMON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,396,000,000
1,616,000,000
Net inc
40,000,000
117,000,000
Share earns
.26
.78
6mo rev
3,115,000,000
3,462,000,000
Net inc
189,000,000
307,000,000
Share earns
1.24
2.05


DRUG MAKERS FIGHTING BACK AGAINST ADVANCE OF GENERICS
LEAD: Some manufacturers of brand-name prescription drugs, alarmed by the success of cheaper generic versions of their products, are waging a counterattack against their competition.


Genrad to Close Testing Unit
LEAD: Genrad Inc. said today that it was discontinuing operations at its semiconductor test division in Milpitas, Calif.
The company, based in Concord, Mass., is a major manufacturer of electronic test systems.


National City Elects A New Chairman
LEAD: The National City Corporation, Ohio's second-largest bank-holding company, said yesterday that Edward B. Brandon, its president, would become chairman and chief executive, effective Sept. 1.


USAIR GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USAIR GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
619,583,000
458,464,000
Net inc
72,710,000
32,222,000
Share earns
2.33
1.08
6mo rev
1,084,537,000
865,479,000
Net inc
96,196,000
25,441,000
Share earns
3.14
.93


Multifoods Bid Rumored
LEAD: The stock of the International Multifoods Corporation jumped $4.75, to $36.875, in active trading yesterday, on the possibility that a takeover bid might emerge for the Minneapolis-based company.


International Network Nourishes Avant-Garde
LEAD: As experimental performance work attracts a growing audience around the country, a loosely affiliated network of producers, festivals, performing spaces, museums and broadcasting outlets has sprung up to nurture and promote what is often called ''interarts'' work or ''new theater.''


Alcohol Abuse Cited
LEAD: The top problem in the National Football League is alcohol abuse rather than drug abuse, according to Mike Lynn, the general manager of the Minnesota Vikings, whose quarterback, Tommy Kramer, is undergoing treatment for alcohol abuse.
After being charged with drunken driving last Friday night, Kramer entered the Hazelden Foundation in Center City, Minn., Sunday to begin 28 days of rehabilitation, his second stay in a treatment center in five years.


A FOE OF PRETORIA DISCOVERED SLAIN
LEAD: A black political figure was found stabbed to death near the coastal town of East London over the weekend after associates received death threats from right-wing extremists.


Outdoor Entertainment
LEAD: ''Music on Water,'' a free series of outdoor performances on the plaza south of 55 Water Street, is to begin on Aug. 7 at 12:15 with a performance by Elise Morris, a singer and pianist.
The series, sponsored by the Lower Manhattan Cultural Council, will present a performance each Friday at the same time through Sept.


ON CONGESTED HIGHWAYS, CALIFORNIA MOTORISTS TURN TO VIOLENCE
LEAD: Motorists here, displaying hair-trigger impulses reminiscent of the frontier West, have tangled with each other in a string of highway shootings that have left two people dead and four injured over the past five weeks.


A PRIVATE PANEL DUE TO EXAMINE NEW YORK CRIME
LEAD: City Councilman Wendell Foster, a Bronx Democrat who is also president of a coalition of black ministers, said yesterday that the group would create a commission next month to look into the causes of crime, racism and poverty in New York City.


Warning on Leetch
LEAD: Despite the fact that he was knocked out of the United States Olympic Festival with a knee injury after 40 seconds of play, Brian Leetch, the Rangers' No. 1 draft pick last season, was one of 29 players selected from the festival for the 1988 United States Olympic team training camp that begins Aug.


SHULTZ WILL TALK TO SHEVARDNADZE
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister, have agreed to hold talks in September on arms control, officials said today.


Popcorn on the Brain
LEAD: A month of movies:


Pan Am Warm-Up
LEAD: David Robinson, the all-America center from Navy, will lead the United States Pan American Games team in its first exhibition game against a squad of National Basketball Association players tonight at Market Square Arena in Indianapolis.
Besides Robinson, the United States team includes Dean Garrett and Keith Smart of Indiana, the National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, Rex Chapman of Kentucky, Jeff Lebo of North Carolina, Fennis Dembo of Wyoming and Danny Manning of Kansas.


JETS LAUD ROOKIE; INGRAM HOLDS OUT
LEAD: Six months and two days after they won Super Bowl XXI, the Giants opened training camp today at Pace University's Westchester campus.
The 59 players who reported included 13 of the 14 draftees, all except Mark Ingram, the wide receiver from Michigan State chosen on the first round.


PUGET SOUND BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUGET SOUND BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
9,312,000
9,286,000
Per share
.59
.59
6mo net inc
18,751,000
17,979,000
Per share
1.19
1.15
The figures reflect the company's merger with Puget Sound Savings Bank in July 1986 which was treated as a pooling of interests.


IMPERIAL OIL LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMPERIAL OIL LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,010,000,000
1,810,000,000
Net inc
193,000,000
bc57,000,000
Share earns
1.18
-
6mo rev
3,640,000,000
3,710,000,000
Net inc
350,000,000
c81,000,000
Share earns
2.14
.50


TV Review; 'Crisis on Federal Street,' Chicago Housing Disaster
LEAD: ''CRISIS ON FEDERAL STREET'' opens and closes with the same aerial picture: a look north toward downtown Chicago from an enormous housing project only five miles away.
The camera makes it appear, though, that these are two separate cities, with a great plain in between.
The view may be distorted, but it is not necessarily untrue.


American Express In Buyback
LEAD: The American Express Company said yesterday that it would buy back up to 40 million shares of its own stock, or 9.3 percent of the total outstanding, over the next two to three years.


JUDGE DENIES BAIL FOR SUSPECT IN SEX ATTACKS ON 3 QUEENS WOMEN
LEAD: A 41-year-old man who has spent half his life in prison was ordered held without bail yesterday on charges of having committed three recent sexual assaults on women in central Queens.


JOHN C. SACCO
LEAD: John C. Sacco, a composer and conductor, died of a cerebral hemorrhage Wednesday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.


The Trouble With Charts
LEAD: THE profusion of graphics software on the market today has made the creation of visuals a breeze.
But that does not mean that the flood of graphs and charts being churned out by home computers are good visuals.
In fact, many of them are downright confusing.


SOVIET REPORTS IT EXECUTED NAZI GUARD U.S. EXTRADITED
LEAD: Feodor S. Fedorenko, an 80-year-old former Nazi death camp guard who was deported from the United States in 1984, has been executed, the official press agency Tass reported today.


METS ON ROAD TO RECKONING
LEAD: It is either a golden opportunity or a terrible ordeal.
But whatever it is, the Mets embark on it tonight when they open a three-game series in St.
Louis against the first-place Cardinals, to be followed by a three-game series in Montreal against the second-place Expos.


HERSHEY FOODS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to July 5
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HERSHEY FOODS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to July 5
1987
1986
Sales
497,745,000
450,201,000
Net inc
27,021,000
24,577,000
Share earns
.30
.26
Shares outst
90,186,336
94,011,336
6mo sales
1,087,994,000
958,197,000
Net inc
59,915,000
51,588,000
Share earns
.66
.55


Dance: Charles Moulton And Urban Bush Women
LEAD: CHARLES MOULTON and Jawole Willa Jo Zollar, director of the Urban Bush Women, are very dissimilar experimental choreographers.
But both collaborate closely and regularly with a specific composer.
This aspect came impressively to the fore Sunday night when they shared the bill in the Serious Fun! series at Alice Tully


AMOSKEAG BANK SHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMOSKEAG BANK SHARES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,814,000
6,260,000
Per share
.53
.69
6mo net inc
11,230,000
12,317,000
Per share
1.23
1.36


TOUGH QUESTIONING IS AWAITING MEESE
LEAD: When Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d made his startling announcement last November that profits from the Iran arms sale had been diverted to Nicaraguan rebels, he drew praise from even longtime detractors.


Cracks in a Great Dome in Florence May Point to Impending Disaster
LEAD: AS the lofty cupola atop this city's Duomo, or cathedral, was being completed in 1434, a visitor from Rome described it as ''a structure so great, rising above the skies, large enough to shelter all the people of Tuscany in its shadow, built without the help of any centering or of much woodwork, of a craftsmanship perhaps not even the ancients knew or understood.


POLITICAL COMMITTEE FOR CUOMO REPORTS RAISING OF $18,000
LEAD: Governor Cuomo's political action committee, established in April to finance local forums for Democratic Presidential candidates, has raised $18,000, according to a report filed today with the Federal Election Commission.


Who Swung the Wrecker's Ball at the Old Met
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Paris, Youth Is the New Wave
LEAD: A fresh wind seems to have wafted over the world of couture fashion here, resulting in clothes that are younger, livelier and more inventive than they have been in years.
It is as if the spirit of Christian Lacroix, who introduced his successful fall and winter collection Sunday, had loosened the bonds of tradition and stimulated long-established houses to take some bold, new steps.


TYSON FOODS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TYSON FOODS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
437,892,000
417,599,000
Net inc
17,550,000
13,583,000
Share earns
.27
.21
9mo sales
1,283,471,000
1,043,730,000
Net inc
49,129,000
35,686,000
Share earns
.77
.56d


No Adverse Effect Seen at Citicorp
LEAD: Between April and June, Citicorp's Investment Bank ran a series of full-page advertisements in a number of publications featuring huge photographs of Thomas C. Theobald, the vice chairman who headed the unit.
Apparently, the ads were as much intended to promote the 50-year-old Mr.
Theobald as the bank itself.


SINGER CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SINGER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
435,800,000
417,500,000
Net loss
b20,200,000
c21,800,000
Share earns
-
.98
6mo rev
871,600,000
796,000,000
Net loss
5,400,000
c33,500,000
Share earns
-
1.53


STUDY PUTS BORK TO RIGHT OF OTHER JUDGES NAMED BY REAGAN
LEAD: President Reagan's judicial appointees have not been much more conservative than those of other recent Republican Presidents, but Judge Robert H. Bork's voting patterns show him to be far more conservative than the average Reagan appointee.


Contras Kill Children
LEAD: To the Editor:


Profit Triples At Compaq
LEAD: The Compaq Computer Corporation, benefiting from a major change in products by its archrival, the International Business Machines Corporation, said today that its profits more than tripled in the second quarter, to $30.7 million, or 80 cents a share.


BILLY JOEL HAS A TANTRUM
LEAD: Billy Joel surprised his Soviet audience at a concert tonight when he lost his temper, overturned an electric piano and smashed a microphone onstage.


The U.N. Today: July 28, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


ARMSTRONG WORLD INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMSTRONG WORLD INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
596,600,000
487,000,000
Net inc
41,100,000
35,100,000
Share earns
.87
.73
6mo sales
1,137,700,000
917,900,000
Net inc
73,000,000
59,500,000
Share earns
1.54
1.23


Business Journals Sold
LEAD: MCP Inc., a New Orleans-based publisher, has agreed to acquire the Boston Business Journal and Boston Business Magazine, and a half share of the Providence Business News from P&amp; L Publications Inc.
Terms were not disclosed, but analysts said the publications were recently valued at $12 million.
The three publications have a combined circulation of 110,000.


A Poll on Leaking
LEAD: Leaking is generally defined as anonymously providing journalists with information they would not otherwise have received, often subject to verification elsewhere.
It is widely believed to be one of Washington's favorite exercises, and a poll by American Politics, a local magazine, does nothing to discourage that belief.


CONCERT: ACADEMY OF ST. MARTIN PLAYS AT FESTIVAL
LEAD: THROUGH no direct fault of their own, the Academy of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields and its conductor, Neville Marriner, have achieved a certain ubiquity in our country.
Darlings of public radio stations across the land, they are never far from the lips of American classical disk jockeys, who find in their frequent and competent recordings of the 18th-century orchestral literature just what their contributing customers like.


VICTORY NO. 6,000 IS ELUDING CORDERO
LEAD: These are not the best of times for Angel Cordero Jr.
On Sunday night, celebrating the 25th anniversary of his first victory as a New York jockey, he choked on a baked clam at a local restaurant.
Yesterday, as fans expectantly waited for him to score his 6,000th career victory, he rode his ninth straight loser.


Sparks Tuneup Account Is Awarded to Messner
LEAD: Sparks Tuneup Centers, one of the more recent creations of Anthony A. Martino, father of Aamco and Maaco, has taken its advertising account to Messner, Vetere, Berger, Carey.
Billings should be $4 million.


Bill Aiding Farm Credit Pushed by House Chiefs
LEAD: Leaders of the House Agriculture Committee plan to introduce legislation this week that would provide a multibillion-dollar line of credit with the Treasury to rescue the crippled Farm Credit System, committee staff members said today.


Careers; View From Top and The Middle
LEAD: IS your boss - your company's chief executive officer - average?


At G.E. Plant, Familiar Fears
LEAD: At the Third Base Lounge, down the road from the General Electric Company's television assembly plant, the conversation between gulps of beer is about the recent buyout of the plant by a European electronics giant.


Tax Watch; Policy Expert Locates Flaws
LEAD: LOOKING at the tax system he helped revamp as the Reagan Administration's chief tax policy adviser, J. Roger Mentz sees a few flaws that still need fixing.
The ''crazy-quilt'' patchwork of Internal Revenue Service penalties is one of them.
Some of the new tax law's foreign provisions are another.


Nuclear Monitoring
LEAD: The Defense Department is spending $43 million for construction of a 3.3-ton satellite meant to perfect the military's ability to detect and inspect nuclear materials in orbit about the earth.


Women, Aging and Candor
LEAD: Going public about birthdays is becoming the thing to do among a new breed of feminists - the glamour women in their 40's and 50's.
Not that there isn't a lot of lying still going on, among men as well as women.


New F.A.A. Chief Sworn In
LEAD: T. Allan McArtor was sworn in today as chief of the Federal Aviation Administration and promised to take steps designed to reduce delays and improve safety.
Mr.
McArtor, 45 years old, who had been a senior vice president for Federal Express, issued a warning to airline employees. ''Pilots, co-pilots, flight engineers and other crew members are also on notice,'' he said.


NALCO CHEMICAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NALCO CHEMICAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
202,602,000
183,993,000
Net inc
19,785,000
15,501,000
Share earns
.50
.40
6mo sales
394,247,000
362,506,000
Net inc
37,887,000
30,900,000
Share earns
.96
.79


SOUTH CAROLINA NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTH CAROLINA NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
13,055,000
10,144,000
Per share
.60
.48
6mo net inc
25,770,000
20,904,000
Per share
1.19
.98


Livestock Prices Climb After Report on Cattle
LEAD: Livestock futures prices surged in hectic trading yesterday after a Government feedlot report confirmed traders' estimates on how much beef will be coming to market.


OPPOSITION GROWS TO SRI LANKA PACT
LEAD: Opposition against a planned peace treaty in the country's ethnic conflict grew today from both extremes as well as from within the Sri Lankan Government itself.


NATIONAL DISTILLERS &amp; CHEMIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL DISTILLERS &amp; CHEMIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
550,600,000
359,000,000
Net inc
b127,900,000
c11,400,000
Share earns
3.91
.31
6mo sales
1,207,800,000
830,700,000
Net inc
b163,800,000
c32,200,000
Share earns
4.99
.92


Chess: Is It Really Luck That Wins For Vaganian - or Insight?
LEAD: The Leningrad International Tournament, celebrating the 70th anniversary of the October Revolution, was won by Rafael Vaganian of the Soviet Union, who scored 8-4.


NORTHEAST SAVINGS FA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHEAST SAVINGS FA (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b8,565,000
b6,914,000
Per share
1.21
1.13
Shares outst
5,404,649
5,324,691
b-After tax credits of $4,032,000 for the latest first quarter and $2,895,000 for the year-ago period.


Steel Output Up 0.3 %
LEAD: Steel production rose to 1.753 million tons in the week ended last Saturday, an increase of three-tenths of 1 percent from the previous week's 1.748 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute said yesterday.
The industry's production amounted to 81.9 percent of capacity during the week, compared with 81.7 percent the previous week.


Browning-Ferris Aiding Inquiries
LEAD: Browning-Ferris Industries said it was cooperating with several Federal grand juries investigating possible illegal pricing practices in the trash-hauling industry.
The antitrust division of the Justice Department said that 11 grand juries, primarily in the South and Northeast, were investigating charges of bid-rigging, price-fixing and the splitting up of customers and territories.


HOWARD SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOWARD SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
8,011,000
5,440,000
Per share
.57
.38
6mo net inc
15,932,000
10,998,000
Per share
1.13
.82
The per share earnings were adjusted for 2-for-1 stock split effected in the form of a 100 percent stock dividend paid in February.


LAWRENCE L. PREISS
LEAD: Lawrence L. Preiss, a former New York investment broker, died Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami Beach, after a series of heart attacks.
He was 83 years old and lived in Miami Beach.


FIRST PENNSYLVANIA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST PENNSYLVANIA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b87,957,000
c8,837,000
Per share
-
.17
6mo net loss
b79,204,000
c16,641,000
Per share
-
.30
b-Includes tax benefits of $5,287,000 for the quarter and $9,373,000 for the 6 months, and a special $100 million addition to reserves for possible loan losses resulting from debt in Brazil and other lesser developed countries for the quarter and 6 months.


BOEING CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOEING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,478,000,000
4,027,000,000
Net inc
117,000,000
169,000,000
Share earns
.75
1.09
6mo sales
7,241,000,000
7,554,000,000
Net inc
235,000,000
317,000,000
Share earns
1.51
2.04


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Mastercard's New Card
LEAD: Mastercard International introduced a new card yesterday that gives issuers more room on the card face for their own designs or logotypes.
The optional new card, which banks may issue in lieu of the current basic Mastercard, also incorporates a new, larger hologram emblazoned with the company's interlocking circles logotype.


KEEP DEMOCRACY IN BASEBALL ALL-STAR VOTE
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Verona' to Start Later
LEAD: Tonight's performance of ''Two Gentlemen of Verona'' at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park will begin at 8:30 P.M. instead of the normal 8 P.M., the New York Shakespeare Festival has announced.


Oil Rig Count Falls by 5
LEAD: The number of working oil and gas rigs in the United States this week totaled 917, down five from the previous week, Baker Hughes Inc. said today. ''It's just a random fluctuation; I wouldn't read that much into it,'' said Ike Kerridge, a spokesman for Baker Hughes.
In the long term, he said, ''I think it will continue to rise, but it could go up or down week to week.


GOVERNORS' SEARCH FOR AGENDA LEADS TO ACTIVISM
LEAD: Moving easily from the language of free markets to bold calls for government action, the nation's governors are seeking this week to establish a political agenda for the 1988 campaign.


Judge in a Right-to-Die Case Backs Treating AIDS Patient
LEAD: In a decision that right-to-die advocates said could affect thousands of AIDS patients, a judge yesterday ruled that Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan could continue drug treatments on a man suffering from an AIDS-related brain infection.


Harness Racing Notebook; ELITE PACING GROUP IS A DISAPOINTMENT
LEAD: Until Sunday night's Cane Pace at Yonkers Raceway, the first leg of the triple crown for pacers, this season was considered to have the best crop of pacers in several years.


Loosening Up
LEAD: Eamonn Coghlan and Marcus O'Sullivan, first- and second-place finishers, respectively, in the Wanamaker Mile at this year's Millrose Games, will run in the Bob Roggy Memorial Invitational track meet tomorrow at Holmdel High School in New Jersey.
Coghlan, who will run in the two-mile race, is tuning up for the World Championships next month in Rome, where he will be defending his world championship record in the 5,000 meters.


VIEWS OF TOUR GAVE WHOLE PICTURE
LEAD: The Tour de France, CBS frequently told us, is the most grueling, painful bicycle race on earth.
Well, the pain was all in the backs, legs and lungs of the riders, for watching on television didn't hurt much at all.


Lincoln Center Institute Gets a New Chairman
LEAD: Edward J. Mortola, the Chancellor of Pace University, has taken over as chairman of the Lincoln Center Institute, the educational arm of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts.
He replaces Francis Keppel, who retired from the post last month and who is to serve as chairman emeritus of the institute's board.


U.S. Issues Little Changed
LEAD: With investors staying on the sidelines and waiting for a flurry of Treasury auctions over the next two weeks, prices of Government securities were little changed yesterday.


RASMUSSEN MAKES COMEBACK, OF SORTS
LEAD: Someone asked Dennis Rasmussen what his mailing address is.


House Votes Toshiba Curb
LEAD: The House of Representatives voted today to ban sales of Toshiba products from stores on American military bases in retaliation for illegal sales of advanced technology by a Toshiba subsidiary to the Soviet Union.


ALLEGHENY POWER SYSTEMS INCALLEGHENY &amp; WESTERN ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEGHENY POWER SYSTEMS INCALLEGHENY &amp; WESTERN ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
453,873,000
399,684,000
Net inc
45,481,000
44,879,000
Share earns
.89
.89
6mo rev
928,105,000
871,788,000
Net inc
107,584,000
113,327,000
Share earns
2.11
2.25


SOUTHLAND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHLAND CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,447,059,000
2,213,837,000
Net inc
47,529,000
81,578,000
Share earns
.93
1.64
6mo rev
4,554,240,000
4,221,602,000
Net inc
b72,545,000
c6,932,000
Share earns
1.39
-


DEMJANJUK, ON THE STAND, DENIES GUILT
LEAD: John Demjanjuk took the witness stand for the first time today and insisted that he was not the Nazi ''hangman or henchman'' Israel was looking for.


ASARCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASARCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
329,557,000
257,365,000
Net inc
b2,875,000
c7,564,000
6mo sales
603,251,000
548,967,000
Net loss
b18,404,000
36,721,000
b-After losses of $8 million and $29.8 million for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, from its equity in the results of associated companies located in Australia, Mexico and Peru.


Davidson Is Expected To Get Kennedy Post
LEAD: Ralph P. Davidson, a publishing executive, is expected to be named Tuesday to succeed Roger L. Stevens as chairman of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.


TIMKEN COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIMKEN COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
302,662,000
287,699,000
Net inc
6,574,000
b394,000
Share earns
.52
-
6mo sales
591,179,000
575,441,000
Net inc
1,556,000
c87,623,000
Share earns
.12
7.19


Tatars Are Told by Gromyko To Cease Political Pressure
LEAD: A group of Crimean Tatars who held a 24-hour protest in Red Square met in the Kremlin today with President Andrei A. Gromyko and were told it was not in their interest to put more pressure on the Government, the Soviet press agency Tass said.


SPRINKLER FAILED LONG BEFORE FIRE THAT KILLED 7
LEAD: The sprinkler system in a Harlem apartment tower had not been working for at least several months and possibly years before a fire that killed seven people on March 22, the head of a special Fire Department inquiry said yesterday.


Telegraphed Punches
LEAD: To the Editor:


Barnaby J. Feder Wed to Ms. Lowy
LEAD: Michele Shulamit Lowy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elie Lowy of Jamaica, Queens, and Barnaby J. Feder, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Feder of Foster City, Calif., were married yesterday in Sunapee, N.H., at the home of Jean Putonen, the justice of the peace who officiated.


INCO LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INCO LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
422,000,000
387,000,000
Net inc
13,800,000
5,800,000
Share earns
.11
.01
6mo sales
803,000,000
762,000,000
Net inc
8,800,000
3,700,000
Share earns
.03
-


Where's Nicaragua?
LEAD: To the Editor:


TOLL IN HAITI IS PUT AT 50 OR MORE
LEAD: Witnesses to a brutal battle last week have given grisly accounts of peasants and sharecroppers fighting with machetes and metal spikes in a clash that killed at least 50 people.


Marva Collins to Open 2d School in California
LEAD: Marva Collins, whose education efforts on behalf of inner-city students have earned her national attention, is planning to open a second school in California with the help of a local fund-raising committee.


CONCRETE COMPANY GIVEN 2D CHANCE BY KOCH
LEAD: A company that New York City helped establish to make concrete at lower prices produced its first 100 cubic yards of concrete yesterday.
In doing so, the company averted a threat from Mayor Koch to cancel its contract for failure to operate.


GOODYEAR TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOODYEAR TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,558,400,000
2,358,500,000
Net inc
141,000,000
c108,000,000
Share earns
2.47
.99
Shares outst
57,003,264
108,861,676
6mo sales
4,859,300,000
4,421,800,000
Net inc
b425,200,000
c54,600,000
Share earns
6.63
.50
Shares outst
64,111,574
108,639,501


Opera: 'Giovanni' in Salzburg
LEAD: SALZBURG, Austria, July 27 -In a year when all the world is celebrating the 200th anniversary of ''Don Giovanni,'' sometimes in distressingly cavalier if not actually criminal ways, Mozart's hometown could hardly overlook the opportunity to pay the respect it neglected to give the opera in the composer's lifetime.


AMERICAN SAVINGS BANK, FSB OF NY reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN SAVINGS BANK, FSB OF NY (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
13,113,000
9,354,000
Per share
1.97
1.35
6mo net inc
25,231,000
17,409,000
Per share
3.77
2.69


Allen Saalburg, 88, Director Of W.P.A. Murals in the 30's
LEAD: Allen Saalburg, a painter and silk-screen artist who headed a murals project of the Works Progress Administration during the 1930's in New York City, died of pneumonia and complications resulting from a stroke, in Flemington, N.J., Saturday.
He was 88 years old and lived in Uhlerstown, Pa.


REAGAN AIDES DENY HE TRIED TO FOOL THE PUBLIC ON IRAN
LEAD: The White House angrily insisted today that President Reagan had not tried to mislead the public when he withheld information about the Iran-contra affair last November.


6-Year-Old Girl Fatally Shot
LEAD: A 7-year-old boy shot and killed his younger sister Sunday in an accident that occurred while they played with a pistol their parents kept in the house, the police said.
The sister, Jennifer Olivera, 6, was critically wounded by a shot from a .22-caliber semiautomatic pistol, according to a police spokesman, Lieut.


The Music In the Lab
LEAD: SCIENTISTS and music lovers are marking the 100th anniversary of the death of Borodin, and the occasion has prompted some musing upon the wondrous wiring of the human brain.


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, JULY 28, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


Trappers Stopped at 29
LEAD: A three-run homer by Eddie Taubensee capped a six-run first inning for Billings, which hung on to defeat Salt Lake City Trappers, 7-5, tonight and end the longest winning streak in professional baseball history at 29 games.


ALABAMA BIAS CASE NEAR RESOLUTION
LEAD: A tentative settlement was announced today in a 15-year-old Federal lawsuit that accused the Alabama state police of discriminating against blacks in its hiring and promotion policy.


Another Message
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.63
6.62
6.42
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.80
5.87
5.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.03
6.02
5.93
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.39
8.40
7.38
30-YR.


Pickens May Buy Into Boeing
LEAD: T. Boone Pickens, the Texas oilman and corporate raider, has indicated his intention to acquire as much as a 15 percent stake in the Boeing Company, the aircraft maker said today.


NL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NL INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
118,958,000
131,170,000
Net inc
b4,973,000
cd293,645,000
6mo sales
230,002,000
315,746,000
Net loss
b7,498,000
d289,607,000
b-After net from discontinued operations of $34,765,000 for the quarter and $60,977,000 for the 6 months.


Have the Flu? Don't Drive
LEAD: Influenza impairs a driver's reaction time even more than does a ''moderate'' dose of alcohol, according to a group of British researchers.


People
LEAD: *
Dawn Sibley has been promoted to executive vice president-director of media and communications services at Ally Gargano/MCA Advertising.


Britain's TV for Children
LEAD: COMPARED with American programming, British television is a children's paradise.
But broadcasters and educators are worried that it might turn into a paradise lost if the Thatcher Government's plans to deregulate the industry materialize.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''Each day we are living in a more typical repressive dictatorship led by a military chief who is rejected by society but who maintains himself by force.''  - Ricardo Arias Calderon, Panama's main opposition leader.  [ A1:6. ]


3Com's Chief Confident About Deal With Bridge
LEAD: When the 3Com Corporation announced Friday that it would merge with Bridge Communications Inc., some analysts were skeptical, despite generally favorable reactions.
In the last two years, 3Com had attempted two other mergers, with Convergent Technologies Inc., and then with Centram Systems West, only to have both fall through.


MOORE MCCORMACK REOURCES CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOORE MCCORMACK REOURCES CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
94,593,000
89,137,000
Net inc
5,729,000
b124,231,000
Share earns
.47
-
6mo rev
169,355,000
159,254,000
Net inc
7,325,000
b127,602,000
Share earns
.52
-


TIGERS CLOSE IN ON YANKEES
LEAD: Bill Madlock's eighth-inning single scored Tom Brookens with the tie-breaking run as the Detroit Tigers beat the Chicago White Sox, 4-1, tonight and moved within a half game of the Yankees in the American League East.


Former North Courier Is Said to Get Immunity
LEAD: A former Senate aide who worked as a courier for Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North has been granted immunity by the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair, according to a law enforcement official with knowledge of the investgation.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Market Adds to Gains; Dow Up 8.61
LEAD: The stock market continued to regain the ground it lost early last week, and the Dow Jones industrial average rose 8.61 points, to 2,493.94.


DIRECTOR OF HARLEM MUSEUM SEEN AS MYERSON SUCCESSOR
LEAD: The director of the Studio Museum in Harlem, Dr.
Mary Schmidt Campbell, is expected to be New York City's new Commissioner of Cultural Affairs, leaders in the city's arts community said yesterday.


PARCELLS'S DRUG VIGILANCE
LEAD: When the Giants opened training camp yesterday, only the rookies and the quarterbacks and a few other players were there.
The entire squad isn't due to report to Pace University in Pleasantville, N.Y., until Friday when all the Giants' authors will be in uniform before any of their books are in the stalls.


Judge, Citing Sloth, Orders Lawyers to School
LEAD: Exasperated by what he considered sloppy legal work in a case before him, Federal District Judge Walter Jay Skinner has ordered two lawyers to attend an all-day seminar on Federal practice sponsored by the Masssachusetts Council for Legal Education.


Politics and Race Cars
LEAD: In nearly 200 years of American Presidential elections, resourceful candidates have discovered innumerable ways to get their names before the voters, from billboards and buttons to skywriting.
But Alexander M. Haig Jr., who is trying to rise above a low standing in the polls for the 1988 Republican


African Art Settling In at New Home
LEAD: For most of its 23 years, the Museum of African Art has lived a stepchild's existence among the grand museums of Washington, making do in a row of nine town houses on Capitol Hill, a few blocks behind the Supreme Court.


John Bernard Myers, Dealer In Artworks and Literature
LEAD: John Bernard Myers, an art dealer and writer who presented and published the work of many well-known New York artists and poets, died of cancer of the bladder Sunday night at the Danbury (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.


NOTES ON FASHION
LEAD: GEOFFREY BEENE abruptly interrupted his vacation in Nice this month and returned to New York bearing news.
He must have missed the south of France, however, because the place he chose to explain his return was Provence, the restaurant at 38 MacDougal Street that captures the essence of that lavender-scented land.


Bork as Stranger
LEAD: Despite all reports that President Reagan and Judge Robert H. Bork, his choice for the Supreme Court vacancy, are political and ideological soul mates, the two scarcely know each other.
Mr.
Bork told an interviewer that he had met the President only once before he went to the White House this month to be formally offered the post.


SCHOLAR LOSES HER WAY IN BRITAIN'S 'NEW PUNJAP'
LEAD: The scholar seems more street-smart than bookish as she barges in with all the trust of kith and kin on the humble homes of what she calls New Punjab in Old England, speaking Urdu and checking on the children, the health, the love lives of the families who are the stuff of her scholarship.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  LAST LETTERS.
Prisons and Prisoners of the French Revolution 1793-1794.
By Olivier Blanc.
Translated by Alan Sheridan. 250 pages.
Michael di Capua Books: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.50.


U.S. IS EASING BENEFITS POLICY ON AIDS CASES
LEAD: The Federal Government has reversed itself and will automatically extend Social Security disability payments to victims of AIDS who meet the newly expanded Federal definition of the deadly disease, a top Social Security Administration official said yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Washington Talk page Monday about the Federal News Service misstated the name of its founder.
It is Richard L. Boyd.


WHITE HOUSE HEARS SONGS BY COLE PORTER
LEAD: DO yourself a great favor:


A Syrian Air Force Jet Is Shot Down Over Iraq
LEAD: A Syrian Air Force fighter jet was shot down over Iraq today and its pilot captured in the first such incident between the two neighboring Arab countries.


VARIAN ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to July 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VARIAN ASSOCIATES (NYSE)
Qtr to July 3
1987
1986
Sales
252,400,000
221,500,000
Net inc
4,300,000
c5,200,000
Share earns
.20
-
9mo sales
706,800,000
654,800,00
Net inc
b16,100,000
c3,500,000
Share earns
.74
-


BYRD WARNS AGAINST A PARTISAN BATTLE OVER CONFIRMATION OF BORK
LEAD: The Senate majority leader, Robert C. Byrd, cautioned today that the battle over the confirmation of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court should not become ''a litmus test of party affiliation and loyalty.''


LIZ CLAIBORNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIZ CLAIBORNE INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
236,019,000
178,942,000
Net inc
24,255,000
17,633,000
Share earns
.28
.20
6mo sales
511,046,000
382,642,000
Net inc
56,436,000
40,262,000
Share earns
.65
.47


JUDGE AND 2 OTHERS ARE SLAIN AT HEARING
LEAD: A man in court for an alimony hearing today shot and killed his ex-wife's lawyer, her sister and the judge hearing the case, the authorities said.


CULLEN-FROST BANKERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CULLEN-FROST BANKERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
551,000
714,000
Per share
.07
.10
Shares outst
8,099,618
7,175,457
6mo net inc
928,000
1,566,000
Per share
.12
.22
Shares outst
8,074,147
7,153,464


HEAD OF U.S. EHTICS OFFICE IS PLANNING TO RESIGN SOON
LEAD: David H. Martin, the ethics official who has come under strong criticism recently for his office's inquiry into the financial affairs of the Attorney General, told his staff in a memorandum last month that he planned to resign.


TOTAL PETROLEUM (NORTH AMERICAN) LTD(A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOTAL PETROLEUM (NORTH AMERICAN) LTD(A)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
410,412,000
401,364,000
Net loss
12,482,000
b17,157,000
Share earns
-
.64
6mo rev
802,650,000
859,734,000
Net loss
25,263,000
b20,348,000
Share earns
-
.77


MORE MINES FOUND IN PERSIAN GULF SHIPPING LANE
LEAD: Pentagon officials said today that seven more mines had been discovered in the area of the Persian Gulf where the re-registered Kuwaiti tanker Bridgeton struck a mine last week.


Advertising; Supporting Special Olympics
LEAD: IN 20 markets around the country, television viewers are learning that for the moment the American Telephone and Telegraph Company will be doubling the donation it normally makes to the Special Olympics for every consumer purchase of a $25 pack of long-distance gift certificates.


Greenspan, Ruder Gain
LEAD: The Senate Banking Committee today approved the nominations of Alan Greenspan as the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and David S. Ruder as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.


At Least 19 Killed as Rioting Erupts in Sri Lanka
LEAD: Crowds battling in Colombo as rioting broke out over an accord with Indian Government that would grant more autonomy to Tamil minority.
At least 100 were reported wounded as police fired into crowds.
Page A3. (NYT/Seth Mydans)


BANKNORTH GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKNORTH GROUP INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
936,000
1,643,000
Per share
.45
.79
6mo net inc
2,930,000
3,170,000
Per share
1.40
1.51


PICKENS ROLE CITED
LEAD: The price of the Boeing Company's stock soared today on the news that T. Boone Pickens might buy a large stake in the company.
But the intentions of Mr.
Pickens, the Texas oilman and corporate raider, remained unclear.


WENDY'S INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WENDY'S INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
270,521,000
300,247,000
Net inc
1,924,000
24,252,000
Share earns
.02
.25
Shares outst
96,111,000
97,105,000
6mo rev
527,092,000
574,957,000
Net loss
4,903,000
b40,276,000
Share earns
-
.42
Shares outst
95,527,000
96,817,000


DYNCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYNCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
213,759,000
186,318,000
Net inc
b1,940,000
2,482,000
Share earns
.18
.24
6mo rev
413,365,000
348,219,000
Net inc
b1,345,000
3,509,000
Share earns
.12
.35


SUNDSTRAND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNDSTRAND CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
325,389,000
343,291,000
Net inc
13,526,000
19,739,000
Share earns
.72
1.05
6mo sales
653,088,000
687,770,000
Net inc
30,545,000
36,845,000
Share earns
1.63
1.97


HIBERNIA SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HIBERNIA SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
373,106
135,238
Per share
.46
-
6mo net inc
733,107
242,618
Per share
.90
-
The bank converted to public form of ownership in September.  February.


DOW JUMPS 25.83 POINTS, TO 2,519.77
LEAD: The Dow Jones industrial average, propelled by news events affecting several of its component companies, soared 25.83 points yesterday, to a new high of 2,519.77.


AVANT-GARDE PIONEERS SEE A QUIETER FUTURE
LEAD: Now that mainstream American cultural institutions are beginning to recognize and absorb the contributions of experimental theater artists and musicians who have been working outside the establishment for the last two decades, the artists and producers who have brought this work to its maturity are casting their eyes to the future.


House Passes Refugee Bill
LEAD: The House of Representatives today passed legislation that would suspend for two years the Government's deportation of Salvadoran and Nicaraguan refugees to their countries.
The vote was 237 to 181.
A similar measure passed the Senate Judiciary Committee on July 15 and awaits action by the full Senate.


3 Campers Killed by Lightning Near Buffalo
LEAD: Officials removing the body of one of three men killed by lightning at a campsite in Darien, N.Y., about 30 miles east of Buffalo.
The bodies were discovered early yesterday in two tents, but authorities said they were probably killed in a thunderstorm early Sunday. (AP)


Dandelion Weeds, Fresh From the Farm
LEAD: To some, the dandelion is merely a weed.
But to Adrian (Butch) Wells it is ambrosia - so delicious that he could eat it straight from the can, and often does.
Mr.
Wells's passion has become his company's salvation: W. S. Wells &amp; Son, for 91 years a family-run cannery here, is thriving.


GOVERNORS FOCUS ON STATES' RIGHTS
LEAD: Declaring that the Federal Government has usurped much of the states' authority and hobbled their ability to attack social and economic problems, the new chairman of the National Governors' Association today outlined a drive to regain that authority.


Try Even Less Phone Regulation
LEAD: What's good for A.T.&amp;T., argue some consumer advocates, can't be good for America.
They're worried about a proposal to substitute broad price ceilings on long-distance service for regulation based on rates and profits.
The approach, they fear, would lead to higher phone bills.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
July 24
July 17
July 25
1987
1987
1986
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.2
7.0
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.6
2.8
Gasoline stocks
226.8
230.1
222.1
Distillate stocks
112.3
109.2
109.8
Crude imports, daily
321.9
317.4
326.3
Product imports, daily
8.3
8.3
8.7
Crude stocks
321.9
317.4
326.3
Crude production, daily
8.3
8.3
8.7
Refinery utilization (%)
86.5
86.7
83.4


Uncertainty Depresses Prices
LEAD: Investor apathy and uncertainty about the schedule of Treasury auctions helped depress prices of short- and long-term issues yesterday.


AIR EXPRESS INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIR EXPRESS INTERNATIONAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
89,610,000
78,245,000
Net inc
b2,875,000
c1,179,000
Share earns
.58
.25
6mo rev
172,681,000
155,828,000
Net inc
b4,033,000
c1,880,000
Share earns
.82
.40


HOME GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
588,100,000
549,000,000
Net inc
b47,700,000
52,200,000
Share earns
1.31
1.31
Shares outst
36,500,000
38,800,000
6mo rev
1,184,400,000
1,065,300,000
Net inc
b121,800,000
c148,400,000
Share earns
3.34
3.75
Shares outst
36,500,000
38,900,000


ARDEN GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARDEN GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Sales
93,000,000
103,000,000
Net inc
2,608,000
1,935,000
Share earns
1.17
.81
6mo sales
183,000,000
206,000,000
Net inc
4,001,000
2,819,000
Share earns
1.79
1.15


ADVISERS QUESTION SPEEDING UP ANTI-MISSILE PLAN
LEAD: A team of high-level advisers to the Defense Department has raised serious questions about the Pentagon's plan to speed up President Reagan's program to develop a space-based defense against attacking missiles.


WORLDS OF WONDER reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WORLDS OF WONDER (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
23,000,000
23,500,000
Net loss
10,400,000
1,300,000


D&amp;N SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*D&amp;N SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
102,000
3,347,000
Per share
.03
1.07
6mo net inc
2,562,000
5,733,000
Per share
.80
1.83
The latest periods' results reflect a $915,000 writeoff of contributions to the Federal Savings &amp; Loan Insurance Corp.


Turned Off
LEAD: A man who rarely rides the subway took a train from Times Square to Brooklyn the other day and emerged doubly impressed:


Optimism in Britain
LEAD: British businessmen are optimistic that output and orders will continue to rise, but they also expect the recent rapid growth to taper off to a more sustainable rate, according to a report from the Confederation of British Industry.
Fewer companies are working below capacity now than at any time since 1974, while a shortage of skilled labor is increasingly seen as a problem, the report said.


CRYSTAL BRANDS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRYSTAL BRANDS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
74,143,000
73,950,000
Net loss
2,504,000
1,448,000
6mo sales
162,501,000
166,754,000
Net inc
944,000
3,636,000
Share earns
.11
.41


GENRAD INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENRAD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
46,591,000
41,526,000
Net loss
b38,313,000
c11,084,000
6mo rev
94,892,000
82,521,000
Net loss
b39,688,000
c19,629,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $4,255,000 and $6,889,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively; and a charge of $34,500,000 related to discontinued operations for both the quarter and 6 months.


AVERY INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AVERY INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
181,807,000
1,873,000
Net loss
1,197,000
b3,309,000
9mo sales
427,355,000
7,236,000
Net loss
19,136,000
b2,905,000
b-After net of $129,000 for the quarter and $2,128,000 for the 9 months both from discontinued equity in earnings of Triangle Industries Inc.


DEAN FOODS CO reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEAN FOODS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
373,739,000
353,330,000
Net inc
13,577,000
10,563,000
Share earns
.51
.40
Yr sales
1,434,600,000
1,268,580,000
Net inc
41,067,000
40,723,000
Share earns
1.54
1.53


JEFFERSON BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERSON BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
602,000
368,719
Per share
.26
.13
6mo net inc
1,201,000
872,446
Per share
.52
.34


BEVERLY SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEVERLY SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b341,000
c219,000
Per share
.12
-
6mo net inc
b847,000
c603,000
Per share
.29
-
b-After tax credits of $56,000 for the quarter and $111,000 for the 6 months.


Dynamics' Net Rises by 20.9%
LEAD: The General Dynamics Corporation said that its earnings increased 20.9 percent in the second quarter of 1987, in part because of a marked increase in sales in the company's military aircraft business.


THE STAGE: 'LADY BE GOOD'
LEAD: MIDWAY through the first act of ''Lady, Be Good!,'' the 1924 Gershwin musical being revived by the Goodspeed Opera House, in East Haddam, Conn., Richard Stillman, an actor and dancer, strolls onto the stage with a banjo and begins to strum and sing an easygoing music-hall rendition of ''Fascinating Rhythm.


CCB FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CCB FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,576,000
4,264,000
Per share
.91
.85
6mo net inc
8,931,000
8,623,000
Per share
1.78
1.72
The year-ago quarter and 6 months results restated for merger with Republic Bank &amp; Trust and accounted for as a pooling of interests.


ADDISON-WESLEY PUBLISHING CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADDISON-WESLEY PUBLISHING CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
37,722,000
32,516,000
Net inc
942,000
5,000
Share earns
.37
-
6mo sales
55,989,000
50,136,000
Net loss
5,569,000
5,486,000
Year-ago results are restated to reflect a change in accounting for certain pension costs.


PANAMA IS TIED UP AS STRIKE GOES ON
LEAD: The second day of a nationwide general strike brought activity to a virtual halt here today, but public reaction to the dramatic arrest of the military leader's harshest critic was muted.


HARSCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARSCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
264,300,000
296,300,000
Net inc
13,400,000
11,600,000
Share earns
.46
.39
6mo sales
533,600,000
577,500,000
Net inc
27,000,000
22,500,000
Share earns
.92
.75


Text of Proposal for a Separate Bill of Rights
LEAD: Following is a working draft of the Bill of Rights written by Roger Sherman, Representative from Connecticut, in July 1789.
If his colleagues on a House committee that was considering amendments approved his proposal, their names were evidently to precede his opening words.
The last two lines of Article 4 end with blank spaces in the original, and the word in brackets in the last paragraph follows a deletion and appears to have been intended for deletion also.


BSD MEDICAL (CO)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BSD MEDICAL (CO)(O)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,045,576
1,378,206
Net loss
1,405,576
26,381
9mo rev
2,480,498
3,568,203
Net loss
2,533,532
252,038


WARREN FIVE CENTS SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARREN FIVE CENTS SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
772,000
639,000
Per share
.22
-
6mo net inc
1,797,000
1,382,000
Per share
.52
-
The year-ago per share earnings not available; the bank converted to stock form in July 1986.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: THE May 13 and 20 Personal Health columns by Jane E. Brody dealt with soft drinks.


MEESE TELLS PANEL HE HAD NO REASON TO PRESS INQUIRY
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d testified today that he had not asked probing questions last November during his three-day preliminary inquiry into the Iran-contra affair because he had no reason to disbelieve other top officials.


AFFILIATED BANK CORPORATION OF WYOMING reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AFFILIATED BANK CORPORATION OF WYOMING (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
1,808,000
8,944,000
6mo net loss
1,274,000
8,930,000
The latest periods include provisions for loan losses of $1,288,000 for the quarter and $1,701,000 for the 6 months.


ENSERCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENSERCH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
653,218,000
596,902,000
Net loss
b110,000
c273,000
6mo rev
1,401,744,000
1,362,268,000
Net inc
b21,417,000
d23,962,000
Share earns
.25
.26
Shares outst
57,397,000
56,310,000


ALCO HEALTH SERVICES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALCO HEALTH SERVICES CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
434,134,000
329,290,000
Net inc
3,823,000
4,205,000
Share earns
.30
.32
9mo rev
1,265,725,000
915,246,000
Net inc
12,326,000
11,761,000
Share earns
.95
.91


Ex-Adviser to Reagan Asks to Be Subpoenaed
LEAD: Michael Ledeen, who helped to develop the program to sell American-made weapons to Iran, says he wants the Congressional committees holding the Iran-contra affair hearings to subpoena him so he can tell his story.


PERU PLANNING TO NATIONALIZE BANKS
LEAD: President Alan Garcia announced today that he planned to nationalize the nation's banks and close private money-exchange houses in a dramatic move to gain control over the country's turbulent financial system.


BANKS OF MID-AMERICA INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKS OF MID-AMERICA INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
25,018,000
28,918,000
6mo net loss
24,857,000
34,856,000


Associates Notes
LEAD: The Associates Corporation of North America, a unit of Gulf and Western Inc., announced a $150 million offering of 8 1/2 percent notes, due in 1991, at a price of 99 3/4, to yield 8.57 percent, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The notes are rated Aa-3 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation and yield about 52 basis points more than comparable Treasury issues.


DONNELLEY, R R &amp; SONS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DONNELLEY, R R &amp; SONS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
574,634,000
5050,823,000
Net inc
41,435,000
35,287,000
Share earns
.53
.45
6mo sales
1,085,252,000
993,040,000
Net inc
71,609,000
63,449,000
Share earns
.92
.81


CUOMO SAYS REAGAN GOVERNMENT LACKS RESPECT FOR THE RULE OF LAW
LEAD: Addressing a Democratic fund-raising dinner, Governor Cuomo charged tonight that with the Iran arms scandal, the Reagan Administration had become a Government disrespectful of the law.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  High Heat and Chickens


Citicorp Rates Up at Auction
LEAD: Interest rates rose at Citicorp's regular weekly commercial paper auction yesterday.


FIRST OAK BROOK BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST OAK BROOK BANCSHARES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
696,000
628,000
Per share
.58
.53
6mo net inc
1,407,000
1,291,000
Per share
1.17
1.08


CIRCADIAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CIRCADIAN INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,006,000
5,264,000
Net inc
133,000
b708,000
Share earns
.03
.15
6mo sales
20,433,000
18,018,000
Net inc
673,000
b2,081,000
Share earns
.15
.45
b-Includes tax credits of $233,000 and $700,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


GLAXO EXPANDING
LEAD: Glaxo Holdings P.L.C., said it would acquire Biogen Inc.'s biotechnology research facilities in Geneva.
It said in a statement that the agreement, once completed, provides for the acquisition to be completed by the month of August.
Glaxo would take over all assets at the Geneva site. it would also give Glaxo marketing rights to certain pharmaceutical compounds in the early stages of investigation and transfer Biogen's Geneva-based research staff, which is engaged in molecular genetics, to Glaxo's payroll.


Remember Wonsan?
LEAD: The problems the Navy is encountering with mines in the Persian Gulf have old Navy hands in the Pentagon recalling a similarly frustrating episode during the Korean War.
In October 1950, the Navy was assigned to put marines ashore to capture the port of Wonsan in North Korea, which first required clearing mines from the approach areas.


PAN AM, IN TURNAROUND, POSTS 10.5 MILLION PROFIT
LEAD: The Pan Am Corporation, parent company of the nation's seventh-largest airline, said yesterday that it earned $10.5 million, or 8 cents a share, in the second quarter, a strong turnaround from the $152.4 million loss in the second quarter of 1986.


Leather And Lace
LEAD:  1. A Historical Motif


FRUEHAUF CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRUEHAUF CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
655,812,000
630,553,000
Net loss
b9,668,000
c6,549,000
6mo sales
1,261,387,000
1,161,249,000
Net loss
b15,331,000
c12,369,000
b-Includes tax credits of $6,000,000 for the quarter and $15,600,000 for the 6 months; and gains from discontinued operations of $5,561,000 and $13,778,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


ANDERSON JACOBSON INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANDERSON JACOBSON INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,520,000
9,329,000
Net loss
614,000
1,129,000


Natwest Net Down 47%
LEAD: National Westminster Bank P.L.C., which recently increased its provisions against possible bad third world loans, said today that its earnings dropped 47 percent during the first half of the year.
National Westminster said that it earned $:155 million, or about $247 million, compared with $:293 million, or about $468 million, in the first six months of 1986.


ISRAELI CHALLENGES DEMJANJUK ON DATES AND PLACES
LEAD: John Demjanjuk was cross-examined by the prosecution at his war-crimes trial today and his testimony produced several inconsistencies about his activities and whereabouts during World War II.


Drake Is No Dodo
LEAD: To the Editor:


QUAKER STATE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUAKER STATE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
217,750,000
242,180,000
Net loss
63,434,000
b15,484,000
Share earns
-
.64
6mo rev
439,665,000
473,521,000
Net loss
57,881,000
b25,990,000
Share earns
-
1.08


BEST BUY CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEST BUY CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
75,303,000
37,048,000
Net inc
808,000
1,370,000
Share earns
.10
.20
Share earnings reflect a 3-for-2 stock split paid in February.


Cultural Affairs Head to Protect 'Endangered Species'
LEAD: Dr.
Mary Schmidt Campbell, who was named the new Commissioner of Cultural Affairs yesterday, has a mushrooming list of goals.


The U.N. Today: July 29, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


Progress Reported in Transplanting of Genes
LEAD: A new way of transplanting genes could lead to the development of treatments for otherwise incurable genetic diseases.


Networks Take Turns In Covering Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 12:30 P.M. on the CBS television network under the network rotation system.
The hearings will also be televised on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New





PRETORIA'S TROOPS KILL 190 IN CLASH
LEAD: Security forces in South-West Africa said today that they had killed 190 Angolan troops and black nationalist guerrillas in one of the biggest clashes in the 21-year-old bush war against South African rule.


It's a Mistake to View Japan as the Enemy
LEAD: To the Editor:


SHELL CANADA LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHELL CANADA LTD
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,170,000,000
1,200,000,000
Net inc
64,000,000
18,000,000
Share earns
.54
.13
6mo rev
2,300,000,000
2,590,000,000
Net inc
167,000,000
58,000,000
Share earns
1.44
.45


IN FRANCE, ECONOMIC MALAISE
LEAD: While their neighbors are managing to find reasons to feel good about their economies, the French are in the grip of a malaise.


COMMERCE CLEARING HOUSE reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCE CLEARING HOUSE (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
74,455,000
68,081,000
Net inc
15,732,000
14,735,000
Share earns
.87
.82
6mo rev
152,745,000
136,988,000
Net inc
39,679,000
36,487,000
Share earns
2.20
2.03


USX NET INCOME SOARS; STEEL UNIT POSTS A PROFIT
LEAD: The USX Corporation, citing gradual increases in crude oil prices and its reduced steelmaking capacity, said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings increased tenfold.


NUCOR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUCOR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
209,464,238
197,088,116
Net inc
13,944,810
12,467,919
Share earns
.66
.58
6mo sales
396,297,652
386,076,825
Net inc
24,770,175
24,494,792
Share earns
1.17
1.14


WINE TALK
LEAD: SIX Texas vintners, looking to corral some business in Manhattan, moseyed into the Puck Building in SoHo last week and uncorked their wines.
Pardner, even Texas wineries do things in a big way.


PRISON COURSE FOR CONVICTS: HOW TO BE AN ESKIMO
LEAD: When Gerald Ell tells visitors to the prison here that one of his jobs is to teach convicts to handle rifles, he seldom fails to get attention.


Foreign Coin Idea Strikes Twice
LEAD: Generally, when an intriguing idea surfaces at about the same time from two different people, one of them immediately accuses the other of grand theft and a bitter exchange of news releases ensues.


SSMC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SSMC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
161,500,000
135,800,000
Net inc
1,900,000
b45,700,000
Share earns
.19
-
6mo rev
312,600,000
283,300,000
Net inc
4,700,000
b53,100,000
Share earns
.52
-


ALABAMA BIAS CASE NEAR RESOLUTION
LEAD: A tentative settlement was announced Monday in a 15-year-old Federal lawsuit that accused the Alabama state police of discriminating against blacks in its hiring and promotion policy.


REAGAN OPTIMISTIC ON A SOVIET PACT TO CURB MISSILES
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he was ''heartened'' by prospects for an arms agreement banning intermediate-range missiles, and announced that the United States had formally agreed to a key element of a compromise advanced by the Soviet Union.


Where the Buck Stops
LEAD: Is President Reagan telling the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth about the Iran-contra fiasco?
Polls suggest that a majority of Americans doubt it.
For that, Mr.
Reagan has no one to blame but himself.


NICARAGUAN EXILES FIND A PLACE IN THE SUN: MIAMI
LEAD: It is an old story, newly told, unfolding on the streets of Miami.


NIKE INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NIKE INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
237,663,000
244,951,000
Net inc
11,495,000
13,726,000
Share earns
.29
.36
Yr rev
877,357,000
1,069,222,000
Net inc
35,879,000
59,211,000
Share earns
.93
1.55


Real Estate; The Shifts In Branch Banking
LEAD: AT one time an important indicator of a bank's strength was the number of branches it operated.
But the high cost of running a branch and the rise of automatic teller machines and banking by phone have spurred some institutions to reduce their retail locations.
Even banks that are opening new branches are making do with much smaller space.


CLARK EQUIPMENT CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLARK EQUIPMENT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
280,900,000
253,100,000
Net loss
b3,700,000
c10,400,000
6mo sales
520,900,000
487,000,000
Net loss
b4,000,000
c26,300,000
b-Includes net of $415,000 and $10,910,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, from discontinued operations; and a tax credit of $721,000 for both the quarter and 6 months.


ACME UNITED CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACME UNITED CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,217,444
9,625,243
Net inc
233,225
152,082
Share earns
.07
.05
6mo sales
18,161,763
18,145,522
Net inc
138,775
184,349
Share earns
.04
.06
Shares outst
19,387,400
20,838,955


MEESE DEFENDS HIS INQUIRY
LEAD: Representative Peter W. Rodino Jr., Democrat of New Jersey, asked Attorney General Meese about his conduct of the investigation into the Iran-contra affair.


HARTFORD STEAM BOILER INPECTION &amp; INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARTFORD STEAM BOILER INPECTION &amp; INSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
106,173,000
96,363,000
Net inc
14,507,000
13,234,000
Share earns
.71
.62
6mo rev
207,230,000
188,372,000
Net inc
29,718,000
25,441,000
Share earns
1.44
1.20


FIRSTBANK OF ILLINOIS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRSTBANK OF ILLINOIS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,822,000
1,631,000
Per share
.35
.35
6mo net inc
3,763,000
3,321,000
Per share
.72
.72


FULTON FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FULTON FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b1,109,000
c13,587,000
6mo net inc
135,000
11,161,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Includes $348,000 in non-recurring gains on sale of investment securities, mortgage-backed securities and property and equipment, and a charge-off of $2.1 million for the association's FSLIC secondary reserve.


Private Property vs. Public Use
LEAD: After years of relative quiescence, the Supreme Court has, with a vengeance, revisited the constitutional balance between government regulation and private property under the Fifth Amendment clause that commands that private property shall not be taken for public use ''without just compensation.''


FIRST NATIONAL BANCORP (GAINESVILLE, GEORIA) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST NATIONAL BANCORP (GAINESVILLE, GEORIA)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,727,888
3,164,000
Per share
.49
.42
6mo net inc
7,154,088
6,348,000
Per share
.94
.85


EASTERN UTILITIES ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTERN UTILITIES ASSOCIATES (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
89,993,462
84,482,622
Net inc
9,358,594
6,629,704
Share earns
.73
.58
Shares outst
12,779,903
11,504,802
6mo rev
182,113,776
177,244,697
Net inc
21,460,501
16,196,182
Share earns
1.75
1.41
Shares outst
12,292,109
11,463,292


CABOT CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CABOT CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
319,388,000
310,140,000
Net inc
14,460,000
14,262,000
Share earns
.53
.52
9mo rev
951,366,000
1,006,691,000
Net inc
b44,083,000
60,112,000
Share earns
1.59
2.10


BIGGER ROLES OF TOSHIBA UNIT AND KONGSBERG CITED
LEAD: The Toshiba Machine Company conceded yesterday that it began selling the Soviet Union advanced ship-propeller milling tools as long ago as 1974, suggesting to investigators that the Japanese manufacturer had a far more extensive, long-term trading relationship with the Russians than previously believed.


AUTO-TROL TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUTO-TROL TECHNOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,963,000
14,860,000
Net inc
272,000
b1,778,000
Share earns
.04
-
6mo rev
35,924,000
30,455,000
Net inc
787,000
b3,381,000
Share earns
.11
-


Scouting; Spit Ball
LEAD: Baseball players are supposed to be role models for youth, but should they be spitting images?


Photos With North
LEAD: It appears that Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's popularity boom was of short duration, or that Washington residents and tourists are particularly fickle.


New Magazine Planned In Public Relations
LEAD: Jack O'Dwyer, well known in public relations circles as publisher of a newsletter and three important annual directories for the field, today will introduce still another enterprise for the J. R. O'Dwyer Company.


FIRST COMMERCE BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST COMMERCE BANCSHARES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,931,000
1,460,000
Per share
.63
.48
6mo net inc
3,567,000
2,624,000
Per share
1.17
.86


B.P. to Build Pipeline
LEAD: Britain's Energy Department said today that it would authorize the British Petroleum Company to build a pipeline from its Wytch Farm oilfield in Dorset, which could help it to become one of Europe's most productive onshore fields.


DAVIES TAKES U.S. OPEN PLAYOFF
LEAD: Laura Davies, the soft-spoken 23-year-old Englishwoman who strikes thunderbolts for drives, beat Ayako Okamoto of Japan by 2 strokes and JoAnne Carner of the United States by 3 today in an 18-hole playoff to win the 42d United States Women's Open golf championship.


ADVANCE ROSS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANCE ROSS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,385,000
736,000
Net inc
388,000
32,000
Share earns
.17
.01
6mo sales
3,125,000
1,790,000
Net inc
b1,786,000
64,000
Share earns
.82
.02
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $1,354,000.


HOMESTAKE MINING CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOMESTAKE MINING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
104,177,000
89,038,000
Net inc
b18,446,000
1,136,000
Share earns
.38
.03
6mo rev
179,499,000
168,004,000
Net inc
24,239,000
5,696,000
Share earns
.50
.12


WILLCOX &amp; GIBBS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILLCOX &amp; GIBBS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
75,405,000
61,835,000
Net inc
2,481,000
1,801,000
Share earns
.33
.26
Shares outst
7,566,000
6,856,000
6mo sales
148,945,000
120,984,000
Net inc
4,945,000
3,523,000
Share earns
.66
.55


'THESE FANS DON'T BOO YOU'
LEAD: He is remembered primarily as the Yankee pitcher during two World Series moments - Bill Mazeroski's winning homer in 1960 for the Pittsburgh Pirates and Willie McCovey's line drive in 1962 for the San Francisco Giants that Bobby Richardson caught for the final out.
But at age 51, Ralph Terry is a rookie again, this time on the Senior PGA


STONE CONTAINER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STONE CONTAINER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
831,000,000
528,000,000
Net inc
32,500,000
3,500,000
Share earns
.83
.07
6mo sales
1,416,700,000
915,200,000
Net inc
58,700,000
b1,200,000
Share earns
1.60
-


Glenfed Blocked
LEAD: Stockholders representing 27 percent of Glenfed Inc. voted against a $210 million merger with the Guarantee Financial Corporation of Fresno, Calif., and the company, surprised by the outcome, adjourned the meeting until Aug. 18 to solicit more proxies.


CINCINNATI FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINCINNATI FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b13,596,000
c22,677,000
Share earns
.89
1.46
6mo net inc
b46,230,000
c47,874,000
Share earns
3.00
3.11
b-Includes capital gains of $1,887,000 for the quarter and $6,474,000 for the 6 months.


GEORGE A. McDERMOTT
LEAD: George A. McDermott, a retired medical publisher, died of a heart attack last Wednesday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 85 years old and lived in Port Washington, L.I.


OFFICIALS SPLIT ON HANDLING FALL JAIL INFLUX
LEAD: New York City jail administrators and the board that oversees them are sharply divided over whether the city will be able to handle the influx of prisoners expected this fall, a time of year when inmate populations traditionally peak.


Custom Chips: Broader Use On Horizon
LEAD: THE market for computer chips tailor-made for the individual user traditionally has been dominated by relatively small players.
But the recent entry of two semiconductor powerhouses, Texas Instruments Inc. and the Intel Corporation, promises to change all that.


FRENCH SHIFT VIEW ON BOMB SUSPECTS
LEAD: A few months ago, responsibility for the series of terrorist bombings here last year was generally, if hypothetically, being attributed to a small family-centered group from the northern Lebanese village of Qubayat.


TRAVIS JACKSON, A SHORTSTOP WHO MADE THE HALL OF FAME
LEAD: Travis Jackson, the gritty, crowd-pleasing Hall of Fame shortstop who played 15 years for the New York Giants in the 1920's and 1930's, died Monday night at his home in Waldo, Ark.
He was 83 years old and had been suffering from Alzheimer's disease.


COURT TELLS E.P.A. TO CHANGE THE WAY IT SETS POLLUTION RULES
LEAD: In a decision written by Judge Robert H. Bork, a Federal appellate court here ruled today that the Environmental Protection Agency could consider only health, and not cost or technological feasibility, when determining what are safe levels of exposure to toxic air pollutants.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Becor's Board Approves Bid
LEAD: Becor Western Inc., which has attracted up to four different suitors, said today that its board had recommended that shareholders approve a $280 million leveraged buyout offer.


THOUSAND TRAILS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THOUSAND TRAILS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,246,000
33,193,000
Net loss
4,063,000
3,744,000
6mo rev
41,398,000
59,131,000
Net loss
7,953,000
5,690,000


Gold Bug Lures Leader Of Bid for St. Joe Unit
LEAD: John A. Wright signed on with the St.
Joe Minerals Corporation as a salesman in 1971 and adapted to a new corporate culture when the natural-resource company was acquired by the Fluor Corporation for $2.3 billion a decade later.


LONE STAR INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LONE STAR INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
211,539,000
246,224,000
Net inc
8,487,000
19,079,000
Share earns
.40
1.05
Shares outst
16,500,000
14,540,000
6mo sales
336,830,000
407,476,000
Net inc
b4,434,000
12,737,000
Share earns
.02
.31
Shares outst
16,098,000
14,533,000


CRISIS ENDS
LEAD: Giovanni Goria, a Christian Democrat, announced tonight that he had formed a coalition government after tough, last-minute bargaining.
The move ended a five-month political crisis.


COMPUGRAPHIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUGRAPHIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Revenue
91,629,000
83,015,000
Net inc
2,618,000
b1,841,000
Share earns
.31
-
6mo rev
180,144,000
169,945,000
Net inc
4,889,000
b619,000
Share earns
.58
-


OSHA Fines Fabric Company
LEAD: The Federal Government fined a New Haven fabric-coating company more than $480,000 today, charging that it had violated more than 200 rules for protecting workers who handle hazardous chemicals.


Airbus Gives G.E. Big Engine Order
LEAD: The General Electric Company said today that Airbus Industrie, the European aircraft manufacturer, had ordered more than $2 billion in aircraft engines from G.E. and CFM International, G.E.'s joint venture with Snecma of France.


PROTEST AND ROCK FETE ARE TESTS OF GLASNOST
LEAD: A joyous rock concert and an angry public demonstration in the last few days have pushed out new boundaries for spontaneous public behavior and protest in Soviet society.
In different settings and for reasons that could hardly have had less in common, a group of Crimean Tatars seeking to redress grievances and the audience at a Billy Joel concert threw away the rule book that has governed public activities in the Soviet Union for decades.


'Robocop' Is No. 1 Film Again at the Box Office
LEAD: ''Robocop,'' a violent adventure film about a half-man-half-robot policeman who battles evil in a futuristic Detroit, remained the top box-office attraction last weekend, earning $6.3 million in its second week.


ONE-WEEK INCREASE IN U.S. DEBT CEILING GAINING IN CONGRESS
LEAD: House and Senate leaders moved today to increase the limit on the Federal debt for a week to avoid imminent default by the Government.


USACAFES LP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USACAFES LP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,729,000
5,640,000
Net inc
2,030,000
1,286,000
Share earns
.29
.20
6mo rev
12,686,000
10,169,000
Net inc
5,097,000
1,988,000
Share earns
.74
.30


Kerkorian Plan On Expansion
LEAD: The Tracinda Corporation, the parent company of MGM/UA Communications, said today that it planned to make a variety of acquisitions in an effort to become a more diversified company.
Tracinda, wholly owned by


KERR-MCGEE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KERR-MCGEE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
726,365,000
625,663,000
Net inc
27,253,000
3,181,000
Share earns
.56
.07
6mo sales
1,273,211,000
1,344,573,000
Net inc
47,477,000
25,310,000
Share earns
.98
.52


Composer Wins Plagiarism Suit on 'Feelings'
LEAD: Morris Albert's ''Feelings'' was not his own, a Manhattan jury has decided.


TRANSACTIONS
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Emery Air Cites Losses
LEAD: The Emery Air Freight Corporation, which is acquiring the Purolator Courier Corporation, said today that it had been losing money since the middle of the second quarter.
It also conceded that earlier predictions of a quick turnaround for Purolator would not be achieved.


Paris: Irreverent Chanel And Seductive Ungaro
LEAD: In different ways, two major designers electrified their audiences Monday as the fall and winter couture openings reached the halfway mark.
Emanuel Ungaro put on a display of elegance this morning that blurred the line of demarcation between masculine and feminine clothes, perhaps forever.
Meanwhile, Karl Lagerfeld has updated the venerable house of Chanel so successfully in the last five years that with this year's collection he has virtually banished its image of quiet, staid and predictable clothes.


House Endorses Arias Plan
LEAD: The House today approved a non-binding resolution supporting a Central American peace proposal sponsored by the Costa Rican President, Oscar Arias Sanchez.
The approval was by voice vote with no objections.
The Arias peace plan, which proposes a regional cease-fire and a negotiated settlement of grievances in Nicaragua, El Salvador and Guatemala, has already won overwhelming support in the Senate.


NORFOLK SOUTHERN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORFOLK SOUTHERN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,043,200,000
1,046,100,000
Net inc
122,400,000
143,000,000
Share earns
.64
.75
6mo rev
2,022,700,000
2,062,000,000
Net inc
b247,200,000
246,700,000
Share earns
1.30
1.30


ARCO Expects Gain From Sale
LEAD: The Atlantic Richfield Company said today it expected to reap between $508 million and $567 million from the sale of 19.6 percent of its ARCO Chemical Company to the public.


CORNERSTONE FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORNERSTONE FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
489,971
539,207
Per share
.25
.40
Shares outst
1,968,318
1,364,574
6mo net inc
1,102,343
1,065,191
Per share
.59
.78
Shares outst
1,878,465
1,362,258


SENATOR LEAHY SAYS HE LEAKED REPORT OF PANEL
LEAD: Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the former vice chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, said today that he resigned from the panel last January partly because he was angry with himself for having given a reporter an unclassified draft report on the Iran-contra affair.


VERMONT RESEARCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERMONT RESEARCH CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Sales
1,178,000
1,176,000
Net loss
987,000
322,000
9mo sales
3,988,000
3,352,000
Net loss
2,187,000
2,329,000


War on Fleas Goes High Tech
LEAD: What's next for today's flea-bitten mutt?
An electronic collar that will break the eardrums of any pest coming within a few feet.


Drug Complaint Disputed
LEAD: A spokesman for Peter Ueberroth, the baseball commissioner, put off suggestions yesterday that the commissioner's policy on drug offenders was not being followed.


Car Pact Lifts Platinum Price
LEAD: The price of platinum on the New York Mercantile Exchange rose sharply yesterday because of the European Community's agreement to require catalytic converters, which use the metal, in some 1988 cars.


SHELL OIL COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHELL OIL COMPANY
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,180,000,000
4,164,000,000
Net inc
266,000,000
219,000,000
6mo rev
9,680,000,000
8,830,000,000
Net inc
374,000,000
495,000,000
Shell Oil is a unit of Royal Dutch Petroleum Co.


AMERICAN BANK OF CONNECTCUT reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN BANK OF CONNECTCUT
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,279,000
1,205,000
Per share
.59
.56
6mo net inc
2,458,000
2,179,000
Per share
1.14
1.01


NET UP AT TEXACO AND CHEVRON
LEAD: Four major oil companies - Texaco Inc., the Chevron Corporation, the Mobil Corporation and the Pennzoil Company - reported second-quarter earnings yesterday that reflected industrywide trends resulting from higher crude oil prices.


INSIDE
LEAD: 6,000 and Counting  Angel Cordero Jr. rode two horses to victory at Monmouth Park and became the fourth jockey to achieve 6,000 career victories.
Page A19.


Scouting; Running Family
LEAD: It wasn't as if someone dared Daniel Drew to work 90 hours a week and spend $12,000 to have his wife and four children run through the streets of Moscow while he tagged along barefoot on his summer vacation.
Dr.
Drew, 47-year-old physician from Jasper, Ind., actually volunteered.


SHARED MEDICAL SYSTEMS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHARED MEDICAL SYSTEMS CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
95,945,000
92,494,000
Net inc
10,665,000
b7,350,000
6mo rev
192,575,000
179,775,000
Net inc
23,511,000
c4,180,000
Share earns
.93
.17
b-Net loss and includes a writedown of almost $20 million due primarily to the closing of operations in Japan.


Jeffrey Dale Kint Dies; Evening Wear Designer
LEAD: Jeffrey Dale Kint, a fashion designer and president of Jeff Kint Designs Ltd., died Sunday at his home in Manhattan, after a long illness.
He was 33 years old.


Dark Clouds Over Japan's Economy
LEAD: Many economists say that the United States today is in a situation alarmingly similar to that of 1929.
But Japan, far more than America, is close to plunging into a depression that, with double-digit unemployment, could severely strain a society that counts lifetime employment as a virtual right of citizenship.


Americans Will Suffer
LEAD: To the Editor:


RELIABILITY INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RELIABILITY INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,221,000
6,383,000
Net inc
461,000
31,000
Share earns
.11
-
6mo rev
14,440,000
9,438,000
Net inc
918,000
b816,000
Share earns
.22
-
b-Net loss


AMERICAN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (DUVAL COUNTY) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (DUVAL COUNTY)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
343,000
b92,000
Per share
.36
-
6mo net inc
758,000
262,000
Per share
.80
-
b-After a charge of $181,000 for interest assessed by the Internal Revenue Service.


LEADING AVIATION GROUPS AGREE ON PLAN FOR SAFER, FASTER FLIGHTS
LEAD: In a rare show of agreement, the airlines and other users of the aviation system have produced a plan to combat what they say are threats to the efficiency and safety of the nation's air operations.


Oil Use Reported Rising Faster Than Expected
LEAD: The nation's consumption of petroleum products, led by a marked rise in demand for gasoline, has grown faster than expected this year, according to a report released yesterday by a major oil industry group.


Five Arrested in Killing Of California Motorist
LEAD: Five people have been arrested in the roadside killing of a 17-year-old high school student Friday.


BURRITT INTERFINANCIAL BANORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURRITT INTERFINANCIAL BANORPORATION
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,001,000
805,000
Per share
.33
.27
6mo net inc
1,860,000
b1,451,000
Per share
.62
.49
b-After a loss of $182,000 for a prepayment penalty on a Federal Home Loan Bank advance.


Cray Presents New Computer
LEAD: Moving to retain its pre-eminence in the supercomputer market, Cray Research Inc. today introduced the Cray-2S computer systems, an enhanced range of the Cray 2 supercomputer offering a 25 to 40 percent improvement in overall system performance.


DETROIT EDISON CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DETROIT EDISON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
688,215,000
691,371,000
Net inc
103,273,000
82,954,000
Share earns
.70
.57
6mo rev
1,396,711,000
1,440,233,000
Net inc
234,716,000
187,397,000
Share earns
2.60
1.28


8.4% of Kenner To New World
LEAD: New World Pictures Ltd. said today that it holds an 8.4 percent stake in Kenner Parker Toys Inc., which it bought for $28.3 million, or an average price of $31.18 a share.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, New World said it has a ''continuing interest'' in acquiring the toy company for $41 a share.


WRIGLEY, WM JR CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WRIGLEY, WM JR CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
209,222,000
186,513,000
Net inc
23,207,000
18,258,000
Share earns
1.10
.87
6mo sales
393,606,000
343,944,000
Net inc
37,462,000
28,490,000
Share earns
1.77
1.35


FOSTER WHEELER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOSTER WHEELER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
331,370,887
345,589,431
Net inc
3,002,025
7,096,983
Share earns
.09
.21
6mo rev
631,128,897
637,280,878
Net inc
13,763,863
14,104,071
Share earns
.40
.41


WETTERAU INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WETTERAU INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
966,900,000
939,300,000
Net inc
9,200,000
8,300,000
Share earns
.75
.64


ELMIRA SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELMIRA SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
372,000
c345,000
Per share
.94
1.29
Shares outst
397,668
268,327
6mo net inc
b790,000
c650,000
Per share
1.99
2.91
Shares outst
397,668
223,248


BARRY WRIGHT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARRY WRIGHT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
51,658,000
49,733,000
Net inc
1,247,000
1,687,000
Share earns
.15
.19
Shares outst
8,205,000
8,836,000
6mo sales
103,680,000
98,754,000
Net inc
b4,520,000
c4,569,000
Share earns
.55
.51
Shares outst
8,191,000
8,968,000


Republic Offering
LEAD: The Republic National Bank of New York is offering $100 million of 8.4 percent deposit notes, due in 1990, at a price of 99.95, to yield 8.42 percent, through E. F. Hutton &amp; Company as sole underwriter.
The notes, which are rated Aa-1 by Moody's and AA by S.&amp;P., yield about five-eighths of a percentage point more than Treasury issues of a similar maturity.


DI GIORGIO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DI GIORGIO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
303,161,000
280,788,000
Net loss
b4,329,000
c6,230,000
Share earns
-
.79
6mo sales
584,599,000
535,837,000
Net loss
b10,434,000
c8,267,000
Share earns
-
1.08


UNITED SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
903,078
907,513
Per share
.53
.53
6mo net inc
1,818,995
1,828,602
Per share
1.07
1.07


KEY CENTURION BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEY CENTURION BANCSHARES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,846,000
3,448,000
Per share
.52
.65
Shares outst
7,410,000
5,294,000
6mo net inc
7,502,000
6,952,000
Per share
1.11
1.31
Shares outst
6,761,000
5,256,000


ALASKA AIR GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALASKA AIR GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
178,447,000
109,974,000
Net inc
4,374,000
2,837,000
Share earns
.27
.23
Shares outst
16,302,000
12,565,000
6mo rev
289,137,000
181,752,000
Net loss
1,063,000
2,012,000


Contra Aid Figure Talks
LEAD: Robert W. Owen, a self-described ''private foot soldier'' in Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's effort to help the contras, is cooperating with the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair, a person familiar with the case said today.
Mr.
Owen has provided the independent counsel, Lawrence E. Walsh, with details of his activities in return for immunity from prosecution based on his testimony, the source said.


BROOKFIELD FEDERAL BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROOKFIELD FEDERAL BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
532,000
701,000
Per share
1.11
1.46
6mo net inc
1,151,000
1,293,000
Per share
2.40
2.69


RALPH P DAVIDSON OF TIME NAME HEAD OF KENNEDY CENTER
LEAD: Ralph P. Davidson, a Time Inc. publishing executive, was selected today to become president and chief executive officer of the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, an appointment that prepares the way for him to succeed to the chairmanship next year.


Fannie Mae Rates Set at 8.4% to 8.9%
LEAD: While the Treasury's borrowing plans have been stymied by lack of authority to issue new debt, the Federal National Mortgage Association is free to proceed with its previously announced plans to sell $1.8 billion of debentures.


Sports People; Krickstein Is Injured
LEAD: Aaron Krickstein withdrew from the D.C.
Tennis Classic in Washington yesterday after trainers discovered an apparent stress fracture in his left leg.
Krickstein, seeded sixth for the tournament and ranked 29th in the world, said he would return to his home in Grosse Point, Mich.
Tournament officials said that he is uncertain whether he would be able to play in the United States Open beginning next month.


Of Ads and Taxes
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service, faced with having to spread the word on the new tax law to more than 100 million taxpayers, is turning to Madison Avenue for help.
The Advertising Council, the nonprofit industry group that created such memorable public-service campaigns as Smokey Bear and Crime Dog McGruff, announced yesterday that it would start a national campaign on behalf of the I.R


SOVIET CAUTIONS ISRAEL AGAINST A NEW MISSILE
LEAD: The Soviet Union, apparently concerned about vulnerability to a nuclear strike, has warned Israel three times in the last week against continuing the reported development of a medium-range missile.


FORD MOTOR CO OF CANADA LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORD MOTOR CO OF CANADA LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,990,000,000
4,020,000,000
Net inc
b16,000,000
35,000,000
Share earns
1.97
4.26
6mo sales
7,610,000,000
7,570,000,000
Net inc
b89,000,000
42,000,000
Share earns
10.76
5.02


ANCHOR FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANCHOR FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
191,000
164,000
Per share
.26
.29
Shares outst
726,855
560,105
6mo net inc
417,000
337,000
Per share
.57
.60


Ohio Man With AIDS Is Dead After Flight Back From China
LEAD: A 38-year-old man who suffered from AIDS died less than a week after he was flown back to the United States from China in an Air Force jet, a hospital spokesman said today.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Acme-Cleveland Corp., Cleveland, a maker of telecommunications products, elected to its board Gerald C. McDonough, chairman of Leaseway Transportation Corp.


PAN AM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAN AM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
899,900,000
673,500,000
Net inc
10,500,000
b152,400,000
Share earns
.08
-
6mo rev
1,663,000,000
1,352,000,000
Net loss
83,100,000
270,800,000
b-Net loss


OPERA: A Salzburg 'Abuduction'
LEAD: Those dogmatic idealists who hold that there can be no significant connection between a composer's life and his music have some serious explaining to do when it comes to Mozart's operas.
The youngster who hastily married the sister of the woman he really loved spent the rest of his short life torturing himself over questions of love and fidelity.


CENTERIOR ENERGY CORP reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTERIOR ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,962,493,000
1,868,366,000
Net inc
411,300,000
380,682,000
Share earns
3.08
3.02
Shares outst
133,499,000
125,916,000


MOBIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOBIL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,529,000,000
12,176,000,000
Net inc
304,000,000
582,000,000
Share earns
.74
1.42
6mo rev
26,282,000,000
26,053,000,000
Net inc
556,000,000
1,022,000,000
Share earns
1.36
2.50


REUTER LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REUTER LABORATORIES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
789,460
898,178
Net loss
483,396
180,746
6mo sales
2,072,673
1,663,207
Net loss
657,231
291,314


COMMERCE NATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCE NATIONAL
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
588,000
b1,786,000
Per share
.14
-
6mo net inc
611,000
b667,000
Per share
.15
-
b-Net loss


FIRST NATIONAL BANK CORP (MICHIAN) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST NATIONAL BANK CORP (MICHIAN)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
728,000
505,000
Per share
.74
.56
Shares outst
980,203
905,536
6mo net inc
1,458,000
943,000
Per share
1.55
1.04
Shares outst
942,869
905,536


A New Chief At Santa Fe
LEAD: The Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation said yesterday that Robert D. Krebs had been elected chief executive.


GLENMORE DISTILLERIES CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GLENMORE DISTILLERIES CO (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,701,782
18,554,693
Net loss
2,689,096
c535,812
Share earns
-
.23
Yr sales
59,346,835
97,683,008
Net inc
b18,332,049
3,123,392
Share earns
7.93
1.36


'BATTLE FOR AFGANISTAN,' ON 'CBS REPORTS'
LEAD: WHY is the Soviet Union fighting in Afghanistan?


Big Sand Bar Is Cleared From Mississippi River
LEAD: A 3,000-foot sand bar that blocked the Mississippi River for more than a week has been cleared and loaded barges are now moving past the spot, a spokesman for the United States Army Corps of Engineers said yesterday.


British Airports' Shares Up Sharply
LEAD: Shares in BAA P.L.C., formerly the British Airports Authority, jumped 42 pence, or 67 cents, above the offering price when the stock started trading today on the London Stock Exchange.
About 2 million people bought shares in the company, which manages seven major British airports.
Small investors seeking to buy up to 1,000 shares were limited to a maximum 100 after the subscriptions to buy stock came to 10 times the amount available.


TELOS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELOS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,042,000
19,186,000
Net inc
b1,125,000
b776,000
Share earns
.31
.22
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $89,000 and $29,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Rorer and Dalkon
LEAD: Rorer Group Inc., which is trying to acquire the A. H. Robins Company, does not plan to increase the $1.75 billion to be set aside for women injured by Robins's Dalkon Shield contraceptive, said Robert Cawthorn, Rorer's chairman.
A lawyer for the claimants has said his clients are likely to fight the merger of the two companies because the funds to pay for Dalkon Shield injuries are inadequate.


Autopsy Shows Black Died From Head Blow
LEAD: An autopsy today on Eric Mxolise Mntonga, the black political figure who was found Sunday after being stabbed near the heart, showed that he actually died from a blow to the head.


JOHN GRIMES, THE PUBLISHER OF THE IRISH ECHO, DIES AT 54
LEAD: John Grimes, publisher of The Irish Echo, a newspaper that serves Irish-Americans, died Sunday.
He was 54 years old and lived in Pound Ridge, N.Y.


REAL-ESTATE OFFICIAL'S DEALS RAISE QUESTIONS OVER ETHICS
LEAD: The official who oversees New York City's commercial real-estate dealings started a private real-estate business with a top aide last year and was involved in the purchase and resale of three apartments in Manhattan and in the negotiations for seven others.


BALLY MANUFACTURING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALLY MANUFACTURING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
421,426,000
318,575,000
Net inc
b80,505,000
c11,679,000
Share earns
2.40
.42
Shares outst
32,680,132
27,799,686
6mo rev
811,193,000
563,597,000
Net inc
b54,457,000
c16,174,000
Share earns
1.52
.59
Shares outst
33,408,356
27,363,851


Small Town in the Big City: South Brooklyn Changes
LEAD: These days, Salvatore Scotto, a longtime resident and community leader in the Carroll Gardens section of Brooklyn, frequently receives phone calls from real-estate agents wanting to know if any of his properties in the neighborhood are for sale.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE SONGLINES, by Bruce Chatwin. 293 pages. Elizabeth Sifton/Viking. $18.95.


Bears Sign Payton To 1-Year Contract
LEAD: Walter Payton, who had been talking with Commissioner Pete Rozelle about purchasing a franchise, will remain a player at least for another year.


COMPUTER SCIENCES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to July 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER SCIENCES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to July 3
1987
1986
Revenue
274,620,000
233,998,000
Net inc
9,457,000
6,652,000
Share earns
.59
.46
Shares outst
15,930,000
14,482,000


Aaronson, Bartolone Acquires Fredericks
LEAD: Aaronson, Bartolone &amp; Pearlman Advertising has acquired the assets and liabilities of Fredericks Kullberg Amato &amp; Pisacane and set up a new subsidiary called Kullberg Amato Pisacane/ABP.


Results Plus; Diving
LEAD: Louganis Leads Qualifiers: Greg Louganis was the leading qualifier yesterday in the 3-meter springboard competition of the United States outdoor championships at Bartlesville, Okla.
For the first time in a decade, Louganis, 27 years old, of Boca Raton, Fla., is not defending a title.
His score of 638.61 points on 11 first-round dives gave him an 18-point margin over the second-place qualifier, Ron Meyer of Baton Rouge, La.


U.S. HAS FALLEN YEARS BEHIND ON A FLEET FOR CLEARING MINES
LEAD: The Navy has fallen years behind schedule as it struggles to rebuild its obsolete fleet of minesweepers, and is hundreds of millions of dollars above budget, according to Government officials.


Stop Importing Beef From Cleared Jungles
LEAD: To the Editor:


YANKS STAY ON TOP AS RHODEN WINS
LEAD: The evening seemed to move along swiftly, efficiently.
One moment, Rick Rhoden was pitching to Willie Wilson in the first, the next moment he was easing himself through trouble in the fifth.
Then, almost suddenly, he was savoring the victory.


BELL &amp; HOWELL CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELL &amp; HOWELL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
176,209,000
177,961,000
Net inc
b2,962,000
c6,966,000
Share earns
.28
.65
6mo sales
332,471,000
330,722,000
Net inc
b4,288,000
c11,265,000
Share earns
.40
1.06


SOUTHOLD SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHOLD SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,346,000
1,667,000
6mo net inc
4,242,000
3,483,000
The bank converted from mutual to stock form on April 28.


THE TESTIMONY: NOTIFYING CONGRESS AND A THREAT TO GO PUBLIC
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the first day of testimony by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d yesterday at the Congressional hearings in Washington on the Iran-contra affair, as recorded by The New York Times:


Conviction of Tanaka Is Affirmed on Appeal
LEAD: A Tokyo court today upheld the conviction of former Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka for accepting $2 million in bribes in the Lockheed scandal of the early 1970's.


DEAL MADE ON MAJOR BANK BILL
LEAD: Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d struck a compromise with the chairmen of the Senate and House Banking Committees this afternoon that should avoid a threatened Presidential veto of important banking legislation, Congressional sources said.


Not Reassuring on Rape
LEAD: Last week, at a meeting in a Queens community nervous after more than a dozen rapes in the space of six weeks, a young woman told Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward that she feared going out at night.
Instead of offering reassurance, the Commissioner cast doubt on her fear by noting she'd come to the meeting, hadn't she?


Perfecting Percussion Theater
LEAD: For David Van Tieghem, the unlikeliest objects are instruments.
Car parts, plastic milk bottles, room-service dish covers and punch-toy balloons are only a few of the noisemakers that he'll be using tonight in a solo performance at Alice Tully Hall.
Mr.
Van Tieghem will share a Serious Fun! double bill with Scott


SPANIARDS URGED TO UNITE AGAINST TERRORISTS
LEAD: Spain's ruling Socialist Party, which has come under increasing pressure to do more to curb the latest wave of terrorism, asked Spain's other parties today not to exploit the resulting tensions for political purposes.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: IT has always made me a trifle annoyed that cooking is not included as one of the seven lively arts.
To my mind it is as inspired as painting or music, involving as it does the creation of new flavors and textures.
I suspect that it has not been given greater due because it is so transitory.


Women Voters Group Plans Debates in '88
LEAD: The League of Women Voters announced today that it planned Presidential and Vice-Presidential debates in Birmingham, Boston, Los Angeles and Minneapolis in the general election campaign in 1988.


M.A.C. PLANS TO AID SCHOOL BUILDINGS
LEAD: The New York City school system would receive $600 million from the Municipal Assistance Corporation to help finance a major building program, but only if certain conditions are met, the chairman of M.A.C., Felix G. Rohatyn, said yesterday.


Former Wives: A Legion Of the Needy
LEAD: THE ranks of displaced homemakers appear to be growing rapidly, according to a report to be released today in Washington by the Displaced Homemakers Network.
The report says that at last count there were almost 11.5 million displaced homemakers in this country - women who had lost their source of support, mainly through widowhood or divorce.


INDIANA BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDIANA BANCSHARES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
289,000
246,000
Per share
.90
.78
6mo net inc
519,000
450,000
Per share
1.66
1.43


SUBMARINE CASE TO LIFT U.S. COSTS
LEAD: A classified Defense Department study estimates that developing new technology to re-establish America's edge in tracking Soviet submarines will cost at least $8 billion over 10 years, Pentagon officials who said they had read the report disclosed today.


Scouting; Elder Tees Off On an Old Barrier
LEAD: At 53, Lee Elder is one of the younger oldsters on the PGA Senior tour, but he is old enough to reminisce about the old days, not always with relish.


DRUG SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DRUG SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
29,350,000
14,418,000
Net inc
473,000
206,000
Share earns
.15
.07


Refusal to Treat AIDS Addressed
LEAD: Health experts here have urged hospital administrators to develop guidelines for dealing with doctors who refuse to treat AIDS patients.


Sports People; Senior Season Lost
LEAD: University of Texas officials have decided to declare James Lott, a defensive back, ineligible for his senior season for accepting money from two New York agents, Lloyd Bloom and Norby Walters, The Atlanta Journal reported yesterday.
Bloom, who had said last week that all underclassmen who had accepted money from the agents had been exposed, confirmed that Lott had also accepted money, the paper said.


MIDDLE SOUTH UTILITIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDDLE SOUTH UTILITIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
831,617,000
810,795,000
Net inc
93,566,000
103,393,000
Share earns
.46
.51
6mo rev
1,601,267,000
1,615,604,000
Net inc
193,387,000
217,980,000
Share earns
.95
1.07


CULBRO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CULBRO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
264,800,000
285,108,000
Net inc
4,031,000
b2,466,000
Share earns
.94
.58
6mo sales
490,903,000
538,505,000
Net inc
6,406,000
b21,014,000
Share earns
1.49
4.92


ARMATRON INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMATRON INTERNATIONAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,097,000
8,481,000
Net inc
308,000
cd3,129,000
Share earns
.12
-
9mo sales
16,703,000
19,819,000
Net loss
b472,000
d6,629,000
b-Includes a earnings of $1,500,000 from discontinued operations.


BRUSH WELLMAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRUSH WELLMAN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
75,700,000
64,500,000
Net inc
6,800,000
6,200,000
Share earns
.36
.33
6mo sales
148,800,000
120,500,000
Net inc
13,300,000
10,800,000
Share earns
.70
.57


ZENITH ELECTRONIC CORPORATION OF INDIANA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZENITH ELECTRONIC CORPORATION OF INDIANA (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
538,500,000
380,600,000
Net inc
300,000
b9,900,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sales
1,085,300,000
781,200,000
Net inc
1,300,000
b14,300,000
Share earns
.06
-


Jets' Vick Needs Breather
LEAD: Roger Vick was stopped today, but not by any burly linebacker.
Instead, Vick, the Jets' No. 1 draft pick, a runner who has been a terror in training camp, was badly dehydrated and forced to watch practice.
It happened because of the way Vick drove himself during the camp's first two-a-day sessions Monday.


FARMERS GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FARMERS GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
300,460,000
279,334,000
Net inc
62,537,000
53,410,000
Share earns
.90
.77
6mo rev
596,346,000
551,562,000
Net inc
119,400,000
104,525,000
Share earns
1.72
1.51


No Two Kimchis Taste Alike
LEAD: WHEN one South Korean points a camera at another, what does he say (instead of ''Cheese!'') to make the subject smile?


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''It's always easy some eight months later to look back, and it certainly looks a lot different to us now than it did then.''  - Attorney GeneralEdwin Meese 3d.  [ A7:1. ]


GRAPHIC PACKAGING reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAPHIC PACKAGING
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,738,000
10,488,000
Net inc
205,000
573,000
6mo sales
25,573,000
21,014,000
Net inc
413,000
736,000
The company said the latest quarter and 6-month results include the operations of a facility acquired after June 30, 1986.


Wall St. Figure Indicted In a Parkway Shooting
LEAD: Arthur K. Salomon, a grandson of a founder of the Salomon Brothers investment banking firm, was indicted today on charges of attempted murder in the shooting last month of a teen-age motorist on the Hutchinson River Parkway.


BANCORP OF MISSISSIPPI reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANCORP OF MISSISSIPPI
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,628,000
2,841,000
Per share
.55
.57
Shares outst
4,650,793
3,747,742
6mo net inc
5,468,000
4,471,000
Per share
1.14
1.19
Shares outst
4,660,962
3,732,130


Dennis Russell Davies To Get Music Award
LEAD: Dennis Russell Davies is to receive Columbia University's 1987 Ditson Conductor's Award tonight at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.


MAPCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAPCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
384,411,000
385,835,000
Net inc
5,499,000
25,336,000
Share earns
.26
1.19
6mo rev
750,547,000
809,833,000
Net inc
22,677,000
43,341,000
Share earns
1.07
2.04


33 HOURS OF WORDS ON DISK
LEAD: The Library of Congress plans to introduce on Friday a technology that has enabled it to place virtually its entire collection of the spoken word recorded before 1910 on a single compact disk.


AMERICAN CITY BUSINESS JOURALS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CITY BUSINESS JOURALS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,194,000
5,665,000
Net loss
2,937,000
1,630,000
6mo rev
34,556,000
10,616,000
Net loss
8,134,000
3,125,000
Prior year results are restated to reflect the acquisition in December of 12 publications.


USLIFE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USLIFE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
312,217,000
285,908,000
Net inc
b18,841,000
c20,670,000
Share earns
.99
1.03
6mo rev
603,714,000
563,263,000
Net inc
b41,742,000
c47,744,000
Share earns
2.15
2.39
Shares outst
19,236,000
19,840,000


Sports People; Angels Sign Buckner
LEAD: Bill Buckner, the goat of the 1986 World Series who was released by the Boston Red Sox last week, signed yesterday with the California Angels.
The 37-year-old Buckner was scheduled to be in uniform for the Angels last night in their game against the Athletics at Oakland, Calif.
Buckner, who broke into the majors with the Los Angeles organization in 1969, played for the Dodgers in the 1974 World Series.


BUSH SUPPORTS MORE U.S. AID FOR COLLEGE STUDENTS
LEAD: Vice President Bush, in what his aides described as a shift from Reagan Administration policy, said today that he supported additional Federal assistance to help families meet the cost of higher education.


PHILADELPHIA ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILADELPHIA ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
735,193,000
675,109,000
Net inc
b108,887,000
c128,213,000
Share earns
.45
.58
6mo rev
1,604,656,000
1,543,744,000
Net inc
b278,387,000
c294,474,000
Share earns
1.22
1.39


SEARS CANADA INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEARS CANADA INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
934,136,000
913,119,000
Net inc
b17,725,000
12,115,000
Share earns
.20
.14
6mo sales
1,718,859,000
1,717,778,000
Net inc
b15,400,000
14,003,000
Share earns
.18
.16


MOHASCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOHASCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
205,077,000
191,401,000
Net inc
7,214,000
c72,000
Share earns
.78
.01
6mo rev
391,956,000
364,371,000
Net loss
b1,944,000
cd2,676,000
Share earns
-
.29


BRAINTREE SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRAINTREE SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
472,000
407,000
Per share
.31
.52
Shares outst
1,534,860
758,610
6mo net inc
916,000
815,000
Per share
.60
1.03
Shares outst
1,534,860
758,610


Economic Scene; Chinese See No Retreat
LEAD: CHINA'S crackdown on student demonstrators last winter, and the removal of the liberal Hu Yaobang as General Secretary of the Communist Party, had a jarring effect on intellectuals.
But high-ranking officials insisted to a group of visiting American economists that these politically conservative actions meant no reversal of


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
Net Income
Percent
April-June
Change
1987
From 1986 Borden Inc.
$62,700,000
+20.6 Chevron Corp.
344,000,000
+59.3 Mobil Corp.
304,000,000
-47.8 Pan Am Corp.
10,500,000
*-Texaco Inc.
240,000,000
+29.7 Wendy's International
1,900,000
-92.1
See accompanying notes for special items.(Loss) * Loss in year-earlier period.


Crazy Eddie Offer Is Ended
LEAD: Entertainment Marketing Inc., one of two groups that have offered to purchase Crazy Eddie Inc., said today that it had dropped its bid of $8 a share, or $251 million, and would sell its shares to the competing buyout group.
Elias Zinn, Entertainment


TEXACO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXACO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,500,000,000
7,900,000,000
Net inc
240,000,000
185,000,000
Share earns
.99
.77
6mo rev
17,000,000,000
17,500,000,000
Net inc
358,000,000
513,000,000
Share earns
1.48
2.14


DSC COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DSC COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
77,247,000
82,808,000
Net inc
b6,117,000
3,674,000
Share earns
.15
.09
6mo rev
153,980,000
158,636,000
Net inc
b9,048,000
5,705,000
Share earns
.22
.14


HANDWRITTEN DRAFT OF A BILL OF RIGHTS FOUND
LEAD: A handwritten working draft of the Bill of Rights -the only such document known to exist - has been found and identified in the most likely of places: the Library of Congress.


Interpublic Group's Net Up 12.2% in 2d Quarter
LEAD: The Interpublic Group of Companies released its second-quarter financial statement Monday, the first publicly held advertising company to do so.


Dining Out Or Eating In
LEAD: The availability of African food in New York, while increasing, is still limited.
Here is a sampling:  Caterers  DeeDee Dailey's Fine Catering, 2315 East 14th Street (Gravesend Neck Road), Brooklyn; 718-615-1654.
Restaurants  Abyssinia Restaurant, 35 Grand Street (Thompson Street); 212-226-5959.


Dollar Is Lower in U.S.; Gold Prices Up Sharply
LEAD: The dollar was narrowly lower against all major currencies in quiet domestic trading yesterday.


FIRST UNITED BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST UNITED BANCSHARES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,620,000
1,970,000
Per share
.76
.92
6mo net inc
3,160,000
3,500,000
Per share
1.48
1.64


MEESE'S WHITE HOUSE: PAINTED IN KIND COLORS
LEAD: If George P. Shultz painted a picture of a White House that was a Borgia palace on the Potomac, riddled with deceit, feuds and usurpations of power, Edwin Meese 3d offered a much more benign view of the same scene.


CONSOLIDATED EDISON OF NEW YORK INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED EDISON OF NEW YORK INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
939,049,000
989,016,000
Net inc
93,582,000
88,023,000
Share earns
.72
.66
Shares outst
116,788,000
119,242,000
6mo rev
1,871,836,000
1,997,123,000
Net inc
253,330,000
220,506,000
Share earns
1.99
1.68
Shares outst
117,535,000
119,923,000


F.B.I. SEIZES RECORDS OF COMPANY CITED FOR RACE BIAS IN REAL ESTATE
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation seized thousands of documents yesterday from the offices of one of New York City's largest real-estate brokers, J. I. Sopher &amp; Company.


WISCONSIN ENERGY reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WISCONSIN ENERGY (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,373,324,000
1,432,351,000
Net inc
156,496,000
162,811,000
Share earns
2.35
2.45


REAGAN, CITING FOREIGN CHALLENGE, OUTLINES SUPERCONDUCTIVITY PLAN
LEAD: Responding to the perception of a strong challenge from Japan and other countries, President Reagan announced a broad Federal program today to help American businesses translate the scientific promise of superconductivity into marketable technologies.


CROSS &amp; TRECKER CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROSS &amp; TRECKER CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
116,687,000
100,054,000
Net loss
b1,626,000
d1,125,000
9mo rev
325,298,000
293,770,000
Net loss
b7,871,000
cd444,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $104,000 and $4,385,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, JULY 29, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-11


Tips For Presidents
LEAD: The Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair are collecting some useful tips for the next President of the United States.
Among them are the following:


2 CHARGED IN PLAN ON PAKISTAN ARMS
LEAD: A Pakistani businessman and a Canadian born in Pakistan were indicted today on charges that they tried illegally to export material to Pakistan that could be used to make nuclear weapons.


CITIZENS FIRST BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS FIRST BANCORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
6,374,000
5,276,000
Per share
.44
.38
6mo net inc
12,477,000
10,409,000
Per share
.88
.76


BORDEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BORDEN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,601,747,000
1,236,893,000
Net inc
62,715,000
51,957,000
Share earns
.85
.70
6mo sales
3,030,206,000
2,373,282,000
Net inc
106,745,000
88,636,000
Share earns
1.45
1.18


ONETIME BRASS CAPITAL BEGINS TO SHINE AGAIN
LEAD: By almost any standard, William G. Mastropietro has lived a pleasant and successful life.
He married the woman he loved.
He became a prosperous tobacco salesman.
He even achieved some measure of local fame as a part-time troubadour and radio personality.


CHEVRON CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEVRON CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,300,000,000
6,700,000,000
Net inc
b344,000,000
216,000,000
Share earns
1.00
.63
6mo rev
14,100,000,000
15,400,000,000
Net inc
542,000,000
593,000,000
Share earns
1.53
1.73


SUN MICROSYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUN MICROSYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
185,902,000
76,685,000
Net inc
10,901,000
5,503,000
Share earns
.31
.19
Shares outst
38,158,000
29,182,000
Yr rev
537,537,000
210,126,000
Net inc
36,298,000
11,189,000
Share earns
1.11
.42
Shares outst
33,674,000
26,620,000


Preparation for Shipment of Radium Begins in Jersey
LEAD: Workers securing barrels of radium-contaminated soil to pallets yesterday in Montclair, N.J.
The radium, which had been at the center of a dispute overwhere it could be sent, is to be loaded on trucks today for transportation to Tennessee, where it will be treated. (AP)


Archivist in Waiting?
LEAD: Don W. Wilson, head of the Gerald R. Ford Presidential library in Ann Arbor, Mich., has emerged as the leading candidate to fill the long-vacant position of Archivist of the United States.


4 Major Races Set for Friday
LEAD: Four major harness stakes races will be held at the Meadowlands Friday night in the first renewal of the Million Dollar Babies.


CORDERO ACHIEVES HIS 6,000th VICTORY
LEAD: Angel Cordero Jr. today became only the fourth jockey to win 6,000 races and did it in appropriately flashy style.
The 44-year-old rider won both divisions of the Colleen Stakes at Monmouth Park, one by eight lengths and one by a nose, in his only two mounts of the day.


Great Western Financial Accord
LEAD: The Great Western Financial Corporation said it had entered into a definitive agreement to acquire for $52 million, or $19.80 in cash or stock, the Great Western Savings Bank of Bellevue, Wash., which has 19 branches and assets of $750 million.


Mismanagement Dogs Civil Rights Panel
LEAD: To the Editor:


POTOMAC ELECTRIC POWER CO reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POTOMAC ELECTRIC POWER CO (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,338,920,000
1,356,460,000
Net inc
205,322,000
b216,314,000
Share earns
2.07
2.16
b-After a credit of $21,680,000 from tax loss carryforwards.


LIFE IN THE 30's
LEAD: I WOULD like to say that I became a feminist to make the world better for women everywhere, but in truth it was to make the world better for me.
This was almost 20 years ago, and altruism was not my strong suit; to paraphrase Rhett Butler, the only cause I believed in was me.
Nor was I struck by the rank injustice of sex discrimination.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.65
6.64
6.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.84
5.80
5.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.09
6.03
5.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.43
8.39
7.28
30-YR.


AMERICAN RELIANCE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN RELIANCE GROUP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,659,000
c828,000
Share earns
.63
.48
Shares outst
2,649,000
1,738,000
6mo net inc
b3,413,000
c936,000
Share earns
1.29
.58
Shares outst
2,648,000
1,620,000


ARDEN INTERNATIONAL KITCHNS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARDEN INTERNATIONAL KITCHNS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,437,379
2,340,835
Net inc
66,703
46,739
Share earns
.02
.02
Shares outst
2,935,000
2,356,500
6mo rev
4,557,781
4,361,895
Net inc
38,879
b25,792
Share earns
.01
-


Us Magazine Names Ann Holton Publisher
LEAD: Ms. magazine, the birthplace of stars, can now also claim the publisher of Us magazine as an alumna.
Ann Holton, 37 years old, was once ad director of Ms. before she moved along to the marketing director's job at Gentlemen's Quarterly and then to vice president, ad director of Parade.


SLOW RETURN ON AN INVESTMENT
LEAD: When Tony Tucker won the International Boxing Federation heavyweight title last May, Cedric Kushner of Easthampton, L.I., had good reason to be pleased.


FORT WAYNE NATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORT WAYNE NATIONAL
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,536,000
3,111,000
Per share
.56
.49
6mo net inc
6,928,000
6,128,000
Per share
1.10
.97


CNW CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CNW CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
220,351,000
230,808,000
Net inc
2,084,000
5,519,000
Share earns
.03
.24
6mo rev
454,856,000
465,798,000
Net inc
11,267,000
8,569,000
Share earns
.50
.38


Standard Brands Paint Rejects Bid
LEAD: The Standard Brands Paint Company, a do-it-yourself home-decorator retail chain, has rejected an unsolicited $300 million takeover offer from a New Zealand real estate and investment concern.
The offer of $21 a share in cash, plus a $7 note from a unit of the Chase Corporation of Auckland, would not be in the best interests of shareholders, said Stuart D.


PEOPLES SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,322,000
48,000
Per share
.40
-
6mo net inc
2,545,000
721,000
Per share
.77
-
The bank converted to stock form in October.


Direct Fed Bidders Get Choice on Delayed Sales
LEAD: The disruption of the Treasury's auction schedule has caused the Federal Reserve Banks around the country to adjust their procedures for handling non-competitive bids from investors who buy directly from the Fed rather than through a securities dealer or bank.


Mincing No Words, or Pictures, on Birth Control
LEAD: Even in Washington, a city where causes are constantly in collision, the posters seem shocking.


Music: Mostly Mozart
LEAD: UNTIL shortly before 10 P.M., Monday evening's ''Mozart on Original Instruments'' program at Avery Fisher Hall sounded like a worthy but lackluster continuation of the Mostly Mozart Festival's experiments with historical performance.
But it quickly became apparent that attention and rehearsal time had been focused -reasonably enough - on the groundbreaking final event: what appears to be the first local performance of a Beethoven piano concerto (No.


Sports People; Cade Is Sentenced
LEAD: Mossy Cade, a defensive back for the Green Bay Packers, was sentenced yesterday to two years' imprisonment and fined $15,000 on two counts of second-degree sexual assault, a sentence the prosecutor called ''woefully inadequate.'' Cade, 25 years old, will be eligible for parole in six months and will be taken to the Dodge County reception center in Green Bay before being assigned to a penal institution.


SHAKLEE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHAKLEE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
134,000,000
102,900,000
Net inc
5,500,000
4,900,000
Share earns
.42
.38
6mo sales
279,400,000
199,400,000
Net inc
11,500,000
9,300,000
Share earns
.87
.70


DOTRONIX INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOTRONIX INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,648,000
3,000,000
Net inc
485,000
266,000
Share earns
.19
.12
Yr rev
19,053,000
7,749,000
Net inc
1,482,000
514,000
Share earns
.64
.23


BANKS OF IOWA INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKS OF IOWA INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,407,600
3,181,635
Per share
.52
1.03
6mo net inc
6,101,674
6,353,388
Per share
1.74
2.01
The per share earnings reflect a 5 percent stock dividend paid last month.


Boesky Suits Are Upheld
LEAD: A Federal judge refused to dismiss two lawsuits yesterday against Ivan F. Boesky and several Boesky-controlled companies.
The suits were brought by investors who contended that the convicted stock speculator had misled them in a $1 billion investment partnership.


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, JULY 29, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


MASCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MASCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
489,000,000
338,000,000
Net inc
65,800,000
52,700,000
Share earns
.50
.40
6mo sales
939,000,000
652,000,000
Net inc
121,300,000
98,000,000
Share earns
.92
.75


Beatles Company Sues Over Use of Song in Ad
LEAD: A shoe company that began using a Beatles song earlier this year in a highly publicized television advertising campaign was sued yesterday by the Beatles's music company.


ILLINOIS POWER CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ILLINOIS POWER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
253,727,000
245,259,000
Net inc
63,427,000
62,396,000
Share earns
.81
.83
Shares outst
66,824,276
64,149,043
6mo rev
579,428,000
601,159,000
Net inc
135,169,000
132,246,000
Share earns
1.75
1.79
Shares outst
66,482,166
63,791,321


BRITISH LAND OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRITISH LAND OF AMERICA (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,199,000
4,829,000
Net inc
660,000
b1,859,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


BOSTON ACOUSTICS reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOSTON ACOUSTICS
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
3,509,000
3,050,000
Net inc
314,000
252,000
Share earns
.16
.15
Shares outst
1,993,000
1,677,000


'Send More Fire Engines!' 'No!'
LEAD: To their credit, the brass of New York City's Fire Department offer no excuses for the tragic Schomburg Plaza fire last March.
But that's the only credit they can claim.
A report by a special review board indicates that the Fire Department performed shamefully, perhaps even negligently, and so may bear blame for seven deaths.


METS DOWN CARDS WITH LATE RALLIES
LEAD: The Mets resurrected their long-shot pennant chances tonight when they rallied behind Ron Darling in the seventh and eighth innings and beat the first-place St.
Louis Cardinals, 6-4.


GULF STATES UTILITIES CO reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GULF STATES UTILITIES CO (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,411,317,000
1,667,771,000
Net inc
216,850,000
276,382,000
Share earns
1.43
2.08


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An obituary last Wednesday of John Quincy Adams, a Boston executive, misstated, because of erroneous information provided by a family member, his relationship to two United States Presidents.
He was the great-great-grandson of John Quincy Adams, the sixth President, and the great-great-great-grandson of John Adams, the second President.


BOSTON U. LOSES TENURE CASE
LEAD: A Federal jury ruled today that Boston University had denied tenure to an English professor because she is a woman and ordered the school to pay her $200,000.


COMBUSTION ENGINEERING INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMBUSTION ENGINEERING INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
716,822,000
669,167,000
Net inc
b12,688,000
14,674,000
Share earns
.34
.44
Shares outst
37,323,000
33,337,000
6mo sales
1,355,723,000
1,205,391,000
Net inc
23,700,000
28,292,000
Share earns
.67
.85
Shares outst
35,384,000
33,329,000


Blood Donors' Anonymity Is Upheld
LEAD: Blood donors must be allowed to remain anonymous, even if hospital patients who receive the blood later die of AIDS, according to recent court decisions in New York and Florida.


Dr. Carlton Fredericks, Host of Nutrition Show
LEAD: Dr.
Carlton Fredericks, a leader in nutritional therapy and a radio show host at WOR for the last 30 years, died of a heart attack yesterday at St.
John's Hospital in Yonkers.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.


TRACOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRACOR INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
167,719,000
162,589,000
Net inc
7,547,000
7,529,000
Share earns
.38
.39
6mo sales
326,759,000
307,801,000
Net inc
14,808,000
14,923,000
Share earns
.75
.77


Earnings Soar At WPP Group
LEAD: Britain's WPP Group, which on July 14 acquired America's JWT Group for $550 million, yesterday released six-month financial results that showed the explosive results from a group of smaller acquisitions.


Citicorp Executive In Conciliatory Role
LEAD: Michael A. Callen, who two days ago was named vice chairman of Citicorp and head of its Investment Bank, is determined to smooth the waters between his domain and Citicorp's Institutional Bank.


New York Names Cultural Affairs Commissioner
LEAD: Dr.
Mary Schmidt Campbell at City Hall after she was named by Mayor Koch as the new Commissioner of Cultural Affairs.
She succeeds Bess Myerson, who resigned in April.
Dr.
Campbell, executive director of the Studio Museum in Harlem, will assume her post Oct.1. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr)


GROUP NAMED BY ADMINISTRATION ISSUES REPORT CRITICAL OF CONTRAS
LEAD: The Nicaraguan rebels have executed prisoners, forcibly recruited soldiers, burned a church-sponsored health clinic and killed civilians, according to a report released today by a human rights organization financed by Congress.


OPENING STATEMENT: 'FEW UNDERSTOOD THE TRUE NATURE' OF THE PLAN
LEAD: As the Iran-contra hearings resumed in Washington yesterday, Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d read a statement on his role in the Iran-contra affair and subsequent investigations.


TAFT BROADCASTING CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TAFT BROADCASTING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
95,251,000
129,348,000
Net inc
3,455,000
3,617,000
Share earns
.37
.39


BRISTOL FEDERAL SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRISTOL FEDERAL SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b341,000
555,000
Per share
.30
-
6mo net inc
637,000
978,000
Per share
.55
-
b-Includes a $117,000 writeoff of the FSLIC secondary reserve.
The company went public in March.


About New York; The Fountain Of Refreshment In Flushing
LEAD: Last weekend, just before the cold snap plunged temperatures into the 80's, the urgent quest of cool was sending thousands to the squat cavernous blockhouse in Flushing, Queens, that is headquarters of the Beverage Wagon.


Market Place; Evaluating T.W.A.'s Offer
LEAD: SETTING his sights on taking Trans World Airlines Inc. private, Carl C. Icahn, chairman and dominant owner of the airline, plans to offer minority stockholders $20 in cash and $20 in face amount of debentures for each T.W.A. share they own.
Responding to this announcement, the stock last week rose $3, to $33.625, after selling as high as $35.


OHIO CASUALTY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OHIO CASUALTY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b35,537,000
c25,235,000
Share earns
1.57
1.12
6mo net inc
b70,180,000
c50,757,000
Share earns
3.10
2.25
b-After realized gains of $11,367,000 for the quarter and $20 million for the 6 months.


Banks' Foreign Lending
LEAD: Foreign lending by the world's leading banks rose in the early months of this year, the Bank for International Settlements said today, but the debt-laden developing countries saw little of the money.
It said total new lending in the first three months of 1987 rose $60 billion, compared with a rise of $25 billion a year ago.


Heat Wave in Greece Turns Into Grisly Affair
LEAD: The gravediggers have been ordered to work nights on overtime.
The hospitals have sent out to the fish market for orders of ice to chill the bodies.
The Athens summer, that is to say, has been injected with the grisly, and the macabre.


EXCHANGE INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXCHANGE INTERNATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,098,000
3,378,000
Per share
.34
.42
6mo net inc
8,464,000
5,944,000
Per share
.70
.74
b-Includes a tax credit of $1,082,000.


Don't Punish Toshiba
LEAD: To the Editor:


USX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USX CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,954,000,000
4,174,000,000
Net inc
149,000,000
14,000,000
Share earns
.50
-
6mo sales
6,744,000,000
8,825,000,000
Net inc
52,000,000
b235,000,000
Share earns
.04
-


The Witness File
LEAD:  Name: Edwin Meese 3d  Age: 55  Position: Attorney General of the United States since February 1985.
Mr.
Meese has worked on and off for Ronald Reagan since he was Governor of California, including as chief of staff to Governor Reagan, adviser on the Reagan-Bush campaign committee, director of the transition team for President-elect Reagan, and counselor to the President since the beginning of 1981.


NATHAN B. KOGAN
LEAD: Nathan B. Kogan, a lawyer and a member of the board of directors of the Jewish Theological Seminary, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital of complications following a stroke.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.


FIRST TENNESSEE NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST TENNESSEE NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,763,000
13,190,000
Per share
.25
.88
6mo net inc
12,563,000
16,326,000
Per share
.84
1.09


FIRST SAVINGS BANK (FLORIDA) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST SAVINGS BANK (FLORIDA)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,260,000
1,247,000
Per share
.47
.47
6mo net inc
1,880,000
1,989,000
Per share
.71
.75


WACKENHUT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WACKENHUT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
87,979,000
79,120,000
Net inc
1,337,000
575,000
Share earns
.34
.15
6mo rev
172,783,000
156,290,000
Net inc
2,480,000
1,646,000
Share earns
.64
.43


PATTERSON IS STARTING OVER
LEAD: A year ago, at the start of training camp, Elvis Patterson was the Giants' outstanding cornerback.
When he reports Friday with most of the other veterans, he will be fighting for his job, fighting even for a place on the roster.


EASCO HAND TOOLS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASCO HAND TOOLS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
47,874,000
40,490,000
Net inc
2,130,000
1,269,000
Share earns
.17
.11
6mo sales
93,316,000
79,757,000
Net inc
3,731,000
1,964,000
Share earns
.31
.17


Sports People; Grunfeld Offer Denied
LEAD: Rick Pitino, the Knick coach, yesterday denied a report that he had officially offered Ernie Grunfeld, a former Knick player, the job of assistant coach and that Grunfeld had turned it down. ''Ernie is someone I'm very close to and was very interested to sit down and talk to about the job,'' Pitino said, ''but we never got together to talk about it.


TIMES WINS CASE IN VERMONT
LEAD: The Vermont Supreme Court has ruled that Burlington cannot charge The New York Times a fee to place vending machines on city streets.


Bridge; Makeshift Team Ended Up With Life Master Pairs Title
LEAD: There were a lot of gloomy bridge experts in Baltimore last week, since all the favorites were eliminated at an early stage of the Spingold Knockout Teams.
The carnage was such that not one of the top 11 seeds was able to reach the semifinal, an extraordinary state of affairs.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: NOT only was the day going to be extremely hot and humid, but for Barbara Talabisco it held the excitement of her very first partners' meeting.
Mrs.
Talabisco had recently been made a partner at Gilbert Tweed Associates, an executive recruiting firm.


TIGERS WIN WITH ONLY 3 HITS
LEAD: Jeff Robinson pitched a five-hitter and Darrell Evans hit a home run tonight as the Detroit Tigers defeated the Chicago White Sox, 3-1, for their fifth straight victory.


Mrs. Aquino's Oft-Promised Land
LEAD: Promising land reform in the Philippines is the easy part; politicians have been doing it for decades.
If President Corazon Aquino wants the world truly to take notice, she'll have to do more than ask a newly elected Congress to take the hard decisions.
She is giving Congress 90 days to put into effect a very general decree on breaking up baronial estates.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Friday about Ford Motor profits misstated the results of two subsidiaries.


MICROSOFT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROSOFT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
99,762,000
61,959,000
Net inc
17,257,000
11,507,000
Share earns
.62
.42
Shares outst
27,686,000
27,559,000
Yr rev
345,890,000
197,514,000
Net inc
71,878,000
39,254,000
Share earns
2.60
1.56
Shares outst
27,635,000
25,200,000


U.S. Raids Ship And Charges 2 In Radio Scheme
LEAD: The Coast Guard boarded and seized a ship off Long Island at dawn yesterday and arrested two men who had been operating an unlicensed radio station on the vessel since Thursday.


KELLY SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KELLY SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
286,262,000
259,396,000
Net inc
12,200,000
9,538,000
Share earns
.76
.59
6mo sales
546,552,000
493,866,000
Net inc
21,545,000
17,261,000
Share earns
1.34
1.07


BANK OF SAN FRANCISCO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF SAN FRANCISCO
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
762,450
b255,649
Per share
-
.20
6mo net loss
421,152
b531,422
Per share
-
.40
b-Net income


USG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USG CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
726,228,000
716,253,000
Net inc
58,135,000
76,195,000
Share earns
1.13
1.15
6mo sales
1,419,468,000
1,301,778,000
Net inc
143,119,000
127,889,000
Share earns
2.78
1.96


FLORIDA EAST COAST INDUSRIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA EAST COAST INDUSRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
38,841,000
36,789,000
Net inc
5,823,000
5,399,000
Share earns
.63
.58
6mo rev
79,016,000
75,195,000
Net inc
13,477,000
11,948,000
Share earns
1.45
1.29


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: MOST of us grew up thinking of cheese as healthful, a food high in protein and calcium at an affordable price.
Adding to the attractiveness of cheese is its versatility.
It can be used as is or in recipes for every course from appetizer to dessert.
It is a popular snack for young and old because it is portable, can be eaten with the fingers, is widely available and easy to digest.


Diary Writers Now Turn to Computers
LEAD: FOR hundreds of years, diaries have been written in leather-bound journals, their fragile pages and smudged ink often showing the passage of time.
No more - not for some diaries, at least.
Written on computers, these diaries will never show wear and tear, just editing and re-editing.


TREATING BONE DISEASES WITH ELECTRICITY
LEAD: ALTHOUGH scientists continue to debate exactly why and how it works, the process of applying electricity to aid in the repair and growth of bones - which has been used mainly with fractures - soon may be extended to an array of other problems, ranging from osteoporosis and osteoarthritis to spinal fusions and skin ulcers.


More to Community Service Than Charity Care
LEAD: To the Editor:


19 SRI LANKANS ARE KILLED IN RIOTING OVER INDIAN PACT
LEAD: At least 19 people were killed today in rioting over an accord with the Indian Government of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi that would grant more autonomy to the Tamil minority in Eastern and Northern Provinces of Sri Lanka.


MERCK'S BUYBACK AND DIVIDEND PLAN
LEAD: Merck &amp; Company, projecting that cash from its new pharmaceuticals would increase rapidly in coming years, said yesterday that it would spend up to $1 billion repurchasing shares of its common stock and increase its quarterly dividend to 80 cents from 55 cents.


Masco Adding
LEAD: The Masco Corporation, a maker of home furnishings based in Taylor, Mich., said it had agreed to buy three furniture companies with combined annual sales of more than $200 million.
Masco declined to disclose the size of the transactions, which it said were to be made in cash and stock.
The three acquisitions are the Lexington Furniture Industries group of companies, based in Lexington, N.C., Maitland-Smith Ltd.


Plisetskaya to Direct Spanish National Ballet
LEAD: Maya Plisetskaya, the Bolshoi Ballet's prima ballerina, is to become the artistic director of Spain's national ballet, the Ministry of Culture said today.


WILLIAMS COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILLIAMS COMPANIES (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
340,800,000
349,200,000
Net inc
b15,400,000
c8,700,000
Share earns
.44
.26
6mo rev
884,400,000
1,027,000,000
Net inc
b67,100,000
c22,900,000
Share earns
1.94
.67


Moscow Ballet's Tour Dates
LEAD: The Moscow Ballet is to open its first American tour Sept. 24 at the Lyric Opera House in Baltimore.
The company, under the direction of Vacheslav Gordeyev, a principal dancer with the Bolshoi Ballet of Moscow, is to perform in 21 American cities during a one-month tour that ends with performances at the War Memorial Auditorium in Trenton on Nov.


'JAKE'S M.O.,' WITH A LINK TO REALITY
LEAD: DETECTIVE stories suffer from exhaustion; stories about reporters who help detectives grow tired, too. ''Jake's M.O.'' revives both genres.
It is modest, literate and good humored, even if people do get shot in the back.
The one-hour movie will be seen on NBC, Channel 4, at 10 o'clock tonight.


HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK OF GEORGIA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK OF GEORGIA
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
301,798
536,094
Per share
.17
.33
6mo net inc
818,855
1,047,107
Per share
.47
.64


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Based on information supplied by the designer's representative, the Discoveries column in Wednesday's Living Section gave an incorrect price for a Judith Lieber handbag at Saks Fifth Avenue.
The correct price is $280.


WALTHAM SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WALTHAM SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
958,000
694,000
Per share
.26
-
6mo net inc
2,052,000
1,305,000
Per share
.55
-
The bank converted to stock form of ownership in May 1986.


TAMBRANDS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TAMBRANDS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
142,880,000
127,533,000
Net inc
21,898,000
19,414,000
Share earns
.99
.88
6mo sales
263,393,000
241,953,000
Net inc
40,167,000
36,110,000
Share earns
1.81
1.63


LANE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANE FINANCIAL
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,834,000
4,017,000
Per share
.42
.55
6mo net inc
7,568,000
7,010,000
Per share
.82
.93


Advertising; Johnson &amp; Johnson Ends Its Florida Ban
LEAD: Johnson &amp; Johnson, which had suspended its network advertising in Florida beginning July 1 to protest a new state sales tax that affected advertising, has resumed running the ads there.
None of its other advertising, either spot TV or print, was affected by the ban.


DEMOCRATS TRADE GOWING REMARKS
LEAD: On an island of unworldly peacefulness where cars are banned and the horse and buggy vies with the bicycle as the means of transportation, eight Democratic Presidential candidates told Democratic governors today how they would lead their party to victory and the nation into the 21st century.


THE SOBER SECTION
LEAD: All baseball fans of a certain age will swear that yesterday was exactly like the first time they went to a ball game - bright sun lighting the open decks of a huge major league stadium, a large and mostly responsible crowd, and a home-team victory, of course.


BUSINESSLAND INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUSINESSLAND INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
159,554,000
116,461,000
Net inc
2,498,000
b1,807,000
Share earns
.10
.08
Shares outst
25,102,000
23,389,000
Yr sales
600,039,000
404,300,000
Net inc
8,370,000
b4,772,000
Share earns
.34
.21
Shares outst
24,861,000
22,935,000


LINCOLN FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINCOLN FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,549,000
2,726,000
Per share
.63
.59
6mo net inc
6,755,000
4,947,000
Per share
1.20
1.09


N.F.L. Camps; Wilson Signs 3-Year Pact With Saints
LEAD: Dave Wilson, the quarterback, signed a three-year contract with the New Orleans Saints yesterday.
Wilson, going into his sixth season, would not disclose the terms of his contract.
Nor would he make even a general comparison to the $450,000 that another quarterback, Bobby Hebert, is reported to be making.


PEOPLES BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES BANCORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,278,000
2,117,000
Per share
.34
.33
6mo net inc
4,611,000
4,175,000
Per share
.70
.65


HANNAFORD BROTHERS CO reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANNAFORD BROTHERS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Revenue
254,619,000
215,204,000
Net inc
5,911,000
4,858,000
Share earns
.64
.53
6mo rev
496,074,000
420,309,000
Net inc
11,920,000
8,519,000
Share earns
1.29
.93


Wierton's New Steel Can
LEAD: The Weirton Steel Corporation, trying to regain a share of the food-can market, said today that it had topped the aluminum industry's ''easy-open'' containers with a steel version.
The new can, developed over two years, is easier to open than other products, said William T. Saunders, the vice president of product development and research.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a brief article on June 27 about the Stein &amp; Day publishing house filing for protection under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code incorrectly stated when the company's troubles began.
They started in 1984.
The article also misidentified R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons.
It is Stein &amp; Day's former printer.


Manufacturing Reclaims Pasture In East New York
LEAD: Vacant land has been so abundant for so long in the East New York section of Brooklyn that the horse grazing until recently in a pastoral lot on Williams Avenue hardly seemed out of place.


UNITED SAVERS BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED SAVERS BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,417,000
1,863,000
Per share
.49
.53
Shares outst
4,891,489
3,515,094
6mo net inc
5,345,000
4,344,000
Per share
1.09
1.24
Shares outst
4,891,626
3,501,000


ACCOUNTANT BACKED A SIMPLER TAX CODE
LEAD: Jacob S. Seidman, a senior partner of the accounting firm of Seidman &amp; Seidman and a longtime proponent of simplifying the tax system, died Monday at Doctors Hospital.
He lived in Manhattan and was 86 years old.


NASA TEAM PLANS TO INVESTIGATE OZONE HOLE ABOVE THE ANTARCTIC
LEAD: An international team will investigate the mysterious ozone hole over the Antarctic to see whether man-made chemicals, nature or both are destroying the gas vital to life on earth, space agency scientists announced Tuesday.


Networks Take Turns In Covering Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 9 A.M. on the ABC television network under the network rotation system.
The hearings will also be televised on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New York.


283 Years Later, Dispute Over Gibraltar Persists
LEAD: Patrons at dockside cafes covered their ears to block the engine noise as the Boeing 737 jetliner roared down the runway, which thrusts like an aircraft carrier into Algeciras Bay, and up into the sky toward England.


First 2 Loads of Radium Soil Removed From Jersey Lawns
LEAD: Eighty-four rusting drums of radium-contaminated soil were loaded onto two trucks today and driven away from the lawns of four homes where they and thousands more drums have been stored for two years.


Court Rebuffs Magazine On Use of 'Yale' in Title
LEAD: A Federal judge has dismissed a lawsuit filed by the American Literary Society in an effort to keep ''Yale'' in the title of its Yale Literary Magazine.


Using Surplus Again For Monetary Clout
LEAD: Since its founding during New York City's financial turmoil of 1975, the Municipal Assistance Corporation's role has been, in part, to use its money to force changes it felt necessary upon sometimes unwilling public agencies and public employees.
The city's financial crisis is long gone, but the assistance corporation remains willing and able to use its monetary clout to bring change.


BANNISTER BLANKS TIGERS ON 5 HITS
LEAD: Floyd Bannister pitched a five-hitter tonight as the Chicago White Sox beat Detroit, 4-0, ending the Tigers' five-game winning streak.


Bridge: A Tall Expert Has Achieved His First Big National
LEAD: The world's tallest bridge expert won his first major national title in Baltimore last week.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Maxie Baughan, who coached the Cornell University football team to an 8-2 record and a second-place Ivy League finish in 1986, has signed a contract that extends his current pact for three years.
Baughan had one year left in his five-year contract. . . .
In a minor league transaction, the Kansas City Royals have traded an infielder, Buddy Biancalana, to the Houston Astros for a pitcher, Mel Stottlemyre Jr.


MICROSOFT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROSOFT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
99,762,000
61,959,000
Net inc
17,257,000
11,507,000
Share earns
.62
.42
Shares outst
27,686,000
27,559,000
Yr rev
345,890,000
197,514,000
Net inc
71,878,000
39,254,000
Share earns
2.60
1.56
Shares outst
27,635,000
25,200,000


COUNTY SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COUNTY SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,045,800
2,856,800
Per share
.39
.52
Shares outst
7,716,567
5,509,538
6mo net inc
6,061,800
5,159,100
Per share
.78
.98
Shares outst
7,725,687
5,254,846


TANAKA VERDICT CHANGES FACE OF POWER IN JAPAN
LEAD: Japanese politics moved toward a generational change today when an appellate court upheld the conviction of former Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka for taking bribes from the Lockheed Corporation.


Connecting With the Constitution
LEAD: The site of the first Capitol of the United States, the building where the Bill of Rights was drafted, the site where George Washington was inaugurated and the chapel where he prayed - all of this can be seen by strolling through Lower Manhattan.


Cracks in Tank Motors Are Traced to Maker
LEAD: Cracks that have appeared in 22 engines in recent months, causing a sudden drop of power in the Army's top tank, apparently resulted from faulty welding at the engine-maker's plant.


New York Investigators Say State Senator Took a Bribe
LEAD: State investigators said yesterday that New York State Senator Richard E. Schermerhorn accepted about $6,000 from an organized-crime figure to help obtain state construction contracts at Stewart Airport in Orange County.


On Schedule
LEAD: When he was last seen in these parts, on June 10, Stephane Peyron, a 26-year-old Frenchman, was skimming across New York Harbor on a 24 1/2-foot sailboard, hoping to become the first windsurfer to make a solo voyage across the Atlantic, a trip, he said, that should take about 50 days.


HENRY HIRSCH
LEAD: Henry Hirsch, a founder and chairman emeritus of the Welbilt Corporation, died yesterday at the New York University Medical Center.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 84 years old.


Conferees Approve Bank Bill
LEAD: House and Senate conferees today approved a compromise between Congress and the White House on major banking legislation that has long been the subject of fierce Congressional debate.
Administration officials said that President Reagan had promised he would sign the bill into law.


FIELDCREST CANNON INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIELDCREST CANNON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
345,237,000
256,663,000
Net inc
1,917,000
4,833,000
Share earns
.19
.62
6mo sales
649,002,000
465,234,000
Net inc
4,331,000
b1,360,000
Share earns
.42
-


Yields Rise On C.D.'s
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit rose slightly last week as auctions of Treasury bills were again postponed.


HOW THE U.S. IS DOING BETTER AT THE U.N.
LEAD: To the Editor:


FAIRFIELD FIRST BANK &amp; TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAIRFIELD FIRST BANK &amp; TRUST
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
112,691
27,710
Per share
.18
.04
6mo net inc
237,451
38,789
Per share
.39
.06


PENTAGON AND CONTRACTORS SAID TO AGREE TO UNDERSTATE COST OF WEAPONS
LEAD: The Defense Department allowed military contractors to understate the costs of developing weapons, with both sides knowing a contractor could dip into other public funds to avoid abandoning the project, a Justice Department document says.


Credit-Card Rules Tightened in 12 States
LEAD: Twelve states passed laws this year restricting the advertising practices, fees and interest rates for credit cards, but similar measures died in 24 legislatures, a consumer group said Tuesday.


1 of 3 Saved Whales Is Sighted by Curator
LEAD: One of three young whales that beached themselves on Cape Cod in December and were rescued and returned to the sea by the New England Aquarium last month has been spotted for the first time swimming with a pod of 50 whales about 60 miles south of where the three were released, aquarium officials said today.


CONGRESS PASSES EMERGENCY RISE IN DEBT CEILING
LEAD: Congress approved a one-week extension of the Government's borrowing authority today as Senate negotiators said they had reached a compromise on a new mechanism for automatic spending cuts under the budget-balancing law.


FLAGLER BANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLAGLER BANK CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
391,000
507,000
Per share
.20
.26
6mo net inc
879,000
950,000
Per share
.45
.49


LOCTITE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOCTITE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
96,500,000
73,900,000
Net inc
9,500,000
8,100,000
Share earns
1.05
.89
Yr sales
337,800,000
266,800,000
Net inc
30,700,000
23,200,000
Share earns
3.38
2.56


FIRST MUTUAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST MUTUAL SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
352,914
271,223
Per share
.36
.28
6mo net inc
704,261
480,836
Per share
.73
.50


LOUISIANA LAND &amp; EXPLORAION CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOUISIANA LAND &amp; EXPLORAION CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
194,500,000
181,100,000
Net inc
5,300,000
5,100,000
Share earns
.17
.19
Shares outst
31,100,000
26,900,000
6mo rev
392,200,000
435,000,000
Net inc
12,000,000
19,900,000
Share earns
.39
.72
Shares outst
31,100,000
29,500,000


U.S. IS CRITICAL OF SOVIET ARMS PROPOSAL
LEAD: The Soviet Union today presented what Soviet officials called a new proposal to restrict the testing of anti-missile defensive systems.
But the United States called the proposal disappointing because it did not mark an important change in the Soviet position.


Heard but Unseen, Seven Actors Share 'Talk Radio' Roles
LEAD: Eric Bogosian's new play ''Talk Radio,'' about a nighttime phone-in-show host teetering on the edge of dementia, could just as well be called ''Voices Off.''


Dr. Dean McKee, Who Served As Head of Biblical Seminary
LEAD: Dr.
Dean G. McKee, a former president of the Biblical Seminary in New York, now the New York Theological Seminary, died of lymphoma of the liver on July 19 at his home in Decatur, Ga.
He was 82 years old.


THE TESTIMONY: 'DIFFERENT PEOPLE WITH DIFFERING RECOLLECTIONS'
LEAD: In his second day of testimony yesterday at the Congressional hearings in Washington, Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d was questioned further on his conduct of the investigation into the Iran-contra affair.
Here, as recorded by The New York Times, are excerpts from his testimony.


CARDS LOSE GAME AND CLARK
LEAD: ''As far as I'm concerned, we're back in it,'' Dave Johnson said. ''As far as I'm concerned, he was never out of it,'' Whitey Herzog replied.


CONGRESS HEARS REPORTS ON IMPOTENCE OF U.S. MISSILES AGAINST SOVIET TANKS
LEAD: With representatives of American and European missile manufacturers watching uneasily from the sidelines, experts at a packed Congressional hearing asserted today that American infantry missiles might be virtually useless against the latest generation of Soviet tanks.
But an Army spokesman said that the seriousness of the problem had been exaggerated.


Concert: At the Marlboro Festival
LEAD: The Marlboro Music Festival is not, its directors are careful to explain, a festival in the ordinary sense, nor is it the school that its makeup seems to suggest.
It is an institution in which younger professional musicians come to learn from older ones, and it is an organization that produces concerts - both for an eager audience here in the summer and for syndication in the form of an annual ''Music From


Thorn to Buy Rent-A-Center
LEAD: Thorn E.M.I., a British consumer products company, said today that it had agreed to buy the Rent-A-Center chain in the United States for $594 million.


Market Place; The Asbestos Cleanup Push
LEAD: THE embryonic asbestos abatement industry, which is taking on the task of removing the potentially harmful mineral from hundreds of thousands of buildings, is seen by many analysts as holding vast investment potential over the long term.


GENERAL RE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL RE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
854,500,000
774,800,000
Net inc
b126,200,000
c79,200,000
Share earns
1.23
.77
Shares outst
102,779,000
102,821,000
6mo rev
1,738,100,000
1,483,100,000
Net inc
b255,900,000
c142,400,000
Share earns
2.49
1.41
Shares outst
102,801,000
101,264,000


Chernobyl Officials Sentenced to Labor Camp
LEAD: Viktor P. Bryukhanov, plant director of the Chernobyl nuclear power station at the time of the world's worst nuclear power accident, reacting yesterday as he and two of his aides, Anatoly S. Dyatlov, center, and Nikolai M. Fomin, partly hidden, were sentenced to 10 years in a labor camp.
Page A5. (


REAGAN CAMPAIGN AIDE IS FOCUS OF NEW INQUIRY
LEAD: A 1980 Reagan campaign official shared hundreds of thousands of dollars with a former personal assistant to the President who was paid to arrange private meetings at the White House between Mr.
Reagan and conservative contributors to the contras.


Chelsea Residents Fight Plan For 1,000-Bed Men's Shelter
LEAD: Several hundred angry residents of the Chelsea section of Manhattan expressed vehement opposition last night to a proposal by the city to use the former National Maritime Union building on West 17th Street as a 1,000-bed men's shelter and work-release jail site.


INSIDE
LEAD:  East Germans Allow Visits


ATCOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATCOR INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
123,627,000
113,984,000
Net loss
b15,205,000
c1,824,00
Share earns
-
.30
9mo sales
333,764,000
300,036,000
Net loss
b17,942,000
c5,424,000
Share earns
-
.99


LOUISIANA EXECUTES MURDERER OF 11-YEAR-OLD GIRL
LEAD: John Brogdon was executed early this morning in the Louisiana State Penitentiary electric chair for the rape and torture murder of an 11-year-old girl.


Babi Yar Was a Soviet, And a Jewish, Tragedy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alysheba Will Forgo Lasix
LEAD: Jack Van Berg confirmed yesterday that Alysheba will not race with Lasix in the $500,000 Haskell Handicap at Monmouth Park Saturday.
Alysheba won the Kentucky Derby and Preakness Stakes with Lasix, an antibleeding drug that often improves overall performance, and was beaten by 14 1/4 lengths in the Belmont


McLean Has Surgery
LEAD: Kirk McLean, the Devils' goalie who injured himself running this month, had arthroscopic surgery on his left knee yesterday morning at New York University Medical Center.
The surgery was performed by Dr.
Barry Fisher.
The Devils are expecting McLean to be ready for training camp in early September.


SUN ENERGY PARTNERS LP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUN ENERGY PARTNERS LP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
370,000,000
375,000,000
Net inc
31,000,000
b32,000,000
Share earns
.11
-
6mo rev
755,000,000
914,000,000
Net inc
56,000,000
50,000,000
Share earns
.19
.17


WICOR INC reports earnings for 12mo to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WICOR INC (NYSE)
12mo to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
680,414,000
799,719,000
Net inc
19,601,000
27,586,000
Share earns
2.79
4.35
Shares outst
6,341,000
5,905,000
The company said that the revenue figures do not include costs of gas purchased directly by customers from gas producers.


50 Reportedly Killed By Train Blast in Syria
LEAD: An explosion on a train killed more than 50 people in northern Syria a few days ago, a Lebanese Christian radio station here reported today.


PENNBANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNBANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
7,002,000
6,850,000
Per share
.53
.52
6mo net inc
14,700,000
14,563,000
Per share
1.12
1.11
The per share earnings reflect a 3-for-2 stock split paid in March.


Mexican Attacks U.S. Policy
LEAD: Foreign Minister Bernardo Sepulveda Amor of Mexico said today that the Reagan Administration's policy of aiding Nicaraguan rebels violated international law by blocking Central American peace efforts. ''Not only does it deal with a violation of international law, but it also deals with an attack on the rights and the legitimate interests of Latin American countries,'' he said at a news conference.


Jack Clark Is a Mystery Pitchers Cannot Solve
LEAD: Jack Clark.
It has the ring of Jack Armstrong, or maybe Clark Kent or some other legendary hero.
And that's what Jack Clark is becoming this summer in the uniform of the St.
Louis Cardinals.


NORTH FORK BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH FORK BANCORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,406,000
2,021,000
Per share
.46
.39
6mo net inc
4,858,000
3,839,000
Per share
.92
.81


Foreign Aid From the Bottom Up
LEAD: Many Americans nurse the myth that economic development aid to third world countries goes to relieve the plight of the very poor.
In truth, the money too often turns up in the pockets of the rich or in showy projects with questionable trickle-down effect.
Are there no good ways efficiently to help the poorest of the world's poor?


PRIMERICA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIMERICA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
748,500,000
684,400,000
Net inc
47,500,000
c47,800,000
Share earns
.80
.78
Shares outst
53,490,000
54,558,000
6mo rev
1,549,400,000
1,331,600,000
Net inc
b119,200,000
d115,300,000
Share earns
2.04
1.93
Shares outst
53,646,000
54,258,000


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  U.S.
Sweeps Singles: The United States swept both singles matches against France yesterday to move into the quarterfinals of the Federation Cup tournament in Vancouver, British Columbia.
Pam Shriver, playing singles because of an injury to top-ranked Martina Navratilova -her doubles partner - defeated Isabelle Demongeot, 6-0, 7-6.


Dollar Up a Bit in U.S.; Gold and Silver Rise
LEAD: The dollar moved slightly higher in quiet, uneventful domestic trading yesterday.


In Africa, a Rush to Privatize
LEAD: John M. Moore watched with satisfaction as red-hot steel bars snaked through his successful rolling mill here.


AMERICAN STANDARD INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN STANDARD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
878,100,000
783,900,000
Net inc
b33,000,000
c75,400,000
Share earns
1.04
2.00
6mo sales
1,657,800,000
1,460,400,000
Net inc
b54,600,000
c125,600,000
Share earns
1.70
3.29
Shares outst
32,206,000
38,102,000


METROBANC FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*METROBANC FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
739,000
826,000
Per share
.38
.43
6mo net inc
1,593,000
1,624,000
Per share
.83
.86


Rangers Sign Duguay
LEAD: Ron Duguay, the Ranger center who was traded to the Detroit Red Wings in 1983 and then reacquired last season in a trade with the Pittsburgh Penguins, has signed with the Rangers for next season.
No terms were announced.


SOUTHDOWN INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHDOWN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
91,495,000
89,070,000
Net inc
6,931,000
c24,677,000
Share earns
1.02
-
6mo rev
163,465,000
166,712,000
Net inc
b7,002,000
c20,923,000
Share earns
.96
-


Airline Drops Charge On Angry Passenger
LEAD: Continental Airlines has dropped charges against a New Yorker who was accused of shouting obscenities and inciting a disturbance among passengers after their flight was delayed for three hours here at O'Hare International Airport.


NEW ON 6:25 FROM LEIPZIG, YOUNG EAST GERMANS
LEAD: The train from Leipzig that rolls into Cologne's main station at 6:25 P.M. carries a new category of passengers these days - young East Germans who are being allowed to visit relatives and friends in West Germany.


THE FORGIVER MIGHT NOT BE FORGIVEN, POLITICALLY
LEAD: If a number of prominent conservatives have their way, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North will soon share a distinction with Richard Nixon, Jimmy Hoffa and a Confederate sympathizer in the Civil War, Augustus H. Garland.


Times Co., Time in Deal
LEAD: The New York Times Company and Time Inc. agreed in principle yesterday to form a partnership for national magazine distribution.


BABI YAR WAS A SOVIET, AND A JEWISH, TRAGEDY
LEAD: To the Editor:


FAMILY MUTUAL SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAMILY MUTUAL SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,115,000
1,024,000
Per share
.30
-
6mo net inc
2,461,000
2,918,000
Per share
.66
-
The bank converted to stock ownership in November.


MIDWAY AIRLINES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDWAY AIRLINES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
85,220,000
64,849,000
Net inc
b8,063,000
3,580,000
Share earns
.72
.38
6mo rev
155,754,000
125,723,000
Net inc
b9,222,000
786,000
Share earns
.84
-


CAPITOL BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPITOL BANCORPORATION
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,613,000
3,263,000
Per share
.91
1.11
6mo net inc
6,389,000
7,111,000
Per share
2.22
2.42


Israel Tries to Discredit An Alibi of Demjanjuk
LEAD: The Israeli prosecutor seeking to prove that John Demjanjuk was a Nazi war criminal tried today to discredit his alibi that he was in a prisoner-of-war camp during the 1942-43 period that the Treblinka death camp was in operation.


BERKLEY, W R CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BERKLEY, W R CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
116,279,000
115,603,000
Net inc
b12,727,000
c6,127,000
Share earns
.95
.48
Shares outst
13,360,000
12,898,000
Net inc
b31,734,000
c13,061,000
Share earns
2.38
1.16
Shares outst
13,353,000
11,250,000


REAGAN, OPENING BORK FIGHT, CALLS JUDGE A MODERATE
LEAD: President Reagan opened his campaign today to win Senate confirmation of Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court, and he stressed themes that differ sharply from the views of the President's hard-line conservative supporters.


REGAN TESTIFIES TODAY ON ROLE IN 'BATTLE ROYAL'
LEAD: When Donald T. Regan, the former White House chief of staff, begins testifying before the Iran-contra committee on Thursday, committee members hope he will be able to explain how a ''battle royal'' erupted in the White House over the sale of arms to Iran.


COWBOY WASN'T LONESOME IN DEATH
LEAD: With a eulogy from the President, a full contingent of the diplomatic corps in attendance and altogether more pomp and protocol than Mac Baldrige would have thought necessary, official Washington said goodbye to him today in a brief service at the Washington Cathedral.


Huston Is Hospitalized; His Condition Is Good
LEAD: John Huston was in good condition today after an ambulance carried him to a hospital for emergency treatment of emphysema, a hospital spokeswoman said.


Security Guard is Held in 3 Rapes and 4 Burglaries on Staten Island
LEAD: A suspect was arrested yesterday in connection with at least three early-morning rapes committed at knife point and four burglaries on Staten Island in the last three weeks, the police said.


Bar Exam: Ordeal and a Rite of Passage
LEAD: After seven years of college and law school, two months of cramming and 12 1/2 hours hunched over a test booklet, Franz Paasche was disappointed.


British-French Tunnel Treaty
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain and President Francois Mitterrand of France formally ratified the Channel Tunnel treaty in a ceremony at Elysee Palace today, clearing the way for construction to go ahead after nearly two centuries of debate.


Chernobyl Officials Are Sentenced to Labor Camp
LEAD: The head of the Chernobyl nuclear power station at the time of the world's worst nuclear power accident and two of his aides were sentenced today to 10 years in a labor camp, the maximum possible in the disaster.


GENERAL BINDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL BINDING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
59,442,000
50,779,000
Net inc
3,120,000
1,934,000
Share earns
.65
.40
6mo sales
110,252,000
97,069,000
Net inc
4,837,000
3,075,000
Share earns
1.01
.63


GREAT ADVENTURE TRYING TO REGAIN LOST CUSTOMERS
LEAD: Ray Williams has been living out of a suitcase here since he received orders Sunday to take over the presidency of the Six Flags Great Adventure amusement park and reverse its troubled image and sagging attendance.


At Least 8 Killed as Police Fire on Protesters in Haiti
LEAD: Rescue workers in Port-au-Prince carrying a wounded man after police fired into a crowd of about 2,500 demonstrators who marched to condemn the disbanded private militia, the Tontons Macoute.
Page A6. (Reuters)


How the U.S. Is Doing Better at the U.N.
LEAD: To the Editor:


Talking Deals; Price Goes Up For Magazines
LEAD: MAGAZINE buyouts keep getting more expensive.
As recently as five years ago, deals for well-established publications were done at eight to 10 times cash flow.
But recently a management-led group agreed to pay $650 million, or 14 times cash flow, for CBS Inc.'s 21 consumer magazines.
Even those publishing executives accustomed to ever-escalating prices were surprised.


Japan Most Expensive
LEAD: Japan said today that its domestic goods and services were the most expensive in the industrialized world.
The costliest items include food, cigarettes, education and recreational services.
Prices in Japan are 57 percent higher than in Britain, 49 percent costlier than in Italy, 30 percent up on the United States and 22 percent higher than in France, according to a report by the Economic Planning Agency, a Government organization.


Leaks, Lies and Other Excuses
LEAD: Hardly a day goes by in the Iran-contra hearings that witnesses and legislators don't trade charges about divulging confidential information to the press.
Some of the most prominent witnesses have employed the accusation to justify their having lied to Congress.
Members of Congress resent the charge and reply that most leaks come from the other end of Pennsylvania


BY THE BLACK SEA, A WORKERS' PARADISE (OF SORTS)
LEAD: On a hot summer weekend that Mikhail S. Gorbachev spent pleading with his comrades to make better machine-building equipment, thousands of Russians settled under the sun in Sochi and surrounding communities with nothing more urgent on their minds than a game of cards and a desire for a golden tan.


UNIBANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIBANCORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,758,000
b1,454,000
Per share
1.09
1.15
Shares outst
1,614,000
1,042,000
6mo net inc
3,910,000
b2,649,000
Per share
2.73
2.06
Shares outst
1,345,000
1,042,000


USLICO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USLICO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b10,600,000
c13,300,000
Share earns
.94
1.19
6mo rev
258,000,000
261,200,000
Net inc
b22,000,000
c19,500,000
Share earns
1.95
1.73
b-Includes a capital gain of $2,800,000 and $5,700,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, and a tax credit of $1,200,000 and $2,200,000 for the same periods, respectively.


WESTERN DIGITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN DIGITAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
140,338,000
88,054,000
Net inc
b15,629,000
c8,244,000
Share earns
.58
.36
Shares outst
26,740,000
22,858,000
Yr rev
462,462,000
300,300,000
Net inc
b48,184,000
c23,157,000
Share earns
2.00
1.03
Shares outst
24,088,000
22,361,000


Pacificorp in Talks With Utah Power
LEAD: Pacificorp, an electric utility and telecommunications concern, said today that it had held merger discussions with the Utah Power and Light Company, but added that it had not made a formal offer.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: Although a brick wall is thought of as a permanent structure requiring little or no maintenance, that is not entirely true.
Good-quality bricks will ordinarily last almost indefinitely, but the mortar joints between them may start to crack and crumble after a number of years.


Hawker Siddeley Deal
LEAD: Britain's Hawker Siddeley Group P.L.C. said today that it agreed to buy Aerospace Avionics Inc., a private New York concern, for $:17.5 million, or $28 million, in cash.
Aerospace Avionics supplies electronic subsystems to leading makers in the American aerospace industry.


TENNECO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TENNECO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,789,000,000
3,724,000,000
Net inc
46,000,000
b80,000,000
Share earns
.24
.43
6mo sales
7,474,000,000
7,663,000,000
Net inc
75,000,000
b204,000,000
Share earns
.32
1.16


KEYSTONE FINANCIAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEYSTONE FINANCIAL INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
6,120,000
5,303,000
Per share
.50
.45
6mo net inc
12,308,000
11,039,000
Per share
1.01
.94


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''The people who come over here go back with brand new ideas, and that is the real danger for East Germany.
This transfer of ideas and information, this is what East Germany has tried to prevent for years.''  - Horst Schumm,of West Berlin.  [ A6:4. ]


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday of George A. McDermott, a retired medical publisher, misstated the date of a memorial service for him.
It is scheduled for Aug. 30 - not today - at the Memorial Church at Harvard University.


PRESIDENTIAL PARDONS: A SAMPLER
LEAD:  Confederate Senator: The scope of the Presidential power to pardon was defined 120 years ago in a Supreme Court decision involving Augustus H. Garland, right.
The Confederate sympathizer had been pardoned by Andrew Johnson.
His effort to have his right to practice law restored was succesful.


At Saint Laurent, A Bold Collection
LEAD: Yves Saint Laurent delivered fashion back to the 20th century this morning and received a standing ovation for his effort.
To an audience surfeited with heavy doses of grandeur since the fall and winter couture showings began Sunday, his clean, crisp classics were welcome.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE BOYS OF WINTER. By Wilfrid Sheed. 280 pages. Knopf. $16.95.


HISTORY TEXTS FAIL TO TEACH IDEAS OF DEMOCRACY, STUDY SAYS
LEAD: History curriculums in most American schools are woefully inadequate and fail to teach students to understand and appreciate democracy, a report released today by the American Federation of Teachers concluded.


HOME SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
7,076,000
b5,026,000
Per share
.59
-
6mo net inc
13,165,000
b12,336,000
Per share
1.09
-
b-After tax credits of $698,000 for the quarter and $1,720,000 for the 6 months.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A dispatch from Paris yesterday on the investigation of terrorist bombings in France gave an incorrect location for warships the French Government had alerted for possible duty in the Persian Gulf.
The ships are based in the Mediterranean port of Toulon.


US BANCORP (PORTLAND, ORE)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*US BANCORP (PORTLAND, ORE)(O)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b21,688,000
20,189,000
Per share
.70
.66
6mo net inc
42,032,000
37,416,000
Per share
1.36
1.23
b-Includes a pretax gain of $7.6 million on redemption of an investment in Old National Bancorp.


Critic's Notebook; Vividly Staged 'Cerceau' Takes London by Surprise
LEAD: Though Victor Slavkin's ''Cerceau'' evokes memories of ''The Cherry Orchard'' and Renoir's ''Rules of the Game,'' it is a play with its own vivid contemporary Russian flavor.
Presented for one week at the Riverside Studios as part of the annual London International Festival of Theater, the play is one of the most remarkable dramatic events of the current


Greenspan's Firm Is Closing
LEAD: Townsend-Greenspan &amp; Company, the economic consulting firm that Alan Greenspan ran for nearly 30 years, is notifying clients that it will cease operations tomorrow - a casualty of Mr.
Greenspan's nomination to be chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.


By the Seaside, Old-Fashioned Charm
LEAD: ACTUALLY, Eric and Annie Gleacher already had a perfectly good home in the Hamptons - not on the beach, to be sure, but near it.
But then they took a walk one day and saw three wonderful houses on a large pond that opens into the ocean. ''My husband looked up and said, 'Someday, my dream would be to own one of those houses,' '' Mrs.


MARK TWAIN BANCSHARES INC (ST. LOUIS, MO)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARK TWAIN BANCSHARES INC (ST. LOUIS, MO)(O)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,169,000
2,002,000
Per share
.69
.48
6mo net inc
b4,094,000
4,114,000
Per share
.89
.98
b-After a $771,000 charge from refinancing long-term debt.


KINDER CARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KINDER CARE INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
125,481,000
87,181,000
Net inc
11,297,000
13,525,000
Share earns
.25
.30
6mo rev
244,060,000
150,093,000
Net inc
22,347,000
20,332,000
Share earns
.50
.45


STANDARD PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD PRODUCTS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
117,494,000
118,042,000
Net inc
7,876,000
8,810,000
Share earns
.88
.94
Yr sales
464,905,000
433,159,000
Net inc
31,525,000
27,184,000
Share earns
3.46
2.92


Military Worried by Pickens's Interest in Boeing
LEAD: Pentagon lawyers and financial managers are worried about the implications of a possible investment in the Boeing Company by T. Boone Pickens.
They are examining whether such a move might damage the performance of the military's eighth-largest supplier, and whether the Defense Department has any power to intervene.


OLD NATIONAL BANCORP (INDIANA)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OLD NATIONAL BANCORP (INDIANA)(O)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,346,000
4,194,000
Per share
.50
.47
6mo net inc
8,704,000
8,726,000
Per share
.99
.98
Shares outst
8,785,934
8,896,092


Saving a Civil Rights Symbol
LEAD: The U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights used to be at the forefront of government efforts against racial abuses.
No more.
After years of domination by the Reagan Administration, it has fallen into such disrepute that the House of Representatives recently voted to stop further funding.


OUTBOARD MARINE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OUTBOARD MARINE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
393,483,000
298,808,000
Net inc
b23,497,000
16,569,000
Share earns
1.30
.98
9mo sales
884,865,000
684,823,000
Net inc
b27,852,000
13,838,000
Share earns
1.55
.82


NBC Is First in Ratings For 26th Straight Week
LEAD: ''The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd,'' a new summer situation comedy starring Blair Brown, tied for ninth place in the A. C. Nielsen Company ratings for the week ended July 26, helping NBC to win its 26th straight week in the ratings.


MCGWIRE'S 37th TIES RECORD
LEAD: Mark McGwire hit his 37th home run of the season today to tie the American League record for rookies.


WESTPORT BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTPORT BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
424,000
820,000
Per share
.20
.40
6mo net inc
1,277,000
1,666,000
Per share
.61
.81
The per share earnings adjusted for a 2-for-1 stock split paid in May 1987.


Bethlehem Net Highest In 6 Years
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, the nation's third-largest steel company, yesterday reported a second-quarter net profit of $46.8 million, or 79 cents a share - its highest quarterly profit in six years.
In the corresponding period last year, the company reported a loss of $23.8 million.


WESTMORELAND COAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTMORELAND COAL CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
193,058,000
157,842,000
Net inc
b13,026,000
5,833,000
Share earns
1.58
.71
6mo rev
334,454,000
300,420,000
Net inc
b14,372,000
10,444,000
Share earns
1.74
1.28


SENDS SOLDIERS
LEAD: Sri Lanka and India signed an accord Wednesday intended to end four years of ethnic violence, and early this morning, military officials said, an Indian peacekeeping force began arriving in northern Sri Lanka.


20 DIE IN BRAZIL PRISON UPRISING
LEAD: The police stormed a maximum-security prison where about 250 armed inmates were holding hostages today and ended the uprising in a seven-hour battle.
Officials said 20 people were killed and dozens injured.


Mergers Thin the Ranks of Corporate Givers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pauley Petroleum, Hondo to Merge
LEAD: The Hondo Oil and Gas Company has agreed to merge with Pauley Petroleum Inc. in a deal analysts valued at about $150 million.
Under terms of the transaction, Pauley, an oil refiner based in Los Angeles, would issue 10 million new shares in exchange for the stock of Hondo, a private concern based in Roswell, N


Beck Near Decision
LEAD: Barry Beck, the former Ranger defenseman and captain, who went into semi-retirement partly because of an injured shoulder and partly because of the turmoil under his former coach, Ted Sator, plans to make a decision on whether he wants to return to hockey in the next couple of weeks, according to his agent, Rob


SUN CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUN CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,380,000,000
2,480,000,000
Net inc
90,000,000
100,000,000
Share earns
.82
.92
6mo rev
4,610,000,000
5,830,000,000
Net inc
128,000,000
246,000,000
Share earns
1.17
2.26


G.O.P. SENATE UNIT CALLED METZENBAUM A COMMUNIST ALLY
LEAD: The Republican Senate campaign committee prepared and distributed a report describing Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, as a man whose ''Communist sympathies have found their way onto the Senate floor.''


Not Even Close
LEAD: Phillies' Juan Samuel reaching for first base as he was tagged out by Pirates' Sid Bream on pickoff play last night in Pittsburgh.
Page B6. (AP)


FOUNDER OF NATIONAL REVIEW
LEAD: James Burnham, an influential American conservative who was a founding editor of The National Review, died Tuesday of cancer at his home in Kent, Conn.
He was 82.


SANDOR LORAND, 95, A PIONEER IN FREUDIAN PSYCHOANLYSIS
LEAD: Sandor Lorand, a psychiatrist and prominent disciple of Freud, died of a heart attack Tuesday at his home in Long Beach, L.I.
He was 95 years old.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Outdoor Artistry


2 Men Given 5-to-15-Year Prison Terms in Slashing of Model
LEAD: A Manhattan judge, rejecting last-minute proclamations of innocence by the defendants, sentenced two men yesterday to maximum terms of 5 to 15 years in prison in the Marla Hanson slashing case.


Hungary Seeks Way to Cut High Suicide Rate
LEAD: Worried by the highest recorded suicide rate in the world, the Hungarian Government is encouraging an extensive study of its causes to seek ways of prevention.


North Testimony Top Seller as Book
LEAD: ''Taking the Stand,'' the complete transcripts of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's testimony before the select committee of Congress, is the No. 1 selling paperback nonfiction book in the United States.


Architectural Details
LEAD: WHEN Helen Ballard of Atlanta went looking for an inexpensive table base, she had a hard time.
Finally, she found a local artist who had designed a base with a dolphin motif that he was producing one at a time in his garage.
Miss Ballard and her table base were subsequently featured in a decorating magazine, and ''people saw the base and went mad,'' she said.


'AW SHUCKS' PREMIER FOR ITALY: GIOVANNI GUISEPPE GORIA
LEAD: Giovanni Goria likes to recall that his first big move into national politics, his appointment as Treasury Minister in 1982, came so unexpectedly that he had to borrow a friend's dark suit for the swearing-in ceremony.


FIRST NATIONAL CORP (CALIF) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST NATIONAL CORP (CALIF)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
404,000
379,000
Per share
.18
.18
6mo net inc
b1,140,000
946,000
Per share
.52
.46
b-Reflects $330,000 in pre-tax expenses related to the acquisition of National Bankshares of La Jolla and National Bank of Fairbanks Ranch.


Far Afield
LEAD: It may be awhile before it rivals basketball, soccer or even field hockey, but there is a budding sport on the collegiate scene, and if Smith College has its way, it shouldn't be long before the campus of the women's school in Northampton, Mass., is the scene of the fiercest competition.


Fed Official Warns Of Inflationary Acts
LEAD: The vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board warned today that passage of protectionist trade legislation or a higher minimum wage would unleash inflationary forces - actual and psychological - that the Fed would have to counter by tightening credit, perhaps severely.


Manila Debt Easing Asked
LEAD: Philippine senators cautioned today against any arbitrary repudiation of foreign debts and proposed instead that the Government seek better repayment terms from foreign creditors.


BESSIE BRIMBERG
LEAD: Bessie Brimberg, widow of Louis Brimberg, founder of the brokerage firm Brimberg &amp; Company, died of pneumonia Monday in Doctors Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 90 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Leahy Confession: Fallout
LEAD: The top Republican on the House committee investigating the Iran-contra affair said today that Senator Patrick J. Leahy's unauthorized release of a Senate Intelligence Committee report last January illustrated why the Reagan Administration felt it needed to keep some information from Congress.


House Acts on Land Claim
LEAD: The House has authorized spending $2.25 million to help settle a land battle between an Indian tribe and a town on Martha's Vineyard.
Under the legislation sent to the Senate on Tuesday, the Federal Government and State of Massachusetts would split the $4.5 million purchase price of 180 acres on the island.


MEESE CONCURS: IT WAS NOT LIKE AGATHA CHRISTIE
LEAD: The Senator talked to the Attorney General as though he were the driver of a fire engine who had decided to take the scenic route to a five-alarm blaze.


Dance: Douglas Dunn, at 'Serious Fun!' Festival
LEAD: DOWNTOWN dance, theater and music have been transported to Lincoln Center in the ''Serious Fun!'' festival, which runs through Sunday at Alice Tully Hall.
The premise is that uptown audiences deserve a look at what is going on at the experimentalist theaters south of 14th Street.
But the festival's dance program on


Calendar; Craftmen's Exhibits And Fair
LEAD:  Creative Works  Inspired by the Garden


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, JULY 30, 1987
LEAD:  Markets


FIRST NEW HAMPSHIRE BANKS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST NEW HAMPSHIRE BANKS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,681,000
4,579,000
Per share
.22
.43
Shares outst
11,930,000
10,723,000
6mo net inc
9,069,000
c11,664,000
Per share
.76
1.10
Shares outst
11,917,000
10,633,000


Crossing Atlantic To Get to N.H.L.
LEAD: Brothers have been common enough in hockey, but with such exceptions as the six Sutter brothers, all of whom have made their marks on the National Hockey League, and the Richards, sets of siblings have generally played at different levels.
Vic Howe, for example, was never the star his brother, Gordie, was, and Dennis Hull always lived in the shadow of Bobby.


Scotch Account Given to Grace
LEAD: Obviously pleased with the fresh and smart advertising Grace &amp; Rothschild has recently been supplying for its J &amp; B Scotch, the Paddington Corporation has now assigned the agency its Knockando single-malt Scotch.
As a category, single malt and imported vodka are the only distilled spirits exhibiting growth.


NATIONAL CITY BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL CITY BANCORPORATION
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
448,000
254,000
Per share
.13
.07
6mo net inc
1,642,000
1,124,000
Per share
.46
.32


RAMADA INNS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAMADA INNS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
185,743,000
169,793,000
Net loss
1,800,000
cd3,700,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo rev
370,984,000
314,857,000
Net inc
b2,644,000
d1,561,000
Share earns
.07
.04


BLACK HILLS CORP reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLACK HILLS CORP (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
115,869,000
113,088,000
Net inc
16,862,000
b18,106,000
Share earns
1.79
1.92
b-Includes a gain of $1,248,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Tyson Stock Is Up For Tucker Fight
LEAD: Since the early betting line established him as a 7-1 favorite against Tony Tucker in the fight for the undisputed heavyweight title here Saturday, Mike Tyson's stock has gone up at sports books across this city.
Depending on the vagaries of the wagering hour, Tyson has been favored lately at odds from 10-1 to 14-1.


Public TV Series to Commission and Produce Plays
LEAD: After six years of showcasing top American theater, ''American Playhouse,'' the weekly public television series, is branching out into theater production.


HOUSE RETAINS LIMIT ON UTILITIES' NUCLEAR LIABILITY
LEAD: The House of Representatives voted 300 to 119 today to retain a limit on the liability of public utilities in accidents at their nuclear reactors.


Ben &amp; Jerry's
LEAD: Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade Inc., an ice cream maker, said it had signed a licensing agreement with Jerry Garcia, lead guitarist and vocalist of the San Francisco rock band The Grateful Dead, allowing the company to use the name ''Cherry Garcia'' for one of its ice cream flavors.
The Waterbury, Vt., company will pay a royalty on all sales of the flavor.


DIVERSION OF FUNDS: CONFLICTS ON WHO KNEW
LEAD: According to testimony before the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North made conflicting statements concerning who else in the Government knew about the diversion of profits from sale of arms to Iran to the Nicaraguan rebels.


MULTIBANK FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MULTIBANK FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,709,000
3,616,000
Per share
.50
.43
Shares outst
9,356,631
8,496,610
6mo net inc
9,239,000
6,855,000
Per share
1.01
.81
Shares outst
9,144,869
8,429,861


RIO ALCOM LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RIO ALCOM LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
395,100,000
333,700,000
Net inc
22,000,000
24,000,000
Share earns
.50
.55
6mo rev
758,939,000
664,356,000
Net inc
38,225,000
48,241,000
Share earns
.86
1.10


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: M.D.C.
Asset Investors Trust has issued nearly $345.7 million of collateralized mortgage obligations in a seven-part financing through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The trust is a financing subsidiary of M.D.C.
Holdings, a Denver home builder.


Cleveland-Cliffs
LEAD: Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. said it had agreed to acquire $126 million worth of Tilden Mine long-term debt from eight lenders for a minimum of $75 million.
The company said that buying this debt would remove its subsidiary, the Cleveland-Cliffs Iron Company, from its current default status.
The unit owns 39 percent of Tilden, an iron mine in Michigan.


The Joy of 'Mystery' Plants
LEAD: I KNOW that many people live their lives in perfect contentment knowing the names of not a single plant, except maybe oaks and crab grass, but they certainly are not gardeners.
Ever since Adam was put to the task of naming the beasts of the field and the flora of Eden, gardening has been a matter of nomenclature as well as sweat and pleasure.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
Net Income
Percent
April-June
Change
1987
From '86
American General Corp.
$140,000,000
+2.8
Bethlehem Steel Corp.
46,800,000
*-
Coastal Corp.
22,300,000
-25.7
Eastman Kodak Co.
361,900,000
*-
Sun Co.


AMERICAN GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN GENERAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,587,260,000
1,476,064,000
Net inc
b139,992,000
c136,182,000
Share earns
.95
.92
Shares outst
148,923,264
151,520,260
6mo rev
3,237,154,000
2,920,333,000
Net inc
b292,699,000
c279,437,000
Share earns
1.96
1.87
Shares outst
150,158,269
151,675,053


CILCORP INC reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CILCORP INC (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
648,120,000
486,757,000
Net inc
44,154,000
50,201,000
Share earns
3.26
3.70


Fight for Crazy Eddie Urged
LEAD: The chairman of Entertainment Marketing Inc., who on Tuesday said he had dropped his offer for Crazy Eddie Inc., said today that he had been contacted by a number of Crazy Eddie shareholders who urged him to begin a proxy fight for the electronics retailer.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JULY 30, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-15


Occidental Deal
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said it plans to buy an idled chemical plant in Corpus Christi, Tex., from E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, and put 200 workers back on the job when operations resume next year.
Occidental declined to give specific terms of the transaction.


Recalling Key Lessons Of the Church Committee
LEAD: Twelve years ago, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Agencies - known as the Church Committee after Frank Church, its chairman -issued its report on the attempted assassination of foreign leaders.
A rereading of that report in light of today's Iran-contra investigation demonstrates anew our extraordinary inability to learn from past mistakes.


MESA LIMITED PARTNERS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MESA LIMITED PARTNERS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
72,016,000
62,479,000
Net inc
3,426,000
12,282,000
Share earns
.08
.08
Shares outst
85,040,000
65,719,000
6mo rev
171,174,000
174,006,000
Net inc
20,640,000
46,322,000
Share earns
.25
.69
Shares outst
82,832,000
65,716,000


Soviet Craft, With 3 Aboard Returns From Space Station
LEAD: The Soyuz spacecraft carrying Syria's first astronaut and two Soviet companions landed safely on Earth today after a five-day visit to the orbiting space station Mir, Moscow radio said.


OFFICIAL URGED MEESE TO WIDEN STAFF IN INQUIRY
LEAD: Last November, on the eve of Edwin Meese 3d's inquiry into the Iran arms dealings, the Justice Department's senior prosecutor argued at a meeting of Mr.
Meese's senior aides that it was inappropriate for the Attorney General to work as a ''gumshoe.''


DIXIE YARNS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIXIE YARNS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
167,705,413
69,576,080
Net inc
b9,159,594
c5,517,200
Share earns
.81
.97
Shares outst
11,335,244
5,668,938
6mo sales
255,042,810
133,977,035
Net inc
b12,523,000
c7,310,164
Share earns
1.30
1.29
Shares outst
9,630,306
5,661,324


New York City Police Need More Cells at Central Booking
LEAD: To the Editor:


BATTLE MOUNTAIN GOLD CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BATTLE MOUNTAIN GOLD CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
26,936,000
21,863,000
Net inc
9,256,000
6,057,000
Share earns
.22
.14
6mo sales
51,481,000
42,971,000
Net inc
18,038,000
11,907,000
Share earns
.42
.28


Maryland Wins Thrift Ruling
LEAD: The State of Maryland has won a key ruling in its bid to recover some of the $100 million it lost after the failure of the Community Savings and Loan Association in 1985.
Judge Joseph H. Kaplan of


FIRST AMERICAN BANK FOR SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMERICAN BANK FOR SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,724,000
2,379,000
Per share
.32
-
6mo net inc
7,970,000
4,719,000
Per share
.69
-
The company converted to stock form of ownership July 24, 1986.


MEESE SAYS NORTH LIED EITHER TO HIM OR TO COMMITTEES
LEAD: Under sharp questioning by the Iran-contra committees, Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d reluctantly conceded today that Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North must have lied either to him or in sworn testimony before the committees.


COASTAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COASTAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,683,000,000
1,472,000,000
Net inc
22,300,000
30,000,000
Share earns
.40
.45
6mo rev
3,616,000,000
3,389,200,000
Net inc
66,400,000
b22,000,000
Share earns
1.25
-


Advertising; Beth Israel Hospital Plans Marketing Effort
LEAD: Beth Israel Medical Center, one of New York City's 10 largest hospitals, is responding to the increasingly competitive nature of the health care industry by retaining Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster to set up a marketing communictions program that will probably include advertising.


FIRST MIDWEST BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST MIDWEST BANCORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,990,000
2,690,000
Per share
.38
.35
6mo net inc
b5,452,000
4,791,000
Per share
.70
.62
b-After extraordinary credits of $119,000 for the quarter and $208,000 for the 6 months.


SHOWDOWN IN GULF: IRAN'S ACTION DURING RETURN OF CONVOY WILL BE CRUCIAL
LEAD: Iran holds the initiative in the Persian Gulf, and its actions will determine whether it is on a collision course with the United States as a result of the mine that damaged the supertanker Bridgeton last Friday in a convoy to Kuwait to pick up oil.
The return of the convoy could be critical.
Unconfirmed reports out of Kuwait indicate that the damaged Bridgeton and the Gas Prince will sail Friday.


LAFARGE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAFARGE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
323,735,000
252,074,000
Net inc
27,346,000
12,181,000
Share earns
.63
.29
6mo sales
496,025,000
408,900,000
Net inc
7,329,000
b5,194,000
Share earns
.09
-


HAWTHORNE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAWTHORNE FINANCIAL
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,310,695
2,725,199
Per share
1.27
1.05
6mo net inc
6,939,558
5,128,911
Per share
2.67
1.97


Securing the Hill
LEAD: Efforts to protect the United States Capitol from terrorists have resulted in an ever-changing tableau of barricades and checkpoints scattered across the Capitol plaza.


Rock: The Howlers
LEAD: AUSTIN, Tex., exports a lot of blues-based rock bands -lately, the Fabulous Thunderbirds, Stevie Ray Vaughan and now Omar and the Howlers, who performed Tuesday at the Bottom Line.
The Howlers are a taut, forceful quartet that plays blues, rockabilly and occasionally a pop song with a bridge; they keep the music tough and basic.


Tobacco Unit's Officers
LEAD: The American Tobacco Company, a division of American Brands Inc., said yesterday that Charles H. Mullen had been appointed president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Mullen, 59 years old, succeeds Thomas C. Hayes, who was elected chairman and continues as chief executive.
Mr.
Hayes will also become president and chief operating officer of American Brands.


RORER GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RORER GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
221,255,000
201,602,000
Net inc
10,879,000
b12,619,000
Share earns
.50
.57
6mo sales
422,482,000
373,284,000
Net inc
18,313,000
b135,171,000
Share earns
.84
6.23


NEWORLD BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWORLD BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,262,000
b2,255,000
Per share
.45
.45
6mo net inc
4,520,000
b4,263,000
Per share
.90
.90
b-After tax credits of $949,000 for the quarter and $1,791,000 for the 6 months.


Executive in Drunken Driving Death Is Out of Jail
LEAD: A liquor company executive who pleaded guilty to murder in a drunken driving case was ordered released from the Jefferson County jail Tuesday after serving one month of his 20-year sentence.


Houston Offers Sewer Bonds
LEAD: Houston is offering $240 million of prior-lien sewer revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 8.19 percent for bonds due in 2017.
The offering is being made through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.


INDEPENDENCE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDEPENDENCE BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
7,092,000
5,912,000
Per share
.74
.64
6mo net inc
15,521,000
11,714,000
Per share
1.53
1.26
The year-ago results reflect merger with Third National Bank of Scranton in March 1987.


SECURITY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SECURITY BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,642,000
4,300,000
Per share
.61
.56
6mo net inc
9,090,000
8,606,000
Per share
1.19
1.12


Order for Boeing
LEAD: The Boeing Company said it had received an order valued at about $400 million for 15 of its 737-300 twin-jets from Nordstress Ltd. of Hong Kong.
Nordstress is a subsidiary of Ansett Transport Industries of Australia.
Boeing said the aircraft are scheduled for delivery between June 1988 and June 1989.


Qualities Of Algae Are Odd
LEAD: The brown tide in the bays of Long Island is, in many ways, no different from the hundreds of algae blooms that discolor waters around the world.


Net Slips a Bit At Primerica
LEAD: The Primerica Corporation, formerly the American Can Company, said yesterday that its second-quarter net income slipped six-tenths of 1 percent, although operating earnings were up sharply.


Brazil Softens I.M.F. Stance
LEAD: President Jose Sarney, signaling a more conciliatory tone toward Brazil's foreign creditors, has indicated his country could return to a formal agreement with the International Monetary Fund.


Three ABC Cameramen Lose Discrimination Suit
LEAD: Jurors rejected $3.5 million in claims by three black cameramen who said ABC-TV discriminated against them by barring them from working in the network's highest-paying jobs.


Ex-Chief Files Guinness Suit
LEAD: The former chairman of Guinness P.L.C., Ernest Saunders, has begun a legal counteroffensive in his bitter battle with the brewing giant.


FEAR INFRINGES ON SANCTITY OF AIDS PATIENTS' PRIVACY
LEAD: When a Boston man was recently told he was infected with the AIDS virus, he asked his doctor to keep the information confidential.
The man said he planned to file for divorce and that if his wife were told, it would complicate matters.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.65
6.58
6.26
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.86
5.84
5.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.06
6.09
5.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.39
8.43
7.30
30-YR.


CANADIAN OCCIDENTAL PETEROLEUM LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANADIAN OCCIDENTAL PETEROLEUM LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
11,400,000
8,100,000
Share earns
.34
.24
6mo rev
283,900,000
258,700,000
Net inc
26,100,000
18,700,000
Share earns
.78
.56
Results are in Canadian dollars.


63d St. Tunnel Is Termed Safe In M.T.A. Study
LEAD: Despite floods, cracks and other problems, the 63d Street subway tunnel has always been structurally sound, according to a report released yesterday by the Inspector General of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.


MID MAINE SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MID MAINE SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
407,789
286,124
Per share
.29
-
6mo net inc
1,030,176
927,876
Per share
.73
-
The bank converted to stock ownership in December.


IU INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IU INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
433,890,000
377,803,000
Net inc
b16,142,000
c50,311,000
Share earns
.58
1.84
6mo rev
817,914,000
729,816,000
Net inc
b22,025,000
c61,728,000
Share earns
.79
2.25


PUGET POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUGET POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
715,987,000
726,832,000
Net inc
107,519,000
119,010,000
Share earns
1.79
1.89


A HOME AWAY FROM HOME: CABINS GET PERSONAL TOUCH
LEAD: HERE are 17 Kirk Camerons, the young star of the television show ''Growing Pains,'' on the wall of Bunk 26 at Point O'Pines Camp for Girls in Brant Lake, N.Y.


JET VETERANS TO GET MUCH COMPETITION
LEAD: For a team that has produced 21 victories the last two seasons, and made the playoffs each time, the Jets' veterans will find a startling number of roster openings when they report to camp Friday.


CORROON &amp; BLACK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORROON &amp; BLACK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
87,840,000
82,012,000
Net inc
9,421,000
9,185,000
Share earns
.49
.49
6mo rev
185,018,000
166,194,000
Net inc
b18,709,000
20,379,000
Share earns
.98
1.08


On New York's Legislature; Assembly vs. Senate in Albany
LEAD: To the Editor:


SKIN FROM REAGAN'S NOSE REMOVED FOR TESTS
LEAD: President Reagan had a small piece of skin removed from his nose this afternoon in what his doctor described as a ''routine procedure.''


NORTHERN INDIANA PUBLIC SERVICE CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHERN INDIANA PUBLIC SERVICE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
313,400,000
365,800,000
Net inc
13,000,000
16,200,000
Share earns
.09
.13
6mo rev
734,400,000
905,300,000
Net inc
36,000,000
50,500,000
Share earns
.31
.50


CHURCH &amp; DWIGHT CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHURCH &amp; DWIGHT CO INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
75,136,575
62,834,027
Net inc
3,030,965
2,075,253
Share earns
.14
.10
6mo sales
145,050,914
127,157,671
Net inc
4,204,192
5,167,776
Share earns
.19
.25


HERITAGE-NIS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HERITAGE-NIS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,333,000
1,389,000
Per share
.34
-
6mo net inc
4,791,000
2,789,000
Per share
.69
-
The bank went public in October.


Ward Makes Apology For Comment on Rape
LEAD: Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward apologized yesterday for telling a woman who expressed fears for her safety after a series of rapes in Queens that she was the type of young, attractive target a rapist would attack.


Standard Brands May Get New Bid
LEAD: Entregrowth International Ltd., the American subsidiary of a New Zealand company whose $308 million takeover offer for Standard Brands Paint Company was rejected Monday, said it might revise its bid for the California company.
Entregrowth, a subsidiary of the Chase Corporation, said it was considering whether to make a new bid directly to shareholders or to make a new offer to the board.


Grand Jury Will Investigate Fire Fatal to Seven in Harlem
LEAD: A grand jury will investigate the blaze at the high-rise Schomburg Plaza that killed seven people last March, District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau said yesterday.


SUMITOMO BANK OF CALIFORNIA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUMITOMO BANK OF CALIFORNIA
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
5,055,000
3,683,000
Per share
.73
.55
6mo net inc
9,499,000
7,254,000
Per share
1.37
1.09


Kenneth L. Muse Dies at 75; Animator for Major Studios
LEAD: Kenneth L. Muse, a Hollywood animator who drew Mickey Mouse for Walt Disney, Tom and Jerry for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and the Flintstones for Hanna-Barbera, has died.
He was 75 years old.


Key Models Expected From I.B.M. and Tandy
LEAD: Tandy and I.B.M., two of the leading makers of personal computers, are expected to make significant product announcements next week, company officials and industry analysts said today.


No Grounds to Prosecute in Overturned Case
LEAD: A special state prosecutor has found no grounds to prosecute members of the Brooklyn District Attorney's office, the Police Department or a witness for their roles in the conviction and imprisonment of a Brooklyn man in 1980 on murder and robbery charges that were later overturned.


A Flurry Of Records On Wall St.
LEAD: The stock market surged again to new highs yesterday, after shrugging off some early profit taking and an unsubstantiated rumor that a Navy ship had hit a mine in the Persian Gulf.


NORIEGA IS ADAMANT DESPITE CALL FOR OUSTER
LEAD: Hoisted on banners carried in Government-organized demonstrations, posted on billboards, scrawled on walls, a single slogan is seen everywhere in Panama these days: ''Not one step back.''


Henley Group
LEAD: Bassak Ltd., a Bermuda-based investment firm, said it had lowered its stake in the Henley Group Inc. to 3.45 percent from 7.6 percent.
On July 22, Bassak sold 4.5 million shares in the New York-based diversified manufacturer to Salomon Brothers Inc. for $28.75 a share, or a total of $129.4 million.


JEFFERSON BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERSON BANCORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b984,647
c1,067,531
Per share
.38
.43
6mo net inc
1,685,015
1,734,277
Per share
.65
.71
b-Includes gains of $732,238 from the sale and leaseback of properties and a gain of $2,329 on security transactions.


GALAXY CARPET MILLS INC reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GALAXY CARPET MILLS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Sales
72,074,000
52,964,000
Net inc
2,479,000
233,000
Share earns
.74
.06
9mo sales
190,823,000
141,166,000
Net inc
4,242,000
180,000
Share earns
1.26
.05


IMASCO LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMASCO LTD
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,180,000,000
1,110,000,000
Net inc
70,153,000
52,926,000
Share earns
.56
.48
Shares outst
119,158,667
110,309,351
The results are in Canadian dollars.
The company is listed on the Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver stock exchanges.


No Trade Pact on Pasta As U.S. Deadline Nears
LEAD: The six-year-old pasta war between the United States and the European Community may escalate this week, as Reagan Administration trade officials come up against a self-imposed Aug. 1 negotiating deadline with no resolution in sight.


Star of 'The Equalizer' Hospitalized in England
LEAD: Edward Woodward, the British actor who plays the title role in the CBS television adventure series ''The Equalizer,'' was being treated today for a suspected heart attack, and a hospital official said the actor's condition was improving.


Hear Ye, Hear Ye: A Bit of England Invades Manhattan
LEAD: A knight dressed in armor performing in a joust for visitors to Byrant Park yesterday.
Jugglers, minstrels and gypsy dancers also performed as part of the New York Renaissance Festival. (NYT/Neal Boenzi)


FIRST COMMERCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST COMMERCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,948,000
1,041,000
Per share
.71
.25
6mo net inc
5,058,000
3,445,000
Per share
1.22
.83


AMERIANA SAVINGS BANK OF NY reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERIANA SAVINGS BANK OF NY
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
512,000
632,000
Per share
.27
-
6mo net inc
865,000
1,016,000
Per share
.46
-
The year-ago per share earnings are unavailable; the bank converted to a stock savings institution on Feb.


U.S. ACTS TO RUSH COPTERS TO SWEEP MINES IN THE GULF
LEAD: The Pentagon has ordered eight minesweeping helicopters to be flown immediately to the Persian Gulf to assist American naval forces in searching for mines in shipping channels and destroying them, officials said today.


No Turning Back
LEAD: To the Editor:


7 ARE ARRESTED AFTER INQUIRY AT CREEDMOOR
LEAD: Six workers and a former employee at the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Queens were arrested yesterday after a yearlong undercover investigation.
Three were charged with abusing mentally retarded patients and the rest with selling drugs to fellow employees.


OCEAN DRILLING &amp; EXPLORAION CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OCEAN DRILLING &amp; EXPLORAION CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
90,895,000
92,378,000
Net loss
9,210,000
18,202,000
6mo rev
175,643,000
210,082,000
Net loss
17,692,000
26,742,000


PEOPLES SAVINGS (BROCKTON) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES SAVINGS (BROCKTON)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
445,000
583,000
Per share
.19
-
6mo net inc
1,091,000
1,053,000
Per share
.47
-
The bank converted from mutual to stock form in October 1986.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, some editions of Wednesday's Living Section contained incomplete preparation and cooking times for Tiebou Dienn, a dish from Senegal.
The correct preparation time is 20 minutes and the cooking time is 1 hour, 15 minutes.


No Rerun in California
LEAD: For a while it looked as though the California Congressional delegation was about to see a repeat of what happened last year, when a member gave up his House seat to challenge an incumbent Senator of the other party.


Modern Ceramists Break Out of Mold
LEAD: SO patent is the message in the exhibition that opens at the American Craft Museum tomorrow that it fairly jumps off the display modules.
How, the show asks, can you get people to look at ceramics as sculpture if all they see is pots?


VETERANS' RADIATION BENEFITS
LEAD: The House has approved legislation that would require the Veterans Administration to pay disability benefits to veterans with certain types of cancer who were exposed to radiation in postwar atomic test explosions or in the occupation of Japan after World War II.


GERMANTOWN SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GERMANTOWN SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,237,000
c1,742,000
Per share
.56
-
6mo net inc
b3,999,000
c2,722,000
Per share
.99
-
b-After tax credits of $1,125,000 for the quarter and $2,022,000 for the 6 months.


STARTERS ARE KEY TO AMERICAN LEAGUE EAST RACE
LEAD: The Yankees have used 10 different starting pitchers this season, shedding some as quickly as they could find replacements.
The Toronto Blue Jays have been almost as busy, using nine pitchers in starting roles.
The Detroit Tigers, on the other hand, have basically had the same starting five all season, making only one exception and finding three starts for a sixth pitcher.


Pork Prices Advance; Traders Remain Wary
LEAD: Pork futures prices rose yesterday as traders remained skittish over a continued slowdown in the number of hogs brought to slaughterhouses and uncertain about when the hogs would reach the market.


Concert: National Chorale
LEAD: ONE effect of the National Chorale's Bernstein-Weill program Tuesday at Damrosch Park was to remind one how seriously a few excellent composers have investigated the Broadway musical as a potential forum for sophisticated work.
A corresponding effect, however, was the reminder that basic standards of craft and execution cannot be neglected without peril in light music.


JERRICO INC reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JERRICO INC (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1987
1986
Revenue
154,430,000
147,410,000
Net inc
6,402,000
9,199,000
Share earns
.32
.44
Yr rev
599,296,000
564,320,000
Net inc
24,474,000
27,258,000
Share earns
1.19
1.29


Crafting Modern Rugs That Look Like Antiques
LEAD: ''WE wanted handwoven rugs of the kind they made in the 18th and 19th century, but new and fresh-looking instead of old ones,'' said William Diamond, the interior designer who supervised the decoration of Annie and Eric Gleacher's country house.
He noted that it is almost impossible to find antique rugs in the large sizes he needed.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Sharon Mosse has been appointed executive vice president, management representative at Backer Spielvogel Bates.


Fuel Supply Notes
LEAD: The Mountain Fuel Supply Company is offering $50 million of 9 1/2 percent notes due in 1997 at a price of 99.60 to yield 9.56 percent, through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
Rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P., the notes yield about 95-hundredths of a percentage point more than 10-year Treasury notes.


Sun Microsystems
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. and National Advanced Systems said they had agreed to develop an operating system and other software to allow common applications between Sun's computer work stations and National's mainframe computers.
Both Sun and National Advanced, a subsidiary of the National Semiconductor Corporation, are based in Mountain View, Calif.


Jazz: Henry Butler
LEAD: THE audience at Sweet Basil on Tuesday was dotted with well-known pianists, there to check out a flashy player who grew up in New Orleans and now lives in Los Angeles, Henry Butler.
Leading a quartet with three first-rate sidemen - Alvin Batiste on clarinet, Ron Carter on bass and Joe Chambers on drums - Mr.


Plea on Firearms Charge
LEAD: A man who led a paramilitary patrol along the Mexican border that reportedly held 16 illegal aliens at gunpoint pleaded guilty Tuesday to a Federal firearms charge under a plea agreement.
The man, J. R. Hagan, 37 years old, of Tucson, former regional director for Arizona and Utah in the conservative group Civilian Materiel Assistance, pleaded guilty before Federal District Judge William D.


ROLAND F. MARSTON
LEAD: Roland F. Marston, who started as an insurance salesman and worked his way up to chairman of the State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company, has died.
He was 63 years old.


Intel to Resell Japanese Chips
LEAD: The Intel Corporation, which has long accused Japanese semiconductor companies of unfair trade practices, has reached an agreement to sell computer memory chips made by Japan's Mitsubishi Electric Corporation.


EASTMAN KODAK CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 14
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTMAN KODAK CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 14
1987
1986
Sales
3,207,000,000
2,694,600,000
Net inc
b361,900,000
cd12,200,000
Share earns
1.60
-
6mo sales
5,860,000,000
5,040,000,000
Net inc
b539,900,000
d36,400,000
Share earns
2.39
.16


ANCHOR SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANCHOR SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,700,000
c14,300,000
Yr net inc
b84,100,000
c41,200,000
b-After extraordinary gains of $200,000 for the quarter and $43 million for the year.
c-After extraordinary gains of $7.4 million for the quarter and $11.8 million for the year.


HAITIAN SOLDIERS KILL 8 AT A RALLY
LEAD: Soldiers fired into a crowd of about 2,500 protesters today, killing at least 8 people and wounding 15, as the demonstrators marched to condemn the disbanded private militia known as the Tontons Macoute, witnesses said.


Music: Clarinet Pieces On Mostly Mozart Bill
LEAD: TUESDAY evening's Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra program at Avery Fisher Hall was pretty much business as usual - or business as usual as it used to be, before performance standards were subtly but steadily upgraded over the last couple of summers.
Tuesday's concert, repeated last night, was not bad by any means.


A.C.L.U. Agonizes
LEAD: For 51 years, the American Civil Liberties Union has maintained a policy of not taking positions on nominees for judicial or other offices.
But feelings are running so high against the nomination of Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court that Norman Dorsen, the organization's president, this week called a special board meeting to decide whether the policy should be revised to enable the A.C.L.U.


FIRST FEDERAL OF THE CAROLINAS FA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL OF THE CAROLINAS FA
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
855,000
746,000
Per share
.68
.71
Shares outst
1,259,000
809,000
9mo net inc
2,781,000
2,199,000
Per share
2.53
2.28
Shares outst
966,000
800,000


BYCHKOV TO HEAD L'ORCHESTRE DE PARIS
LEAD: Semyon Bychkov, the Russian-born conductor of the Buffalo Philharmonic, will leave in 1989 to succeed Daniel Barenboim as music director of l'Orchestre de Paris, officials of the Buffalo orchestra said yesterday.


TEXAS UTILITIES CO reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS UTILITIES CO (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,040,680,000
4,042,591,000
Net inc
674,383,000
591,492,000
Share earns
4.66
4.27


JEFFERSON BANKSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERSON BANKSHARES INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,229,000
2,742,000
Per share
.69
.60
6mo net inc
6,343,000
5,636,000
Per share
1.37
1.23


Candidate List for Commerce
LEAD: Howard H. Baker Jr., the White House chief of staff, asked his aides today to pull together a list of candidates to fill the Commerce Secretary's job vacated by the death of Malcolm Baldrige, a senior Administration official said.


Taipei Asked to Revalue
LEAD: The United States has asked Taiwan to revalue its currency upward to help the Reagan Administration fight protectionist bills and reduce its large trade deficit, officials said today.
If the Taiwan dollar rose against the American dollar, American goods would be cheaper for Taiwanese buyers, and Taiwanese goods would be more expensive for American consumers, helping redress the current trade imbalance.


Foreign-Bank Status in Peru
LEAD: President Alan Garcia excluded foreign banks today from a decree regarding a state administrative takeover of Peru's banks and lending companies, which precedes a proposed nationalization.


Earnings Up at Reuters
LEAD: Reuters Holdings P.L.C., the news and information company, said that its earnings in the first half of 1987 rose 44.3 percent, on a 49.3 percent increase in revenues.
Reuters said that net income in the latest six months advanced to $82.2 million, or $1.18 per American depository share, from $57 million, or 83 cents per depository share, a year ago.


Advertising; Promoting Movies Via Cable
LEAD: THE Movietime Channel, conceived as a less expensive way to advertise films, is all set to make its debut on cable television tomorrow.


Money Separating Giants and Stars
LEAD: If everything goes right, all of the Giants will be in training camp here Friday.
But don't bet on everything going right.


ALGAE TIDES AGAIN AFFLICT L.I., AND SCIENTISTS STILL WONDER
LEAD: From one end of Long Island to the other, tides of algae are overwhelming harbors, bays and the Sound this summer, suffocating or starving marine life.


'THE ESSENTIAL FACTS REMAIN THE SAME'
LEAD: Attorney General Meese was repeatedly questioned about the credibility of witnesses.
In one such exchange, Senator Daniel K. Inouye, chairman of the Senate committee, asked him about lies to investigators and their consequences.


VALUE LINE INC reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VALUE LINE INC (OTC)
Year to April 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b15,130,000
b10,191,000
Share earns
1.52
1.08
b-Includes net investment income of $4,792,000 for the latest year and $1,836,000 for the year-ago period.


Charges Disputed
LEAD: Keith Hernandez of the Mets and the former major league infielder, Dale Berra, dispute charges by Lonnie Smith of the Kansas City Royals that baseball's crackdown on drugs is ''a joke.'' Hernandez, Berra and Smith were among seven players disciplined by Commissioner Peter Ueberroth in February 1986 for their involvement with drugs.


FIRST INTERSTATE OF IOWA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST INTERSTATE OF IOWA (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
510,000
b951,000
Per share
.04
-
6mo net inc
762,000
b1,173,000
Per share
.06
-
b-Net loss


Rudman Is Rigorous
LEAD: Few other members of the Congessional Iran-contra committees have worked as hard or been as rigorous in their questioning of witnesses as Warren B. Rudman of New Hampshire, the Republican vice chairman of the Senate panel.
Many people who have followed Senator Rudman's career assumed he hoped to use the national prominence he has gained through the hearings as a springboard toward a Republican leadership position in the Senate.


Dance: Juilliard Program
LEAD: TWO dancers in the New York City Ballet and one former company member showed off their own choreography Tuesday as part of a showcase presented by the company's school, the School of American Ballet.


Charm School for Children
LEAD: ''Please'' and ''thank-you'' can be passwords to a better life, said a city alderman here who has hired a consultant to teach etiquette to poor children.


EG&amp;G INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EG&amp;G INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
309,356,000
291,659,000
Net inc
14,639,000
12,268,000
Share earns
.53
.44
6mo rev
609,962,000
582,571,000
Net inc
27,235,000
25,484,000
Share earns
.98
.92


Borden to Spin Off Two Businesses
LEAD: Borden Inc., a diversified food and chemicals company, said it would spin off its petrochemicals and polyvinyl-chloride plastics businesses as a separate company, a move it hopes will raise up to $400 million.
Borden said the businesses would be turned into a master limited partnership with a majority of the shares to be sold to the public.


Issue Backed By Auto Loans
LEAD: Western Financial Auto Loans 2, a unit of Westcorp's Western Financial Savings Bank, is offering $110 million of bonds collateralized by a pool of car-loan receivables.
Drexel Burnham Lambert is the sole underwriter.


HORIZON BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORIZON BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
909,449
608,253
Per share
.38
-
The bank went public last August.


Advertising; Magazine Pretax Profits Were 11% in 1986
LEAD: Things looked better for magazine profitability last year than the year before, according to the results of a Price Waterhouse survey conducted among members of the Magazine Publishers Association.
With 181 magazines responding, the average pretax operating profit came out at 11 percent, compared with 9.7 percent for the 169 responding in 1985 and 11.3 percent for 174 in 1984.


Emma Hawes, Winner Of World Bridge Titles
LEAD: Emma Jean Hawes, one of the world's leading women in tournament bridge, died of breast cancer Tuesday at her home in Fort Worth after a long battle with the disease.
She was 75 years old.


ASTEC INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASTEC INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
53,067,882
19,813,677
Net inc
2,176,130
716,983
Share earns
.58
.35
Shares outst
3,773,143
2,026,573
6mo sales
101,952,087
38,742,864
Net inc
4,049,162
1,554,023
Share earns
1.09
.79
Shares outst
3,710,550
1,955,539


Cabaret: Judy Tenuta
LEAD: LIKE Emo Philips and Pee Wee Herman, Judy Tenuta, who is one of the country's fastest-rising stand-up comedy stars, plays a childlike eccentric who presides magisterially over her own twisted little empire of the imagination.
Ms.
Tenuta, who dresses like a tatty fairy princess and totes an accordion instead of a wand goes by several self-designated titles, including ''the petite flower,'' ''the living saint'' and ''the princess of power.


GENERAL DYNAMICS IS FINED BY U.S. SAFETY AGENCY
LEAD: The Labor Department fined the General Dynamics Corporation $615,000 today for willfully under-reporting job injuries and illnesses at its submarine shipbuilding yard in Quonset Point, R.I.


Milwaukee Bank Chief Is Silent on Takeover
LEAD: As the chairman and chief executive of the Marine Corporation, a Milwaukee-based banking group with assets of $4.3 billion, George R. Slater, 63, built a reputation for shrewd and aggressive acquisitions.
To enter the high-priced Chicago market, for example, he arranged the purchase of a retail branch of Banco Di


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q.My home is quite close to the beach, so it gets lots of salt spray.
The windows on the side of the house that faces the beach have salt spots on the glass that I can't seem to clean off.
What can I do to get rid of these spots?
A.If you can get to them while they are still fresh, the mineral deposits you are referring to can often be washed off with soap and water.


PEOPLES WESTCHESTER SAVNGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES WESTCHESTER SAVNGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,606,000
c4,151,000
Per share
.91
.82
6mo net inc
b9,811,000
c8,130,000
Per share
1.94
1.61
b-After tax credits of $1,841,000 for the quarter and $4,411,000 for the 6 months.


ORANGE &amp; ROCKLAND UTILITIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORANGE &amp; ROCKLAND UTILITIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
102,600,367
106,437,320
Net inc
8,897,764
9,636,041
Share earns
.62
.68
6mo rev
232,150,160
248,771,209
Net inc
21,153,526
21,598,121
Share earns
1.52
1.54


COWBOYS TESTING PLAYERS
LEAD: The Dallas Cowboys have become the first team in the National Football League and perhaps the first in professional sports to administer voluntary testing for the AIDS virus.


Fraternity Bans Hazing
LEAD: A college fraternity with 700 chapters and 125,000 members in the United States and abroad has banned hazing.
At the end of its national convention Tuesday, the fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha, ordered its affiliates to halt ''abusive physical contact or mental harassment of pledges.'' J. Herbert King, a spokesman for the convention who is a Chicago educator, winced at the memory of the ''brutality'' he says he suffered at the University of Chicago.


Jazz: Threadgill Sextett
LEAD: THE Henry Threadgill Sextett, appearing through Sunday at Carlos 1, 432 Avenue of the Americas, at 10th Street, could spoil listeners for most other small-group jazz.
After the Sextett, more conventional groups sound hidebound and unimaginative.


Coast Guard Survival Drill Off the Rockaways
LEAD: A Coast Guardsman jumping 30 feet from a helicopter into the Atlantic near Jacob Riis Park in Queens yesterday during an annual wet drill.
The drill, a test of water-survival skills, involves jumping from a copter, swimming to a raft and paddling it to a waiting boat.
About 40 guardsmen from the Coast Guard air station at Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn participated in the exercise.


BETHLEHEM STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BETHLEHEM STEEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,128,200,000
1,109,000,000
Net inc
46,800,000
b23,800,000
Share earns
.79
-
6mo sales
2,258,900,000
2,277,600,000
Net inc
72,400,000
b115,600,000
Share earns
1.17
-


NEWMONT GOLD CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWMONT GOLD CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
70,949,000
42,217,000
Net inc
24,147,000
8,700,000
Share earns
.23
.10
Shares outst
104,875,000
94,500,000
6mo sales
124,883,000
73,889,000
Net inc
39,014,000
13,832,000
Share earns
.38
.15
Shares outst
102,187,000
94,500,000


The Forgotten War
LEAD: Remember the war against narcotics?
You know, when our top officials were talking about how drug abuse and the flood of drugs into the country were poisoning the nation and how we had to get together and use all our resources in a real war to lick the drug problem?


Transtar Air To Close Down
LEAD: The Transtar Airlines Corporation, a small Houston-based regional air carrier owned by the Southwest Airlines Company, said today that it will discontinue operations on Aug. 9 and liquidate its assets.


Flurry of U.S. Issues Expected
LEAD: The logjam in Government security auctions that has disrupted the credit markets the last two weeks will soon begin to break up, the Treasury announced yesterday after Congress temporarily raised the Federal debt ceiling.


Kodak Reports a Profit As Sales Increase 19.3%
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company, the world's largest producer of photographic equipment, yesterday announced a record second-quarter profit of $361.9 million, or $1.60 a share.
In the corresponding quarter a year ago, the company had a loss of $12.2 million.


The U.N. Today: July 30, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


Life With 3,000 Mechanical Toys
LEAD: A FEW years ago, when Dr.
Athelstan Spilhaus was on his way from Florida to the Bahamas, he was asked to fill out a customs form that, among other things, asked for his occupation.
As the friend who was traveling with him tells the story, in that space Dr.
Spilhaus wrote ''retired genius.''


Treatment by Yankees Upsetting to Henderson
LEAD: He was a lone figure in the clubhouse yesterday, the one player who seemed unable to enjoy the brilliant afternoon in the Bronx and the victory that by day's end would increase the Yankees' first-place lead to 1 1/2 games over Detroit and 2 over Toronto.
Rickey Henderson angrily stalked from the shower to the trainer's room to his locker.


ALCO STANDARD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALCO STANDARD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
918,274,000
1,141,081,000
Net inc
20,449,000
16,709,000
Share earns
.45
.40
9mo rev
2,662,292,000
3,207,045,000
Net inc
b50,647,000
c43,016,000
Share earns
1.16
1.00


TRAVELERS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRAVELERS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b105,400,000
b72,500,000
Share earns
1.01
.72
6mo net inc
c247,900,000
c193,900,000
Share earns
2.40
2.00
b-Includes realized investment losses of $8.5 million and $19.4 million in the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Philharmonic Negotiating Concert Tour Of Soviet
LEAD: The New York Philharmonic has been invited to tour the Soviet Union next spring.
If negotiations with Goskontsert, the official Soviet concert agency, are successful, the orchestra will play three concerts in Leningrad and four in Moscow between May 28 and June 9.


Jacobs Stake In Allegheny
LEAD: Irwin L. Jacobs, the Minneapolis investor, said yesterday that he owned about 900,000 shares of Allegheny International, or about 9 percent of the financially troubled company that makes Sunbeam, Oster and Mixmaster appliances.


BELDING HEMINWAY CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELDING HEMINWAY CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
36,919,000
29,895,000
Net inc
1,347,000
808,000
Share earns
.57
.31
Shares outst
2,411,000
2,663,000
6mo sales
71,076,000
59,398,000
Net inc
2,213,000
1,401,000
Share earns
.92
.53


FIRST FIDELITY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FIDELITY BANCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
7,448,000
b27,811,000
Per share
-
.98
6mo net inc
24,477,000
56,648,000
Per share
.74
2.01
b-Net income  The company said the loss in the latest second quarter was attributable almost entirely to a special provision of $56 million for possible future uncollectable loans.


Transactions; BASEBALL
LEAD: KANSAS CITY (AL) - Traded Buddy Biancalana, shortstop, to the Astros for Mel Stottlemyre Jr., pitcher.
Assigned Stottlemyre to Memphis of the Southern League.


Few Champions Can Go Distance
LEAD: It has been nearly 10 years of ever-changing heavyweight champions, an era when ordinary fighters became, in effect, king for a day.


Board Worried Thrift Units Might Quit F.S.L.I.C.
LEAD: Four of the nation's 10 largest savings and loan associations may be planning to leave the crippled deposit insurance system for thrift institutions for a much stronger Government agency that insures deposits at commercial and savings banks, officials of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board are warning.


RAYCHEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAYCHEM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
275,617,000
222,146,000
Net inc
27,426,000
10,732,000
Share earns
2.49
1.01
Yr sales
944,434,000
797,632,000
Net inc
73,599,000
48,790,000
Share earns
6.74
4.65


New Jersey Can Have Both Its Bottle Bills and Its Glass Industry
LEAD: To the Editor:


Disinvestment Weighed
LEAD: Britain's Standard Chartered Bank is discussing the sale of its shares in South Africa's second-largest bank as a prelude to disinvestment, bankers said today.
Standard Chartered's stake is the last major foreign shareholding in the South African banking sector.
South Africa's Standard Bank Investment Corporation said in a brief statement that it was ''aware that discussions are taking place concerning the future'' of the British banking group's 39 percent stake but gave no details.


PRINTRONIX INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRINTRONIX INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,489,000
29,978,000
Net loss
1,548,000
b1,810,000
Share earns
-
.37
b-Net income


Film: 'A Man In Love'
LEAD: A MAN LOVE'' is an unaccountably bad film from Diane Kurys, who at other times (with ''Peppermint Soda'' and ''Entre Nous'') has seemed one of the most promising new directors around.
The story centers around a very important American film star played by Peter Coyote, which is to say that ''A Man in Love'' is misconceived from the very start.


MUNSINGWEAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MUNSINGWEAR INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
48,894,000
31,050,000
Net loss
10,718,000
b2,360,000
Share earns
-
.50
6mo sales
104,158,000
64,259,000
Net loss
10,147,000
b4,498,000
Share earns
-
1.01


FOREIGN INVESTORS PROPEL U.S. STOCKS TO RECORD LEVELS
LEAD: Foreign investors, buoyed by a renewed confidence in the stability of the dollar, are helping to push prices of American stocks to historic highs, according to traders and international market experts.


Advertising; Calet, Hirsch &amp; Spector Gets Rorer Assignment
LEAD: Calet, Hirsch &amp; Spector/New York has been assigned Myoflex analgesic cream by Rorer Consumer Pharmaceuticals.
No budget has been set yet, but last year's spending was on the $2 million level.


MICROSEMI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROSEMI CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 28
1987
1986
Sales
11,651,000
10,175,000
Net inc
1,297,000
1,455,000
Share earns
.14
.16
Shares outst
9,221,000
9,211,000
9mo sales
32,223,000
28,356,000
Net inc
3,937,000
b3,989,000
Share earns
.43
.48
Shares outst
9,228,000
8,319,000


CEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CEM CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,712,000
2,236,000
Net inc
377,000
225,000
Share earns
.17
.13
Yr sales
9,801,000
7,959,000
Net inc
1,252,000
885,000
Share earns
.56
.51


2 Markets Study Merger
LEAD: The New York Mercantile Exchange and the Commodity Exchange have commissioned a feasibility study with an eye toward merging the two markets, officials said yesterday.
The study is to be conducted by the management consulting firm Arthur D. Little Inc.
Rosemary McFadden, president of the New York Mercantile Exchange, said the committee would review the study within 90 days and pass on recommendations.


4 Die in Collision With Train
LEAD: A 14-year-old boy drove his family's pickup truck into the path of a freight train in a crash that left his mother and three of his siblings dead, the authorities said.
The driver, Adam Taylor, and his 1 1/2-year-old brother, Benedict, were injured in the accident Wednesday afternoon at the intersection of U.S.


KAY JEWELERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAY JEWELERS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
73,244,000
54,033,000
Net loss
492,000
b390,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
132,569,000
95,687,000
Net loss
3,939,000
775,000
b-Net income


SEALED POWER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEALED POWER CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
197,062,000
178,836,000
Net inc
11,300,000
9,100,000
Share earns
.92
.74
6mo sales
376,080,000
343,617,000
Net inc
19,900,000
15,700,000
Share earns
1.62
1.28


Poems of Protest: A Sampler
LEAD:  THE WINTER REPUBLIC  By Yang Song U  (Translated by Ko Won)  Is it now winter?
The middle of night?
With what, my friend,  Shall we comfort ourselves  This winter time when our fields are frozen?
Is our great land still livable?
Is the land still as beautiful as silks?
That's a lie; that is a lie.


TONGUE-CHEEK-COUTURE
LEAD: A new name was added Wednesday night to the 24 couture houses.
Patrick Kelly, an American whose whimsical ready-to-wear has been attracting attention here for the last few seasons, decided to make clothes for private clients.
So he sent out invitations, decorated with his signature buttons, to all of Paris, and all of


KINNARD INVESTMENTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KINNARD INVESTMENTS INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,679,495
5,724,310
Net inc
82,708
351,629
Share earns
.05
.22
6mo rev
10,601,782
10,450,040
Net inc
507,182
689,049
Share earns
.31
.43
Year-ago quarter and 6-month share earnings are adjusted for a 6-for-5 stock split in January 1987.


Mitsubishi C.D.'s
LEAD: The Mitsubishi Bank Ltd.'s New York branch is offering $50 million of 8 5/8 percent certificates of deposit due in 1990 at various prices through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The notes are rated Aaa by Moody's and AA+ by S.&amp;P.


ST PAUL COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ST PAUL COMPANIES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b100,995,000
c42,399,000
Share earns
2.10
.94
6mo net inc
b196,303,000
c65,002,000
Share earns
4.09
1.51
b-After capital gains of $11,492,000 for the quarter and $26,239,000 for the 6 months, and tax credits of $11,635,000 and $22,154,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JULY 31, 1987
LEAD:  Markets


Film: 'Treadmill,' From Hungary
LEAD: ''SINGING ON THE TREADMILL'' is a frolic with an edge - which may be why it was banned by the Hungarian authorities for a decade after it was made in 1974.
Gyula Gazdag, who directed and did some of the writing, has blended the froth of operetta and the grit of reality into a concoction that is creamy on the outside, tart on the inside.


GEODYNE RESOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEODYNE RESOURCES INC
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
833,887
674,901
Net loss
161,191
117,296


Arthur D. Little
LEAD: Arthur D. Little Inc. said the trustees of its major shareholder, the Memorial Drive Trust, had rejected the proposed purchase of the trust's stake in the company by the Plenum Publishing Corporation.
The trust is Little's employee retirement fund and it owns more than 70 percent of the company's stock.


NEVADA NATIONAL BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEVADA NATIONAL BANCORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
468,000
b4,161,000
Per share
.08
-
6mo net inc
637,000
b3,820,000
Per share
.05
-
b-Net loss


FIRST GEORGIA SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST GEORGIA SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
95,000
51,000
Per share
.11
.16
Shares outst
879,434
319,434
9mo net inc
196,297
131,185
Per share
.33
.41


A Long Way to Go
LEAD: To the Editor:


General Cinema's 61% Neiman Stake
LEAD: Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc. disclosed that the General Cinema Corporation will control more than 60 percent of Neiman-Marcus Group Inc., the new public company created in Carter Hawley's restructuring plan.
In a proxy statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Carter Hawley said that General Cinema plans to buy an additional 471,012 Carter


HON INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HON INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
131,603,000
117,681,000
Net inc
4,227,000
6,227,000
Share earns
.20
.31
6mo sales
269,110,000
248,597,000
Net inc
10,381,000
14,100,000
Share earns
.51
.69


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  FANTASY ON FILM


Luther Johnson
LEAD: Luther (Guitar Jr.) Johnson will play the blues tonight at Speakeasy, 107 Macdougal Street (598-9670).
Sets are at 8:30 and 11; admission is $7 with a two-drink minimum.


CURIOSITY ON HEALING IN FROGS LEADS TO A GAIN IN ANTIBIOTICS
LEAD: Curiosity about the way wounds in frogs healed quickly from surgical cuts has led a Federal researcher to the discovery of a new family of natural antibiotics that appear to kill a broad spectrum of microbes and may have uses in human therapy.


NEW PROCESS CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW PROCESS CO (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
88,586,819
93,906,526
Net inc
5,622,301
5,215,222
Share earns
.60
.56
6mo sales
174,329,586
178,421,595
Net inc
9,671,752
8,342,384
Share earns
1.03
.89


Market Place; Analysts See Utility Mergers
LEAD: THE Utah Power and Light Company, whose financial performance has been weak in the last year, is turning out to be a utility whose stock has been put into play.
The shares rose 75 cents, to $27.75, yesterday after climbing $2.50 on Wednesday.


U.S. Breaks Up Major Crack Ring in New York
LEAD: Federal authorities yesterday said they had smashed a drug ring that they described as the biggest distributor of crack in New York City.


Film: 'The Lost Boys'
LEAD: FILL a bathtub with holy water and garlic, load a plastic water pistol and aim at the vampires.
In ''The Lost Boys,'' Joel Schumacher's hip, comic twist on classic vampire stories, practical reactions to the unnatural seem normal.
These lost boys are not Peter-Pan innocents, but teen-agers who dress like rock stars, roar through town on motorcycles and happen to fly through the air and drink blood.


MASCO INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MASCO INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
356,700,000
151,940,000
Net inc
23,120,000
10,940,000
Share earns
.26
.15
6mo rev
709,870,000
326,420,000
Net inc
39,980,000
21,160,000
Share earns
.54
.29


Free Jazz on L.I.
LEAD: International Art of Jazz (515-632-6590) is sponsoring a free jazz concert with more than 50 performers that begins at 6 P.M. tomorrow in Heckscher State Park in Islip, L.I.
The performers include Jaki Byard on piano, Bill Hardman on trumpet, Sahib Shihab on saxophone and many others.
In case of rain, the concert will move indoors to East Islip High School at Redman Lane in East Islip.


Stage: 'Gentlemen of Verona'
LEAD: WHAT does love do to its victims?
According to the young William Shakespeare in ''Two Gentlemen of Verona,'' love leaves one ''metamorphosed,'' ''humbled,'' ''deformed.'' Lovers are driven to betray their friends, defy their parents, write bad poetry, and, in general, to behave with a great deal less decorum than the play's one indisputably chaste character, the sour dog Crab.


Soviet Charges U.S. Incites Tatars in Homeland Protests
LEAD: The Government accused American diplomats today of fomenting demonstrations by Crimean Tatars, and Soviet authorities moved on several fronts to suppress public demands by the Tatars for their lost homeland.


HARD TIMES HIT TEXAS' GIANT, THE KING RANCH
LEAD: The fabled King Ranch, long a symbol of the wealth, power and pride of Texas, is struggling through one of the most difficult eras in its 134-year history.


PATTEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PATTEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 28
1987
1986
Revenue
23,440,000
12,003,000
Net inc
2,781,000
1,393,000
Share earns
.17
.11
Shares outst
16,846,000
12,575,000


POP AND JAZZ GUIDE
LEAD: Henry Butler, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street (242-1785).
For his New York debut, the formidable young pianist from New Orleans has put together a quartet featuring Alvin Batiste, a clarinetist and one of that city's most accomplished and original instrumentalists.
Mr.
Batiste does it all, from keening sonics to the richly elegant bluesiness of Barney Bigard.


PENTAIR INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENTAIR INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
196,324,000
133,737,000
Net inc
2,946,000
3,779,000
Share earns
.26
.44
6mo sales
394,121,000
269,599,000
Net inc
6,605,000
7,422,000
Share earns
.67
.86


LOGICON INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOGICON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
47,860,000
50,242,000
Net inc
2,281,000
2,382,000
Share earns
.48
.50


FOOTE MINERAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOOTE MINERAL CO (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
19,705,000
24,503,000
Net inc
b151,000
c545,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sales
36,402,000
49,339,000
Net loss
b1,479,000
d577,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $68,000 for the quarter and $787,000 for the 6 months; a gain of $275,000 for the quarter and a loss of $225,000 for the 6 months both from disposition of discontinued operations.


NATIONAL ENVIROMENTAL CONROLS INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL ENVIROMENTAL CONROLS INC (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,602,188
1,509,319
Net inc
202,743
b202,488
Share earns
.06
-
9mo sales
4,826,935
4,481,225
Net inc
64,189
b134,642
Share earns
.02
-


POVERTY RATE DIPS AS THE MEDIAN FAMILY INCOME RISES
LEAD: The proportion of Americans living in poverty dropped a bit last year, to 13.6 percent, the lowest level since President Reagan took office, the Census Bureau reported today, while median family income grew faster than inflation.


SIGNIFICANCE SEEN IN A GUAM DISEASE
LEAD: An international research team has found strong evidence that a poisonous substance in a plant eaten widely on Guam during World War II was the cause of a mysterious and devastating nerve disease that appeared years afterward among natives of that Pacific island.


Sports People; Theismann Tells of Bets
LEAD: Joe Theismann admits that he lost more than $35,000 gambling in one season and more than $10,000 during a single training camp, but the former Washington Redskin quarterback said he never bet on games.
In his book ''Theismann,'' written with Dave Kindred, Theismann said that he lost money in card games with his teammates and drinking buddies and at the casinos in Las Vegas, Nev., and that his wife, Cathy Lee


Murderer of Girl Is Put to Death in Louisiana
LEAD: A mentally retarded man who said he was the victim of child abuse went to his death calmly in Louisiana's electric chair early today for raping, torturing and murdering an 11-year-old girl in 1981.


NEW LINE CINEMA reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW LINE CINEMA (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,773,000
7,920,000
Net inc
666,000
2,170,000
Share earns
.11
.42
Shares outst
6,190,000
5,211,000
6mo rev
26,485,000
15,136,000
Net inc
3,738,000
2,970,000
Share earns
.60
.57
Shares outst
6,190,000
5,177,000


MONTGOMERY STREET INCOME SECURITIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONTGOMERY STREET INCOME SECURITIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,868,331
3,968,431
Share earns
.49
.50
6mo net inc
7,808,865
7,948,011
Share earns
.98
.99


Volcker Sees Nations in Bank Pact
LEAD: In his last appearance before Congress as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Paul A. Volcker said today that an international banking agreement would likely be reached by the end of the year to provide uniform banking regulation among many industrialized countries.


To See Reagan: $20,000 a Month
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, the former White House chief of staff, told the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair today that he had been shocked to learn that a former personal assistant to President Reagan was paid $20,000 a month to arrange meetings between the President and wealthy contributors to the contras.


DOSKOCIL COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOSKOCIL COMPANIES (OTC)
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Sales
53,749,000
51,510,000
Net inc
b1,011,000
c2,755,000
Share earns
.17
.46
6mo sales
105,223,000
101,423,000
Net inc
b2,680,000
c4,532,000
Share earns
.45
.77


Project Interrupts Solitude Of Statue F.D.R. Spurned
LEAD: A mundane construction project - expanding the parking lot at the Franklin D. Roosevelt National Historic Site here - has uncovered a monument to the 32d President's quest for a representation of feminine beauty recalled from his younger days.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Lendl Forced to Rally: Top-seeded Ivan Lendl rallied to beat 18-year-old David Wheaton, 6-7, 6-3, 6-2, yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of the $232,000 D.C.
Tennis Classic in Washington.
Boris Becker and Jimmy Connors moved into the final eight with straight-set victories.
Becker, the second seed, rallied from a 3-4 first-set deficit to beat John Ross, 6-4, 6-2.


Sports People; Task Force on Tennis
LEAD: Concerned about what he called a current malaise in American tennis, Arthur Ashe announced yesterday that the United States Tennis Association's committee on player development, of which he is a member, has formed six ''task forces'' to improve the caliber of American players.


Sports of The Times; Carter's Right at Home
LEAD: Gary Carter, that old showoff, is up to his old tricks again.


Motorola Expects U.S. Indictment
LEAD: Motorola Inc. expects to be indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges of overpricing and improper billing in two Defense Department contracts for electronics equipment, company officials said.
Motorola's vice chairman and chief operating officer, William J. Weisz, said the company was considering a plea agreement on some of the charges.


INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH &amp; DEVELOPMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH &amp; DEVELOPMENT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,478,590
4,101,115
Net inc
281,763
96,127
Share earns
.10
.03
6mo rev
8,552,501
8,217,448
Net inc
434,123
190,268
Share earns
.16
.06


NETWORK SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NETWORK SYSTEMS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
30,551,000
26,115,000
Net inc
4,904,000
3,760,000
Share earns
.17
.13
6mo rev
50,841,000
50,090,000
Net inc
6,049,000
6,850,000
Share earns
.21
.24


Van Heusen Plans To Buy Back Stock
LEAD: The Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation, the diversified apparel company now a takeover target of Rosewood Financial Inc., said yesterday that it would soon begin a $145.6 million program to repurchase about 34 percent of its stock.


PRICE-STERN-SLOAN PUBLISHRS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRICE-STERN-SLOAN PUBLISHRS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,673,000
5,246,000
Net loss
378,000
151,000
6mo rev
11,606,000
11,011,000
Net loss
349,000
134,000
The net for the year-ago quarter includes a net gain of $2.5 million from the sale of certain timberlands, a net gain of $5.8 million from the exercise of an overallotment option by the Underwriters of American Capital Management &amp; Research Inc.


An 'F' for School Bureaucrats
LEAD: It sounded like a sensible and practical idea: a summer program of remedial classes and part-time work for 3,500 youngsters.
They were bound for New York City high schools this fall and considered ''at risk'' of dropping out.
But the Board of Education reneged on the promise of jobs for all but several hundred; hundreds more left the program - a new class of summer dropouts.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Sibling Solidarity
LEAD: A Long Island woman belatedly showing up to register her household for the community pool found herself looking at an application form that wanted to know who else would be swimming.
Under ''family,'' she crossed off ''husband'' and ''wife'' -she neither is one nor has one - and wrote in ''sisters.


Opera: 'Troades' Debut
LEAD: If Aribert Riemann's ''Troades'' does not go on to find a place in the international repertory, it will be no fault of the Bavarian State Opera or the Jean-Pierre Ponnelle production that introduced the work here as part of the Munich Opera Festival.
No effort or expense was spared, evidently, to shine the best light on this difficult new work, which re-tells in one two-hour act of unrelieved agony and tension the Homeric tale of the Trojan women whom the victorious Greeks took as concubines after capturing and burning


INTERNATIONAL MINERALS &amp; CHEMICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL MINERALS &amp; CHEMICAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
460,500,000
443,100,000
Net loss
b400,000
d214,700,000
Yr sales
1,637,500,000
1,177,700,000
Net inc
b21,100,000
cd217,800,000
Share earns
.31
-


TUCSON ELECTRIC POWER COMPANY INC reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TUCSON ELECTRIC POWER COMPANY INC (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
428,309,000
451,607,000
Net inc
b130,783,000
b128,454,000
Share earns
5.22
5.06
b-Includes a non-recurring credit of $9,332,000 and $14,150,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


MUNFORD INC reports earnings for Qtr to July 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MUNFORD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to July 2
1987
1986
Revenue
108,600,000
114,450,000
Net loss
1,122,000
b412,000
Share earns
-
.11
6mo rev
211,110,000
224,686,000
Net loss
1,882,000
b343,000
Share earns
-
.09


Blacks Get a Voting Majority On the City Council in Selma
LEAD: Twenty-two years after the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. led a historic voting rights march in Selma, a veteran of the civil rights movement has been sworn in to give the City Council its first black voting majority.


ALLIED PRODUCTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIED PRODUCTS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
129,241,000
116,581,000
Net inc
1,957,000
5,422,000
Share earns
.33
1.20
6mo sales
255,900,000
200,796,000
Net inc
6,852,000
8,984,000
Share earns
1.24
2.14


FRAMINGHAM SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRAMINGHAM SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,987,000
1,506,000
Per share
.49
-
6mo net inc
3,844,000
2,750,000
Per share
.94
-
There are no per share earnings for the year-ago periods because the bank converted to stock form of ownership in October 1986.


John B. Bremner, Journalism Teacher, Is Dead
LEAD: John B. Bremner, a professor of journalism at the University of Kansas and an expert on writing consulted by newspapers across the country, died yesterday of cancer at his home in Ponce Inlet, Fla.
He was 66 years old.


MURPHY OIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MURPHY OIL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
368,387,000
324,349,000
Net inc
b7,114,000
2,628,000
Share earns
.21
.08
6mo rev
701,856,000
742,436,000
Net inc
10,211,000
13,503,000
Share earns
.30
.40


A Second Stake In Del E. Webb
LEAD: Hecco Ventures, an investment partnership here, said today that it owns a 9.1 percent stake in the Del E. Webb Corporation and that it might seek control of the Phoenix-based gaming and real estate concern.


Leading Indicators Had 0.8% Rise in June
LEAD: The Government's index of leading indicators, a widely followed economic forecasting tool, climbed in June for the fifth straight month, the Commerce Department reported today.


U.N.'s Panel on War Crimes Will Weigh Opening Its Files
LEAD: The 17 former members of the United Nations War Crimes Commission will meet in mid-September with Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to consider opening the group's files on war criminals to the public, a top United Nations official said today.


PORTEC INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PORTEC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
31,141,000
32,306,000
Net loss
954,000
b102,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo sales
56,293,000
63,271,000
Net loss
3,891,000
b3,795,000
Share earns
-
1.39
b-Net income and 6 months includes a gain of $2,772,000 from pension plan termination.


McDonnell Net Is Up 19.6%
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation, helped by strong gains from its space and missile systems operations, said yesterday that second-quarter earnings rose 19.6 percent on a 9.7 percent increase in revenues.


Byrd Says Reagan Tries to Deflect Attention From a 'Debacle'
LEAD: The Senate Democratic leader accused President Reagan today of seeking to deflect public attention from the ''great national debacle'' over the Iran-contra affair by adopting a confrontational strategy intended to make Congress the ''fall guy.''


Legendary Oilman Has a New Venture
LEAD: Robert O. Anderson spent two decades building ARCO into the nation's sixth-largest oil company, and now, less than two years after retiring, he plans to take the top job at yet another oil company.


Networks Take Turns In Covering Hearings
LEAD: The Congressional hearings on the Iran-contra affair will be televised live beginning at 9 A.M. on the NBC television network under the network rotation system.
The hearings will also be televised on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on some local affiliates of PBS, the Public Broadcasting Service, including Channel 13 in New York.


Houston Person
LEAD: Houston Person, an alto saxophonist, and Etta Jones, a singer, will lead their group tonight through Sunday at the West End Cafe, 2911 Broadway, at 114th Street (666-8750).
Sets begin at 9, 10:30 P.M., midnight and 1:30 A.M.; there is no fourth set on Sunday.
There is a $6 cover and a $7.50 minimum tonight and tomorrow, a $5 cover and a $7.50 minimum on Sunday.


At the Movies
LEAD:  A Bond Transaction


Cherkassky and Horne
LEAD: Shura Cherkassky will give a piano recital of works by Bach-Busoni, Beethoven and Chopin, tonight at 9 in the Spanish Courtyard at the Caramoor Festival in Katonah, N.Y.
Tomorrow evening at 8:30 in Caramoor's Venetian Theater, Marilyn Horne will sing works by Vivaldi, Beethoven, Schubert, Debussy and Copland; Martin Katz will be her accompanist.


MINUTES WITH KEMP WITHOUT KEMP
LEAD: A dozen people gathered in the home of Blanche and Roger Sirois, sipping coffee and soft drinks and examining a new campaign product.


INSITUFORM SOUTHEAST reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSITUFORM SOUTHEAST
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,835,690
2,152,655
Net inc
266,566
257,857
Share earns
.07
.08
Shares outst
3,915,000
3,075,000
Share earnings and shares outstanding are fully diluted.


Rent-A-Center's Chief Happy With Takeover
LEAD: Although many chief executives dread the notion of their companies being taken over, the acquisition this week of Rent-A-Center Inc. by Thorn EMI, a British consumer products company, seems to have delighted Thomas R. Devlin.


A Strategy for Handling Nicaragua
LEAD: President Reagan will ask Congress this fall for $100 million or more to carry on the contra war in Nicaragua against the Sandinista regime.
This raises a central question: Do United States interests require the removal of that regime from power?


Currency Options Shift
LEAD: In an unusual move, the Chicago Board Options Exchange said today that it was turning over its currency options contracts to the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, already one of the nation's leading currency options exchanges.
Currency options, which give the owner the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell a fixed amount of foreign currencies at a set price, began trading on the Chicago Board in September 1985 but never captured a significant portion of the currency options market.


INFOTRON SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INFOTRON SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,529,000
21,664,000
Net inc
168,000
891,000
Share earns
.03
.17
6mo rev
37,069,000
40,752,000
Net loss
2,917,000
b1,238,000
Share earns
-
.24


Queens Jury Is Split on Murder of a Detective
LEAD: After nine days of deliberations, a Queens jury yesterday declared itself ''hopelessly deadlocked'' on charges that three reputed Mafia figures shot a New York City police detective to death on a Queens street.


Festival Latino Puts an Accent On Global Themes
LEAD: IT'S not Christmas yet, but a pinata filled with rich artistic gifts is about to burst on this city.
The 11th Festival Latino in New York - the biggest Latin American cultural event in the United States and one of the most important showcases anywhere for Latin talent - begins tomorrow.
Fifty thousand people attended the festival's events last year, and at least as many are expected this time.


FOREST LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOREST LABORATORIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
19,403,000
13,495,000
Net inc
3,679,000
2,642,000
Share earns
.23
.17


Maxus Charge
LEAD: The Maxus Energy Corporation, the exploration and production company that resulted from the split of the Diamond Shamrock Corporation this year, said it had taken a $380 million non-cash charge in its second quarter on the book value of its non-oil and gas assets.
The company said it took the charge against geothermal assets and an Alaskan coal project and related technology.


OGILVY GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OGILVY GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
181,045,000
137,931,000
Net inc
b8,140,000
6,439,000
Share earns
.57
.45
6mo rev
337,298,000
258,869,000
Net inc
9,277,000
c9,675,000
Share earns
.65
.68


CHIPS &amp; TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHIPS &amp; TECHNOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,569,000
7,143,000
Net inc
3,967,000
b1,353,000
Share earns
.30
.12
Shares outst
13,439,000
11,077,000
Yr sales
80,236,000
12,721,000
Net inc
12,904,000
b1,496,000
Share earns
1.01
.14
Shares outst
12,729,000
11,077,000


A Portion of L.I. Sound Has No Oxygen or Fish
LEAD: Earlier this week, a group of scientists and environmental officials trolled Long Island Sound and made a rare, if not unprecedented, discovery off Hempstead Harbor: water with no oxygen, and no fish.


MILTON ROY CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MILTON ROY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,436,000
30,713,000
Net inc
821,000
487,000
Share earns
.20
.12
6mo sales
54,478,000
59,160,000
Net inc
1,590,000
763,000
Share earns
.38
.19


KINARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KINARK CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,088,000
5,989,000
Net inc
234,000
b495,000
Share earns
.07
-
6mo sales
13,326,00
11,488,000
Net inc
343,000
b801,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss and includes losses from discontinued operations of $345,000 and $382,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.25
8.25
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.73
6.70
6.35
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.07
5.86
5.75
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.14
6.06
5.76
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.42
8.39
7.16
30-YR.


BDM INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BDM INTERNATIONAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
80,278,000
79,815,000
Net inc
5,139,000
3,490,000
Share earns
.43
.31
6mo rev
160,321,000
150,478,000
Net inc
9,703,000
6,351,000
Share earns
.82
.59
Shares outst
11,839,000
10,754,000


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''I don't mind spears in the breast.
It's knives in the back that concern me.''  - Donald T. Regan.  [ A9:2. ]


Barclays Loss Due to Loans
LEAD: Barclays P.L.C., one of Britain's four biggest banks, today reported a loss for the first half of this year after setting aside $:570 million ($912 million) for doubtful third world loans.


SCRIPPS HOWARD BROADCASTNG reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCRIPPS HOWARD BROADCASTNG (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
61,487,000
55,624,000
Net inc
b7,059,000
4,425,000
Share earns
.68
.43
6mo rev
111,375,000
100,043,000
Net inc
b28,898,000
3,897,000
Share earns
2.80
.38


Washington Talk: Issues With a Tenacious Hold; The Politics of Hope on Americans Missing in Vietnam
LEAD: The ghosts of Vietnam haunt Senator John McCain and Colleen C. Shine.
And they are not alone.  ''There is no way, absolutely no way, that we'll ever close the chapter on that unhappy part of America's history, the Vietnam War, unless we have a full accounting for those who are still listed as missing in action,'' said Senator McCain, a leader in Congress on the issue.


Art: Celadon in 'Ice and Green Clouds'
LEAD: THE title ''Ice and Green Clouds: Traditions of Chinese Celadon'' accurately reflects the two sides of an unusual ceramic exhibition.
On the one hand, some of the 87 examples of Chinese green-glazed ware at the Asia Society have a touch of poetry, a metaphorical charge that suggests not only ice and green clouds, but also jade, stained glass and repositories in which seeds and souls are invited to settle.


KEMPER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEMPER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b67,394,000
c48,450,000
Share earns
1.09
.80
6mo net inc
b148,706,000
c85,687,000
Share earns
2.40
1.13
b-Includes investment gains of $13,724,000 and $39,266,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article yesterday about plans of ''American Playhouse'' to stage new dramatic works before presenting them on television misstated the occasion for presenting a production of Eugene O'Neill's ''Strange Interlude'' next season.
It is to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the playwright's birth.


ARTEL COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARTEL COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,315,051
1,022,425
Net loss
260,227
469,271
6mo sales
2,117,051
2,090,832
Net loss
b1,188,148
811,373
b-Includes a writedown of $267,000 of excess and obsolete inventory.


'THE SPIRIT,' ON ABC, BASED ON COMIC BOOK
LEAD: WE haven't had a comic-book character on television for a while.
Batman and Robin long ago went the way of syndication, while Superman flew off years ago.
Comes now, however, the Spirit, who is the crime-fighter in a domino mask.
Will Eisner's comic-book creation socks thugs in a 90-minute movie, ''The Spirit,'' on A


Eating Outside in New York Gains, Despite Noise, Soot and Panhandlers
LEAD: The al fresco dining area at Caffe Sorrento in the Little Italy section of Manhattan.
A city agency said it has issued 150 permits for sidewalk cafes, about 10 percent more than last year.
Restaurant owners say they are trying to please their customers, but the cafes present constant problems.
Page B10.


Peru Clarifies Banking Policy
LEAD: The Government will not expropriate foreign bank branches in Lima as part of its plan to nationalize Peru's private banks, the Prime Minister, Guillermo Larco Cox, said today.


Brush Fire Burns 6,000 Acres on California-Nevada Border
LEAD: Firefighters in Nevada near Markleeville, Calif., getting ready to do battle with a blaze shortly after it started in the Sierra Nevada.
The fire destroyed at least 27 homes nearby in Woodfords, Calif., and by yesterday afternoon some 1,500 people were fighting it.
No serious injuries have been reported.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday with an article about the new play ''Talk Radio'' incorrectly described the situation shown in the picture.
The picture did not show a scene from the play, but rather actors offstage telephoning to an actor onstage.
Also, the actress at the right was misidentified.
She is Susan Gabriel.


BETZ LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BETZ LABORATORIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
97,497,935
87,377,024
Net inc
10,130,141
9,229,019
Share earns
.64
.58
6mo sales
186,067,535
171,162,430
Net inc
19,833,244
18,713,732
Share earns
1.26
1.18


Bork Is No Centrist Disguised as a Conservative
LEAD: To the Editor:


Agency Approves Plan For Holocaust Museum
LEAD: The National Capital Planning Commission today approved the general design for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, which will honor millions of victims of Nazism.


Benazir Bhutto to Marry, in a Pact by 2 Families
LEAD: Benazir Bhutto, the Pakistani opposition leader, said today that she had agreed to an arranged marriage to a wealthy businessman selected by her mother and introduced to Miss Bhutto only five days ago.


NWA INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NWA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,315,487,000
702,472,000
Net inc
b50,647,000
c23,894,000
Share earns
1.73
.99
Shares outst
30,199,000
26,901,000
6mo rev
2,484,702,000
1,340,911,000
Net inc
b15,654,000
c7,540,000
Share earns
.59
.34
Shares outst
26,312,000
21,789,000


ANTHONY INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANTHONY INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
65,138,000
57,968,000
Net inc
1,496,000
b1,450,000
Share earns
.34
.33
6mo sales
123,923,000
109,921,000
Net inc
2,660,000
b2,637,000
Share earns
.60
.60


Bridge: Emma Jean Hawes Was Star With Grace and Sharp Wits
LEAD: The international bridge scene lost its First Lady on Tuesday when Emma Jean Hawes, who was born in Kentucky, died at her home in Fort Worth at the age of 75.


PLM COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLM COMPANIES (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,400,000
10,400,000
Net inc
1,027,000
495,000
Share earns
.25
.13
6mo rev
34,100,000
18,100,000
Net inc
1,626,000
527,000
Share earns
.40
.24


Washington Talk: Briefing; Borge Heard From
LEAD: Victor Borge, the Danish-American pianist-comedian, first appeared in Washington in 1943 and has been making annual appearances practically ever since, in recent years at the Kennedy Center.
So yesterday the Danish Ambassador, Eigil Jorgensen, gave what has become practically the annual Victor Borge luncheon at the Danish


CITIZENS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
121,171
163,914
Per share
.21
.29
6mo net inc
311,655
231,332
Per share
.59
.45


In Struggle Of Primates, A Man Wins
LEAD: It was a battle, but man triumphed over monkey yesterday at Kennedy International Airport.


DeVEREN BOOKWALTER
LEAD: DeVeren Bookwalter, the actor and director, died of stomach cancer July 23 at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 47 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Needling the Lawyer
LEAD: At the Congressional hearing on the Iran-contra affair the other day, Representative Jim Courter needled the chief Senate counsel, Arthur Liman, who has questioned some Government officials sharply.


Almost-a-Million Stakes
LEAD: Although the four major harness-racing stakes tonight at the Meadowlands - three for 2-year-olds and one for 3-year-olds - are billed as the Million Dollar Babies, none is worth a million.


INTERNATIONAL MICROELECRONIC PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL MICROELECRONIC PRODUCTS
Qtr to June 28
1987
1986
Revenue
12,175,000
7,479,000
Net inc
1,370,000
53,200
The company went public in June.


CONSOLIDATED-BATHURST INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED-BATHURST INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
573,600,000
515,200,000
Net inc
43,300,000
24,900,000
Share earns
.38
.21
6mo sales
1,110,000,000
968,900,000
Net inc
76,300,000
b7,800,000
Share earns
.67
-


Voice of Dissent in South Korea Speaks in Verse
LEAD: Some angry South Korean dissidents battle the Government with bricks and gasoline bombs; others hurl verse.


A Baker's Dozen Of New York City's Urban Masterpieces A BAKER'S DOZEN OF NEW YORK CITY'S URBAN MASTERPIECES; 13 Gems
LEAD: SO persistent is the onrush of new construction in New York that the first temptation for the architecture buff is to track down the latest things, be they good or bad: the office towers and apartment blocks of Battery Park City, for example, or the glitzy new office buildings of the East 50's.
But as the new buildings often physically overwhelm the old, a fixation on the most au courant architecture can overshadow the classic structures of the city, those works of architecture that, though they be neither the biggest nor the newest, remain the greatest, the works that transform our vision


INTERSTATE BAKERIES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to May 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERSTATE BAKERIES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to May 30
1987
1986
Sales
181,157,000
167,731,000
Net inc
4,689,000
b5,873,000
Share earns
.61
.78
Yr sales
749,337,000
708,483,000
Net inc
13,947,000
b15,332,000
Share earns
1.81
2.05


UNIVERSAL FOODS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSAL FOODS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
176,091,000
157,739,000
Net inc
5,549,000
4,688,000
Share earns
.47
.43
9mo rev
528,593,000
429,418,000
Net inc
17,596,000
b9,417,000
Share earns
1.49
.89


ON THE ROAD TO A CABBY'S LICENSE, NO SHORT CUTS
LEAD: The life of the London taxi driver has long been an arcane process, beginning with its two-year memorization of ''the Knowledge'' - the city's 600-square-mile anatomy - and the dozens of examinations that wash out seven of eight hopefuls before they ever get to ask a paying customer, ''Where to, Guv'nor?


ARCHIVE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARCHIVE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 26
1987
1986
Sales
24,364,000
19,307,000
Net inc
2,007,000
430,000
Share earns
.18
.04
Shares outst
11,224,000
11,095,000
9mo sales
63,664,000
60,617,000
Net inc
3,799,000
2,868,000
Share earns
.35
.26
Shares outst
10,973,000
11,000,000


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A headline on a dance review yesterday misrepresented the program that was being reviewed.
The dance program was a showcase by the School of American Ballet, the school of the New York City Ballet.


DOUGLAS &amp; LOMASON CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOUGLAS &amp; LOMASON CO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
75,648,312
74,151,206
Net inc
1,723,750
1,597,218
Share earns
.88
.83
6mo sales
151,198,849
147,084,852
Net inc
3,323,080
2,933,569
Share earns
1.71
1.53


Washington Talk: Single-Issue Lobbying; Caustic Debate on Acid Rain Letter
LEAD: The letterhead says the appeal is from ''Citizens for Sensible Control of Acid Rain.''


Gooden Helps Mets Sweep, 5-3
LEAD: The Mets, who seemed reasonably dead when the week started, showed signs of a remarkable revival tonight when they completed a three-game sweep of the St.
Louis Cardinals, sent them to their seventh straight defeat and closed to 5 1/2 games out of first place.


Sports People; Patriotic Bonus
LEAD: Fred Lebow, the director of the New York City Marathon, announced yesterday that any American citizen who wins the men's or women's competition will get an extra $10,000 and that there will be an extra $5,000 for an American finishing second or third in either division.
The incentives are being offered because no American has won the race since Alberto


THE TESTIMONY: 'COULDN'T SEEM TO GET THEIR ACT TOGETHER
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the testimony of Donald T. Regan, the former White House chief of staff, before the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair, as recorded by The New York Times:


Sports People; Surgery for Gedman
LEAD: Rich Gedman, the Boston Red Sox catcher, has been placed on the 21-day disabled list, and will undergo surgery Monday for torn ligaments in his left thumb.
He could be lost for the remainder of the season, and the Red Sox have called up John Marzano from the Pawtucket Red Sox.
Gedman hurt his thumb Monday night in a tag play on Jesse Barfield at home plate in Toronto.


Band's Quest For Stardom
LEAD: By 7:45 P.M.
Madison Square Garden was filling with young, excited rock-and-rollers.
A good omen, thought Steve Mountain, manager of the opening act, the Hooters, as he looked at the 18,500 seats.


ESSELTE BUSINESS SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESSELTE BUSINESS SYSTEMS (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
299,267,000
235,826,000
Net inc
b12,789,000
c10,065,000
Share earns
.62
.49
6mo sales
590,077,000
459,842,000
Net inc
b27,526,000
c22,652,000
Share earns
1.34
1.11


Washington Talk: Briefing; Helms Aides Join Kemp
LEAD: Two of Senator Jesse Helms's top political operatives are joining Representative Jack F. Kemp in his drive for the Republican Presidential nomination.
Mr.
Helms, a North Carolinian who is a leader in the conservative wing of the party, has said he will not back anyone in the primaries, but his key people would be unlikely to join Mr.


Iranians Take a Tour of the West Wing
LEAD: Donald T. Regan was asked about how representatives of Iran were able to gain access to the White House.


BANKERS FIRST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKERS FIRST CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b14,111,000
c1,926,000
Per share
-
.44
6mo net loss
b11,746,000
c3,358,000
Per share
-
.77
b-Includes provisions for possible loan losses of $16,477,000 for the quarter and $17,310,000 for the 6 months.


ULTRA BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ULTRA BANCORPORATION
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,006,000
3,554,000
Per share
.75
.67
6mo net inc
8,019,000
7,068,000
Per share
1.66
1.47
The bank did not provide primary per share earnings for the quarters; they show fully diluted figures.


LOMAS &amp; NETTLETON FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOMAS &amp; NETTLETON FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
199,396,000
109,984,000
Net inc
18,526,000
16,062,000
Share earns
.58
.54
Shares outst
31,950,000
29,380,000
Yr rev
624,988,000
376,424,000
Net inc
45,448,000
54,463,000
Share earns
1.49
2.19
Shares outst
30,529,000
24,801,000


FLUKE, JOHN MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLUKE, JOHN MANUFACTURING CO (AMEX)
Qtr to June 26
1987
1986
Sales
51,033,000
52,100,000
Net inc
2,555,000
2,872,000
Share earns
.32
.32
Shares outst
8,056,296
8,899,826
9mo sales
154,600,000
156,619,000
Net inc
7,792,000
9,274,000
Share earns
.94
1.05
Shares outst
8,312,419
8,861,222


Panhandlers' Numbers Seem to Rise
LEAD: Kenneth Jackson, 48 years old, sat on a plastic milk crate in front of the Chemical Bank at Broadway and 81st Street with his hand out.
The shade was yielding to sun, and he had yet to collect enough for a decent meal.


NATIONAL MEDICAL ENTERRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL MEDICAL ENTERRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
768,405,000
695,697,000
Net loss
b35,882,000
c27,560,000
Yr rev
2,880,806,000
2,577,147,000
Net inc
b63,493,000
c84,995,000
Share earns
.83
1.08
Shares outst
76,366,000
78,504,000


HOUSE APPROVES LIABILITY LIMIT FOR ATOM PLANTS
LEAD: The House of Representatives today approved a 10-year extension of the law that sets a limit on the liability of nuclear reactor operators in case of accident.


BRITAIN'S TOP COURT BANS SPY'S MEMOIRS IN ALL PRESS REPORTS
LEAD: Britain's highest court, backing the Government in a confrontation with the press, barred newspapers today from reporting the memoirs of a retired intelligence agent even though his book is available on the streets of London, fresh from its American publisher.


Dollar Eases in U.S.; Gold Prices Advance
LEAD: The dollar turned slightly lower yesterday in domestic trading, as dealers shrugged off an encouraging report on the economy.


John, 44, Sends Royals Into Retirement
LEAD: If things had worked out differently, Tommy John would not have won his 10th game last night for the Yankees.
He would have been somewhere in Chapel Hill, N.C., his career having turned from pitcher to pitching coach for the University of North Carolina baseball team.


NCA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NCA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,236,000
5,424,000
Net inc
22,000
144,000
Share earns
.01
.05
6mo rev
13,710,000
9,448,000
Net inc
b74,000
c1,293,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Includes an extraordinary tax benefit equal to 1 cent a share.


LYDALL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LYDALL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
33,763,000
28,487,000
Net inc
938,000
763,000
Share earns
.34
.27
6mo sales
66,336,000
55,591,000
Net inc
1,532,000
1,205,000
Share earns
.54
.41


JOHN A. MAYER
LEAD: John A. Mayer, former chairman of the board and chief executive officer of the Mellon Bank Corporation, died of a cerebral hemorrhage Wednesday at Latrobe Area Hospital in Latrobe , Pa.
He was 77 years old and lived in Ligonier, Pa.


AMERICA WEST AIRLINES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICA WEST AIRLINES (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
129,976,000
75,017,000
Net loss
8,939,000
716,000
6mo rev
248,285,000
148,466,000
Net loss
14,916,000
2,308,000


The Witness File
LEAD:  Name: Donald T. Regan  Age: 68  Position: Mr.
Regan was Secretary of the Treasury under President Reagan for four years beginning in 1981, then spent two years as chief of staff, resigning in February.
Previously with Merrill


INSIDE
LEAD:  Copter Crashes in Gulf  An American helicopter in the force escorting Kuwaiti oil tankers crashed in the Persian Gulf, killing one man and leaving three missing.
Page A3.  39 Die in Mexico Air Crash  At least 39 peolple were killed when a cargo plane crashed into a highway and struck a restaurnt on the outskirts of Mexico City.


TRANSIT WORKERS' CHIEF TO SIT ON MTA BOARD
LEAD: The president of Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union, Sonny Hall, will serve as a temporary observer on the board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority until Governor Cuomo appoints a permanent labor representative to the board.


Brief by Feminists Opposes Surrogate Parenthood
LEAD: A group of well-known feminists joined today in filing an amicus brief in the Baby M case, arguing that the commercialization of surrogate parenthood violates the Constitution and the dignity of women.


JACOBS ENGINEERING GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACOBS ENGINEERING GROUP INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
84,609,000
50,295,000
Net inc
721,000
568,000
Share earns
.17
.13
9mo rev
234,354,000
151,372,000
Net inc
1,727,000
1,149,000
Share earns
.40
.26


DOMTAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOMTAR INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
657,000,000
574,000,000
Net inc
44,000,000
32,000,000
Share earns
.47
.35
6mo sales
1,260,000,000
1,140,000,000
Net inc
88,000,000
b68,000,000
Share earns
.95
.77


ON CHOOSING THE PEOPLE
LEAD: A former European leader who was in a position to know about nuclear decision-making asked the other day about Rear Adm.
John Poindexter's role in the nuclear chain of command when he was in the White House.


Adelman Quits as Head Of Arms Control Group
LEAD: Kenneth L. Adelman announced today that he would leave his post as director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency later this year, or after a possible summit meeting between President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader.


MIDDLEBY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDDLEBY CORP
Qtr to July 4
1987
1986
Sales
8,581,000
6,919,000
Net inc
b730,000
133,000
Share earns
.12
.03
6mo sales
15,007,000
11,743,000
Net inc
b951,000
c80,000
Share earns
.16
-
b-After tax credits of $14,000 for the quarter and $155,000 for the 6 months.


POLK AUDIO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POLK AUDIO (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,167,389
3,220,833
Net inc
304,697
210,411
Share earns
.12
.10
Shares outst
2,598,346
2,061,679


IPL SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IPL SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,150,000
564,000
Net inc
383,000
207,000
Share earns
.08
.04
6mo rev
2,242,000
1,369,000
Net inc
801,000
509,000
Share earns
.16
.10


MILLIPORE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MILLIPORE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
129,608,000
109,461,000
Net inc
11,355,000
9,132,000
Share earns
.40
.33
6mo sales
246,165,000
209,508,000
Net inc
21,167,000
17,355,000
Share earns
.75
.63


Bill Auction Is Well Received
LEAD: The Treasury's long-delayed auction of new three-month and six-month bills elicited good investor demand yesterday, spurred by the availability of interest rates well above 6 percent.


USF&amp;G CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USF&amp;G CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b101,541,000
c80,690,000
Share earns
1.37
1.25
Shares outst
70,854,122
64,549,183
6mo net inc
b105,166,000
c224,245,000
Share earns
1.39
3.48
Shares outst
69,849,300
64,450,345


Maryland Democrats Set Back
LEAD: The Maryland Democratic Party's plan for electing delegates to the Democratic National Convention has been held unconstitutional in a ruling that could affect the party in up to seven other states, including New York and New Jersey.


'Stranger Than Fiction'
LEAD: ''It may seem strange to you, it may strike you as truth being stranger than fiction, but I take offense at the idea that it's hard to accept because what I have told you is the absolute truth of what happened.'' Thus did Attorney General Edwin Meese defend his early inquiry into the Iran-contra affair.


Campaign Sleaze and Mr. Metzenbaum
LEAD: Republican Senate aides who charged Senator Howard Metzenbaum with having ''Communist sympathies'' deserve to be dismissed.
And the senators responsible for supervising them might take a hard look at how they may have contributed to this sleaze.


INTEGRATED COMPUTER GRAPHICS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTEGRATED COMPUTER GRAPHICS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,149,145
699,491
Net inc
b311,898
b93,092
Share earns
.06
.03
Shares outst
5,535,576
3,453,383
b-Includes tax credits of $40,000 for the latest quater and $43,000 for the year-earlier period.


AUCTIONS
LEAD: WINE collectibles - corkscrews, coasters, funnels, tasters, decanting devices and cellarets - will be auctioned Oct. 27 at Christie's in the first major wine-accessories sale held in New York in memory.
According to the Christie's specialist in charge of the auction, Christopher Hartop, 800 items will be offered in 250 lots, the largest and most comprehensive selection of such material ever auctioned in the United States.


Japanese Leaders Seek Stiffer Export Penalties
LEAD: Japan's Government has agreed on legislation to toughen penalties for illegal exports of militarily sensitive technology to Communist bloc countries, although approval by the parliament is uncertain.


SOUTHERN CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,767,479,000
1,667,748,000
Net inc
205,069,000
188,726,000
Share earns
.71
.68
Shares outst
287,802,369
277,381,106
6mo rev
3,307,945,000
3,253,340,000
Net inc
396,201,000
384,465,000
Share earns
1.38
1.39
Shares outst
286,733,892
276,154,664


REAGAN TO HAVE SURGERY ON NOSE FOR SKIN CANCER
LEAD: A scraping of skin that was removed from the tip of President Reagan's nose on Wednesday was found to be cancerous under microscopic examination, the White House announced today.


PIONEER FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIONEER FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,151,108
1,134,309
Per share
.28
.35
9mo net inc
4,729,343
4,457,459
Per share
1.23
1.39


SOUTHSTATE BANK FOR SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHSTATE BANK FOR SAVINGS
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
457,000
b805,000
6mo net inc
705,000
460,000
b-Net loss  The bank went public in April.


Ingram, First Giant Pick, Is Last to Sign
LEAD: Mark Ingram, the Giants' first-round draft choice, joined the Super Bowl champions today, four days late, $1.285 million richer and one piece of luggage poorer.


EPSILON DATA MANAGEMENT reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EPSILON DATA MANAGEMENT (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,604,000
14,896,000
Net loss
132,000
1,108,000
Yr rev
47,210,000
53,219,000
Net inc
189,000
b1,251,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


Advertising; Dispelling Doubts for Post Cereal
LEAD: PARENTS with TV-viewing youngsters should prepare for a flood of ''indubitably.''


DWG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DWG CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Revenue
286,681,000
282,096,000
Net inc
b14,943,000
c1,912,000
Share earns
.68
-
Yr rev
1,153,434,000
1,105,283,000
Net inc
b18,240,000
c8,611,000
Share earns
.86
-


Tito Puente's Ever-Fresh Old Songs
LEAD: TITO PUENTE has been performing his composition ''Oye Como Va,'' a call-and-response tune steeped in Afro-Cuban tradition, for the last 30 years.
The tune itself hasn't changed, but its surroundings have, in ways the composer could hardly have foreseen.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: DIVERTIMENTO 1889.
By Guido Morselli.
Translated from the Italian with an Introduction by Hugh Shankland. 145 pages.
E.
P.
Dutton. $15.95.


OWENS &amp; MINOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OWENS &amp; MINOR INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
140,869,000
111,220,000
Net inc
1,350,000
869,000
Share earns
.33
.22
6mo sales
273,053,000
217,258,000
Net inc
2,708,000
1,975,000
Share earns
.67
.50


New NATO Chief's Plan on Arms
LEAD: NATO's new military commander said today that the alliance's nuclear and conventional arsenal would need buttressing if the United States and the Soviet Union agreed to eliminate their short- and medium-range missiles.


FOR WEINBERGER, A TALE OF CONFLICT
LEAD: Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger's involvement in the Iran-contra affair is a tale of conflict between his stated conviction that selling arms to Iran was folly, and his submission to Presidential authority, no matter how misguided he believed it to be.


FIRST LIBERTY FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST LIBERTY FINANCIAL
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,018,000
1,845,000
Per share
1.03
1.03
Shares outst
1,961,251
1,791,856
9mo net inc
6,518,000
4,867,000
Per share
3.34
2.75
Shares outst
1,951,570
1,765,664


'L.A. Law' Series Gains 20 Emmy Nominations
LEAD: NBC's ''L.A.
Law'' dominated the Emmy nominations today, closely followed by the same network's ''Golden Girls'' and ABC's ''Moonlighting.''


He Took Wider View
LEAD: To the Editor:


Art: Red Grooms Show At Whitney Museum
LEAD: THE exhibition of Red Grooms's work at the Whitney Museum of American Art seems at first like too much to handle: too much to look at and too much to listen to, as well.
There are among this exhibition's several environmental ''sculpto-pictoramas'' no less than four separate soundtracks.
Blaring in tandem, they enhance the carnival spectacle of the work itself.


MSI DATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MSI DATA CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Revenue
20,493,000
15,442,000
Net inc
805,000
191,000
Share earns
.30
.07


THE EVENING HOURS
LEAD: ''WE'RE two gents from Verona,'' George Delacorte said, wrapping an arm around Joseph Papp's shoulder. ''I've never seen Verona, never hope to see it, but I understand Joe here has a little play about it.''


3 Prison Esapees Captured
LEAD: Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation have recaptured the last three of seven prisoners who escaped from the state penitentiary on the Fourth of July. the authorities said today.
The three, David B. Gallegos Jr., 33 years old, William Wayne Gilbert, 37, and James Kinslow, 27, were arrested in Garden Grove, Calif., said a Public Safety Department spokesman, Robert Kemble.


ISRAELI PROPOSES OUSTER OF ARABS
LEAD: A furor has erupted in Israel over a Government official's proposal that the 900,000 Palestinian Arabs living in the occupied West Bank be sent to Jordan.


AIDS TESTING MEASURES OFFERED IN BOTH HOUSES
LEAD: Key Congressional leaders on health policy, supported by many of the country's most influential health organizations, introduced legislation today in the House and Senate that would greatly expand testing for the AIDS virus.
The testing would be done on a voluntary basis with strict civil rights guarantees.


For Benazir Bhutto, An Arranged Marriage
LEAD: The Pakistani opposition leader announcing that she will marry a wealthy businessman she met only five days ago.
Page A2. (AP)


INDIA SAYS IT WILL SET THE TIMING FOR WITHDRAWAL FROM SRI LANKA
LEAD: The first 3,000 soldiers in an Indian peacekeeping unit landed today in northern Sri Lanka, and the Indian Ambassador said they would stay until New Delhi decides their mission has been completed.


COLUMBIA FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLUMBIA FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
566,000
938,000
Per share
.24
.41
Yr net inc
3,355,000
2,161,000
Per share
1.45
.96
The company said the latest fourth quarter earnings were reduced by 16 cents a share by the addition of $383,000 to reserves for possible losses on real estate owned through foreclosure.


Art: Met Favorites, Outdoors and In
LEAD: EVERY time the Metropolitan Museum of Art gets bigger, we cherish all the more the glimpses of the world outside that it has to offer.
Not only do they remind us of the Met's uniquely privileged position in Manhattan, but they give us a sense of space and air and light that can come as a welcome break.


CIT Group Notes Have 8.44% Yield
LEAD: CIT Group Holdings, a finance company subsidiary of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, is offering $150 million of 8 3/8 percent notes due in 1990 at a price of 99.825, to yield 8.44 percent, through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Horse Racing Notebook; Lineup of Large Questions
LEAD: The Haskell Handicap at Monmouth Park tomorrow should answer three important and intriguing questions: Can Alysheba win without Lasix?
Was Bet Twice's Belmont Stakes victory a fluke or the start of a championship season?
Is Lost Code as good as the division's leaders?


Computers Replace Coziness as Republicans Stress Iowa Caucuses
LEAD: Republican Presidential front-runners are already waging a fierce battle with 3-by-5 cards and personal computers to identify and perhaps lock in supporters now to help them in February.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Jim Lampley, who recently left ABC Sports because of unhappiness over his assignments, is likely to go to work for CBS as a sports anchor in Los Angeles and as a broadcaster on National Football League games.
Eric Ober, the president of CBS's owned and operated stations, said KCBS was ''reasonably close'' to signing Lampley as its local anchor.


About Real Estate; River Housing Gives Nyack New Look
LEAD: ''You're inquiring about our Disneyland on the Hudson, our Miami Vice?'' came the playfully sardonic voice of Jean Gardner, the clerk in Nyack, N.Y., when asked about a new condominium development now creeping up the banks of the Hudson River in the Rockland County village.


Tainted Food Possible in Patient's Death
LEAD: One patient has died and 175 more have suffered apparent food poisoning at Coler Memorial Hospital on Roosevelt Island, New York City hospital officials said yesterday.


KOLLMORGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KOLLMORGEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
73,952,000
90,077,000
Net loss
b2,610,000
1,452,000
6mo sales
146,400,000
175,189,000
Net loss
2,370,000
1,733,000
b-After a charge of $487,000 from the reversal of a tax credit.


Advertising; Media Costs in 1988 Are Seen Rising by 6.1%
LEAD: In its August issue, Marketing &amp; Media Decisions magazine will forecast that media costs will increase 6.1 percent in 1988.
This is the publication's 17th Media Cost Forcast survey, and it is based on responses from 200 agency media directors nationwide.


HAROLD PARROTT
LEAD: WEST NYACK, N.Y., July 30 (AP) -Harold Parrott, a former sportswriter and baseball executive, died today.
He was 78 years old.


SUMMIT BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUMMIT BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
7,514,000
6,736,000
Per share
.56
.50
6mo net inc
14,192,000
12,177,000
Per share
1.06
.93


GOULD INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOULD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
232,500,000
225,700,000
Net inc
b3,500,000
d4,300,000
Share earns
.08
.10
6mo rev
460,100,000
454,000,000
Net inc
b11,100,000
cd110,800,000
Share earns
.25
-


Some Things Even a Colossus Can't Do
LEAD: To the Editor:


MACLEAN HUNTER LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACLEAN HUNTER LTD
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
327,900,000
285,300,000
Net inc
24,246,000
18,584,000
Share earns
.31
.24
6mo rev
622,700,000
545,900,000
Net inc
38,705,000
30,434,000
Share earns
.50
.40


Carlton Fredericks, 76, Host Of Radio Program on Health
LEAD: Dr.
Carlton Fredericks, a well-known radio commentator and writer on nutrition and health, died of a heart attack Tuesday at St.
John's Riverside Hospital in Yonkers.
He was 76 years old and lived in New City, N.Y.


The Record Stock Rally Continues
LEAD: The summer stock market rally continued yesterday, as strong institutional buying, both from within the United States and from abroad, pushed the leading market indexes further into record territory.


De Larrocha and Hager
LEAD: Leopold Hager will conduct the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra tonight and tomorrow evening at 8 in Avery Fisher Hall.
The performances include works by Haydn, Mozart and Schubert; soloists will be the pianist Alicia de Larrocha and Delores Ziegler, a mezzo-soprano.
Tickets are $8 to $16.
Information: 874-6770.


REGAN TESTIFIES REAGAN FELT IRAN 'SNOOKERED' HIM
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, who was closer to President Reagan than anyone else who has testified before the Iran-contra committees, said today that the President felt he had been repeatedly ''snookered'' by Iranians into believing that continued arms sales would lead to the release of more American hostages.


Regan on Arms Shipment: 'Bigger Than a Breadbox?'
LEAD: Donald T. Regan was asked about earlier characterizations of the arms shipments to Iran.


SUSQUEHANNA BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUSQUEHANNA BANCSHARES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,358,000
2,864,000
Per share
.47
.41
6mo net inc
b7,382,000
6,220,000
Per share
1.03
.89
b-After a tax loss carryforward of $450,000.


ALLEGHANY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEGHANY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
279,300,000
128,200,000
Net inc
b6,200,000
c20,000,000
Share earns
.95
3.08
6mo rev
553,000,000
238,000,000
Net inc
b16,700,000
c27,500,000
Share earns
2.60
4.24


EMERSON RADIO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMERSON RADIO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
155,315,000
177,129,000
Net loss
5,873,000
b7,032,000
Share earns
-
.20
b-Net income and includes a net gain of $1,477,000, or 4 cents a share, from the sale of common shares of Imatron Inc.


LIMITS ON ABORTION COUNSELING OPPOSED
LEAD: Family planning professionals said today that the abortion regulations proposed by President Reagan could severely limit the services provided by the more than 4,000 clinics in the United States that receive Federal funds.


POLICY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POLICY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
43,553,000
35,225,000
Net inc
4,016,000
3,190,000
Share earns
.25
.20
6mo rev
85,056,000
67,258,000
Net inc
7,918,000
6,253,000
Share earns
.49
.39


To Balance The Budget
LEAD: Mr. Regan was asked about the price of missiles shipped to Iran:


AUGAT INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUGAT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
78,284,706
65,005,781
Net inc
2,814,433
2,802,030
Share earns
.16
.16
6mo rev
153,499,136
129,376,025
Net inc
6,352,926
4,552,461
Share earns
.36
.26


CINCINNATI MICROWAVE reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINCINNATI MICROWAVE (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
22,368,000
26,838,000
Net inc
3,075,000
4,317,000
Share earns
.19
.26
6mo sales
44,338,000
48,787,000
Net inc
5,743,000
7,596,000
Share earns
.36
.46


SCEPTRE RESOURCES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCEPTRE RESOURCES LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,500,000
14,800,000
Net inc
2,600,000
1,100,000
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
31,300,000
25,800,000
6mo rev
33,500,000
39,200,000
Net inc
4,800,000
3,900,000
Share earns
.10
.08
Shares outst
28,600,000
25,800,000


Texaco Advocate
LEAD: A wealthy Colorado rancher who once was the ''Marlboro man'' was chosen as chairman of a committee to represent the interests of Texaco Inc. shareholders in the oil company's bankruptcy proceedings.
Robert Norris, 58 years old, of Colorado Springs, owns 650,000 shares of Texaco and is a descendant of one of the company's founders.


Illegal Aliens No More
LEAD: Ashraf and Zahida Rizvi and their children after receiving temporary green cards at the Immigration and Naturalization Service offices in Manhattan.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JULY 31, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-10  Donald T. Regan testified that President Reagan felt he had been repeatedly ''snookered'' by Iranians into believing that continued arms sales would lead to the release of more American hostages.
Page A1  President Reagan told aides to protect American hostages in Lebanon by limiting disclosure and instead make statements that pointed up inaccuracies in press accounts, according to notes.


MACMILLAN BLOEDEL LTD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACMILLAN BLOEDEL LTD (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
806,800,000
698,700,000
Net inc
74,600,000
49,100,000
Share earns
.68
.44
6mo sales
1,530,000,000
1,310,000,000
Net inc
135,000,000
b123,300,000
Share earns
1.22
1.15


Our Towns; Elysian Days At Helen Keller: A Special Camp
LEAD: Why is it that day-camp vans always honk five minutes before you are ready?
If anyone knows, would they please give Matt Brazezicke a call.


GREYHOUND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREYHOUND CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
652,000,000
644,000,000
Net inc
b19,600,000
c47,700,000
Share earns
.50
1.01
6mo rev
1,200,000,000
1,200,000,000
Net inc
b53,300,000
c58,800,000
Share earns
1.35
1.24


What Mussolini Knew and When He Knew It
LEAD: To the Editor:


Advertising; Ogilvy Profit Up 26.6%
LEAD: The Ogilvy Group, parent of Ogilvy &amp; Mather, reported yesterday that it had second-quarter revenues of $181 million, a 31.3 percent gain from $137.9 million in the comparable period last year.
Net income grew 26.6 percent, to $8.1 million, or 57 cents a share, from $6.4 million, or 45 cents.


Allegheny Secures New Credit Line
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc., the troubled industrial and consumer products company, said it had reached a new revolving-credit agreement with a consortium of banks.
The company said the agreement prohibits payments of dividends and requires it to maintain certain levels of net worth.


JASON INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JASON INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,778,000
18,070,000
Net inc
425,000
225,000
Share earns
.17
.09
6mo sales
38,551,000
37,195,000
Net inc
1,160,000
736,000
Share earns
.46
.29


'Chronology? I Was the Guy Looking for the Chronology'
LEAD: Donald T. Regan was asked about being the ''fall guy'' in the Iran-contra affair.


LADD FURNITURE INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LADD FURNITURE INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
93,237,000
64,897,000
Net inc
6,631,000
4,803,000
Share earns
.35
.25
6mo sales
189,101,000
130,396,000
Net inc
13,597,000
9,743,000
Share earns
.71
.51


MDC HOLDINGS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MDC HOLDINGS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
216,700,000
163,900,000
Net inc
3,700,000
8,600,000
Share earns
.19
.41
6mo rev
357,600,000
292,800,000
Net inc
9,900,000
16,400,000
Share earns
.49
.86


POP AND JAZZ GUIDE
LEAD: Bob Brookmeyer with Joe Roccisano's Big Band, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street (533-7902).
Bob Brookmeyer, the valve trombonist who played a key role as both arranger and sideman with Gerry Mulligan's Concert Jazz Band 25 years ago and currently is an arranger for Mel Lewis's big band, is adding his big-band background to a 15-piece group led by Joe Roccisano, an alto saxophonist and arranger, that is playing its first major engagement in the East this weekend at Fat Tuesday's.


CROWN CENTRAL PETROLEUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROWN CENTRAL PETROLEUM CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
276,927,000
275,645,000
Net loss
2,637,000
b6,256,000
Share earns
-
.87
Shares outst
6,251,599
7213,209
6mo rev
510,125,000
568,166,000
Net loss
17,880,000
11,444,000
Shares outst
6,251,599
6,251,205


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Economic Scene; China's Debate On Reforms
LEAD: DEBATE in China among economists, politicians and Marxist theoreticians remains intense on future changes in the economic and political system.
A group of American economists, led by Prof.
M.
Jan Dutta of Rutgers University, in recent meetings with Chinese economists and public officials in Shanghai, Beijing and at the Huazhong University of Science and Technology in


AST RESEARCH reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AST RESEARCH (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
63,159,000
40,037,000
Net inc
2,851,000
4,098,000
Share earns
.25
.35
Yr sales
205,962,000
172,299,000
Net inc
13,033,000
27,177,000
Share earns
1.13
2.34


New-Home Sales Rose 3.5% in June
LEAD: After a huge decline in May, new-home sales rose 3.5 percent in June as a turnaround in mortgage rates bolstered a sagging sales market, the Government reported today.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 390 money market mutual funds increased $1.05 billion, to $241.9 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 100 institutional funds were up $478.3 million, to $67.66 billion.
Assets of the 200 general purpose funds were down $111 million, to $68.23 billion.


MORTON THIOKOL INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORTON THIOKOL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
557,916,000
490,542,000
Net inc
36,371,000
30,043,000
Share earns
.76
.63
Yr sales
1,987,342,000
1,949,882,000
Net inc
138,033,000
132,871,000
Share earns
2.90
2.80


N.F.L. Camps; 5 Teams Offering AIDS Testing
LEAD: In addition to the Dallas Cowboys and the Houston Oilers, at least 3 other of the 28 National Football League teams are offering free, confidential AIDS tests to players, coaches and staff members at their training camps, club officials said yesterday.


Music: Five Scott Johnson Works
LEAD: SCOTT JOHNSON plays the electric guitar and writes music for his own ensemble of guitars, saxophones and percussion.
But he is a classical composer through and through, his music steeped in the heritage of the concert hall.
Sharing a Serious Fun! concert with David Van Tieghem at Alice Tully Hall on Monday, Mr.


O'CONNOR DEFENDS AIDS PANEL ROLE
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor yesterday defended his appointment to the Presidential commission on AIDS, saying he believed in the sacredness of every person even if that person's sexual behavior ran counter to Roman Catholic teaching.


NATIONAL HEALTHCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL HEALTHCORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,060,000
24,927,000
Net inc
2,804,000
1,159,000
Share earns
.41
.18
6mo rev
53,242,000
50,165,000
Net inc
5,322,000
2,846,000
Share earns
.78
.43


TRW Contract
LEAD: TRW Inc. has been awarded a $743.5 million military contract to build and launch five early-warning satellites, the Air Force said.
The company was also awarded a second Air Force contract for $33.6 million for work on a space surveillance and tracking system.
TRW, which has built such satellites for years, was the only company to bid on the contract for the five warning satellites.


ONE VALLEY BANCORP (WEST VIRGINIA) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONE VALLEY BANCORP (WEST VIRGINIA)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,006,000
2,846,000
Per share
.81
.77
6mo net inc
6,186,000
5,873,000
Per share
1.67
1.59


39 Killed as Cargo Plane Crashes in Mexico City
LEAD: A commercial cargo plane carrying 12 people and 18 horses today crashed on a crowded highway, rammed into a restaurant and exploded.
Officials said at least 39 people were killed and 17 were injured.


BRINTEC CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRINTEC CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
86,646,000
81,190,000
Net inc
2,485,000
4,910,000
Share earns
.21
.41
6mo rev
167,004,000
159,036,000
Net inc
3,699,000
8,296,000
Share earns
.31
.68


The Bucolic Pleasures Of Van Cortlandt Park
LEAD: ASK even the most city-smart New Yorker to free-associate about the Bronx, and you're not likely to hear of forests and wetlands, horse trails and farmhouses.
Yet, in the borough that boasts the city's largest proportion of parkland, all this and more can be found in one of New York's greatest natural and recreational treasures: Van Cortlandt


Advertising; Another Top Officer Returns to Thompson
LEAD: W. Lee Preschel, the 53-year-old international specialist who was dismissed from the J. Walter Thompson Company by its old management in May, will be back on Monday to a bigger job than the one he left.


SHAW INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHAW INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
192,927,000
156,936,000
Net inc
8,308,000
8,215,000
Share earns
.50
.48
Yr sales
694,203,000
550,024,000
Net inc
28,545,000
24,095,000
Share earns
1.70
1.41


From Reagan: 'This Didn't Happen'
LEAD: In the frantic weeks after the American arms shipments to Iran were exposed, President Reagan told aides to protect the American hostages in Lebanon by limiting disclosure and instead make statements that pointed up inaccuracies in press accounts, according to notes made public today.


Clergyman Faces Panel On Attack on His Wife
LEAD: There is not enough evidence ''at this time'' to indict a prominent minister whose wife has been comatose since an attack by an unknown assailant in April, a prosecutor who called the clergyman before a grand jury said Wednesday.


OMNICARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OMNICARE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
30,431,000
37,275,000
Net inc
522,000
b1,222,000
Share earns
.05
.12
6mo sales
61,334,000
80,575,000
Net inc
1,225,000
b2,698,000
Share earns
.12
.27


Music: City Opera's 'Sweeney Todd'
LEAD: WITH its overtly operatic pretensions, Stephen Sondheim's ''Sweeney Todd'' remains the focus of controversy between those who wish to extend opera to include the American musical theater and those who wish to keep the two traditions separate.
Certainly no operatic production of ''Sweeney Todd'' has attracted more attention in this regard than that of the New York City


Essex County, Caught in Bind, Quadruples Garbage Disposal Fees
LEAD: State regulators approved sharply higher garbage-disposal fees today for the 22 communities in Essex County and two in Union County that are to be shut out of a landfill in the Hackensack Meadowlands starting Friday.


Oslo Expels 3 Russians
LEAD: Norway said today that it had asked three Soviet officials to leave the country, saying they had tried to obtain sensitive submarine technology.
It said the Soviet Union, in turn, had expelled a Norwegian diplomat.


NICHOLS-HOMESHIELD reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NICHOLS-HOMESHIELD (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
45,231,000
41,014,000
Net inc
2,469,000
2,007,000
Share earns
.45
.37
6mo sales
83,213,000
75,852,000
Net inc
3,687,000
2,913,000
Share earns
.67
.53


AMGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMGEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,581,000
7,743,000
Net inc
494,000
474,000
Share earns
.03
.03
Shares outst
16,881,000
14,853,000


U.S. and Greece Ease Dispute And Open Way to Base Talks
LEAD: Greek and American officials indicated today that their countries had overcome a crisis that had reportedly jeopardized the future of United States military bases.





PACIFIC NUCLEAR SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFIC NUCLEAR SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,600,000
5,100,000
Net inc
140,000
b890,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo rev
6,600,000
5,100,000
Net inc
67,000
b632,000
Share earns
.02
-
b


SUBURBAN BANKSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUBURBAN BANKSHARES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
63,000
b13,000
Per share
.04
-
6mo net inc
114,000
64,000
Per share
.07
.04
Shares outst
1,036,470
587,409
b-Net loss


Diner's Journal
LEAD: ASIA MINOR meets Major Trendies at Anatolia, a pastel-washed, designer-label Turkish restaurant on Third Avenue at 80th Street.
If it weren't for the gleaming brass samovar and zealous young waiters flapping around in billowing costumes, you might think you had stumbled into yet another hip Italian trattoria.


NUVISION INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUVISION INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,229,000
7,676,000
Net inc
1,105,000
1,083,000
Share earns
.36
.34
6mo rev
23,121,000
14,799,000
Net inc
1,997,000
1,898,000
Share earns
.65
.65


A Rebound in Metals Prices
LEAD: Rising metals prices, an important factor in the gain reported yesterday in the Government's index of leading economic indicators for June, are expected to be a fact of industrial life for the rest of this year, according to economists and traders.


Citing Cost, Cuomo Vetoes a Pay Raise for Jurors
LEAD: Governor Cuomo announced today that he had vetoed a bill intended to make jury service more attractive through features such as an increase in pay and a reduction in the number of times a resident may be summoned to jury duty.


HALL, FRANK B &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HALL, FRANK B &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
96,608,000
100,084,000
Net loss
b2,231,000
cd4,777,000
Share earns
-
.11
6mo rev
202,185,000
200,659,000
Net inc
5,553,000
d13,878,000
Share earns
-
.52


PUBLIC SERVICE CO OF NEW HAMPSHIRE reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUBLIC SERVICE CO OF NEW HAMPSHIRE (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
114,099,000
116,641,000
Net inc
13,698,000
b322,159,000
Share earns
.09
-
6mo rev
267,319,000
273,831,000
Net inc
69,697,000
b274,777,000
Share earns
1.08
-


Broadway
LEAD:  The Public Sets Opening Dates


Baseball; Fitzgerald Powers Expos Past Cubs, 6-1
LEAD: Mike Fitzgerald went 3 for 3, scored twice and drove in two runs today as the Montreal Expos beat the Chicago Cubs, 6-1.


VOLUNTEER BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VOLUNTEER BANCSHARES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
555,000
603,000
Per share
.36
.41
Shares outst
1,546,013
1,459,832
6mo net inc
1,158,000
1,332,000
Per share
.76
.92
Shares outst
1,523,163
1,332,000


O'Brien Gets 2-Year Pact, Ends Holdout
LEAD: Ken O'Brien's week-long holdout ended just after midnight this morning when the quarterback agreed to rejoin the Jets with a new two-year contract.


Film: 'Living Daylights,' With the New Bond
LEAD: IT'S a tough job, keeping the world's waiters and butlers and bathing beauties apprised that he takes his martinis ''shaken, not stirred.'' But somebody has to do it, and in ''The Living Daylights'' - a great title, from a 1966 Ian Fleming short story - that somebody is Timothy Dalton.
Mr.
Dalton, the latest successor to the role of James Bond, is well equipped for his new responsibilities.


Another Kind of Underground Art
LEAD: Besides the mosaics and, of course, one another, subway riders have precious little to look at, which makes New York's underground good for conveying messages as well as people.


LEGGETT &amp; PLATT INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEGGETT &amp; PLATT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
161,064,000
144,516,000
Net inc
9,845,000
8,516,000
Share earns
.60
.51
6mo sales
318,300,000
283,619,000
Net inc
18,860,000
16,458,000
Share earns
1.15
.99


JUSTIN INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JUSTIN INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
66,365,000
67,828,000
Net inc
535,000
1,455,000
Share earns
.10
.25
6mo sales
126,455,000
133,400,000
Net inc
319,000
1,678,000
Share earns
.06
.29


Latin Festival: What, Where and When
LEAD: Festival Latino in New York, a theater and film series, begins tomorrow and runs through Aug. 23 at the New York Shakespeare Festival Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street.
Unless otherwise noted, all theater performances are at 8 P.M. and are $15.
Four theaters - LuEsther Hall, the Newman Theater, the Susan Stein Shiva Theater and the Little Theater - will be used for the festival; on some days, more than one show will be presented.


Role for Health Insurers In Producing AIDS Data
LEAD: To the Editor:


70 Hurt in Explosion Near Johannesburg Barracks
LEAD: A bomb exploded today outside a military barracks in downtown Johannesburg, wounding 70 people, including several soldiers, and causing extensive damage to surrounding buildings.


STERLING BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STERLING BANCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
850,787
1,878,061
Per share
.14
.32
6mo net inc
2,093,248
b4,927,465
Per share
.34
.86
b-After a gain of $1,485,961 from the cumulative effect of a pension accounting change.


OGDEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OGDEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
205,635,000
204,099,000
Net inc
12,637,000
b10,194,000
Share earns
.32
.27
6mo rev
408,935,000
409,391,000
Net inc
24,709,000
b20,275,000
Share earns
.62
.53


CITIZENS SAVINGS FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS SAVINGS FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,129,968
2,657,493
Per share
1.03
.88
6mo net inc
b6,180,298
5,300,490
Per share
2.00
1.77
b-After writeoffs of $21,624 for the quarter and $365,399 for the 6 months from the balance of unamortized issuance costs of subordinated debt redeemed Jan.


MCDONNELL DOUGLAS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCDONNELL DOUGLAS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,493,000,000
3,180,000,000
Net inc
97,100,000
81,200,000
Share earns
2.39
2.01
6mo sales
6,481,000,000
6,175,000,000
Net inc
140,100,000
142,300,000
Share earns
3.45
3.52


Tabou Combo
LEAD: Tabou Combo, a Haitian band, will perform tonight at Sounds of Brazil, 204 Varick Street (243-4940).
Sets begin at 11 P.M., 1 and 2:30 A.M.; there is a $15 cover and a two-drink minimum.


PAM TRANSPORTATION SERVCES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAM TRANSPORTATION SERVCES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,421,731
10,686,991
Net inc
962,008
718,474
Share earns
.20
.20
Shares outst
4,905,436
3,607,926
6mo rev
30,328,776
18,275,271
Net inc
1,770,858
1,015,740
Share earns
.36
.30
Shares outst
4,916,001
3,333,334


U.S. Copter Crashes in Gulf; 1 Is Dead and 3 Are Missing
LEAD: An American helicopter serving in the naval force deployed to escort Kuwaiti oil tankers crashed in the Persian Gulf today, killing one man and leaving three others missing at sea, according to military officials.
Five were rescued.
The crash of the Sea-King helicopter occurred as it approached the La


Palmer Trying To Find Touch
LEAD: The time when he would devote a whole week to a golf tournament is past for Arnold Palmer, now a member of the Senior PGA Tour and without a victory in two years and two months.


Walter T. Skallerup, Counsel For Navy Dept., Dies at 67
LEAD: Walter T. Skallerup Jr., the general counsel of the Navy Department and a former deputy assistant secretary of defense, died of cancer Wednesday at the Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 67 years old and lived in McLean, Va.


Beirut Names Bomb Suspect
LEAD: A soldier was charged today in the slaying of Prime Minister Rashid Karami last month by a bomb hidden in a military helicopter, judicial sources said.
Lebanon asked Interpol to issue a warrant for Pvt.
Elie Salibi, a Christian, who fled abroad shortly after the killing.
Mr.
Karami was Moslem.


Microsoft Buys Software Unit
LEAD: The Microsoft Corporation announced its first significant software acquisition today, paying $14 million for Forethought Inc. of Sunnyvale, Calif.


FIRST OHIO BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST OHIO BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
120,296
2,714,838
Per share
.03
.60
6mo net inc
1,960,862
5,829,727
Per share
.43
1.29
First Ohio said the decline in earnings results is from a $3.9 million increase in its loan loss provision in the latest quarter related to the FSLIC secondary reserve.


Regan Takes the Stand, Looking Mellow and Quite at Ease
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, with the mellow smile of a Washington survivor, got a little of his own back today.


RESTAURANTS
LEAD: PROVENCAL is one of those terms that is tossed around with abandon on restaurant menus these days, a nifty and sophisticated-sounding label attached to just about any dish that calls for tomato, mixed herbs and garlic.
Anyone who has had the good fortune to visit that magically fragrant region of southern France knows that Provencal food is far more diverse.


COASTAMERICA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COASTAMERICA CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
97,700,000
88,800,000
Net inc
b1,700,000
1,500,000
Share earns
.23
.21
6mo rev
176,500,000
164,200,000
Net inc
b1,700,000
1,200,000
Share earns
.24
.18


Textile-Import Bill Advances
LEAD: The Senate Finance Committee today forwarded a bill to curb textile imports to the Senate, where it faces almost certain approval, and afterward the possibility of a Presidential veto.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Bob Clark and Meryl Fischman have been elected senior vice presidents and members of the executive committee at Kallir, Philips, Ross.


First Chicago to Curtail Its Overseas Operations
LEAD: The First Chicago Corporation said today that it planned to reduce its overseas presence substantially and indicated that it would close its branches in a number of cities, such as Paris, Frankfurt and Rome.


MOLSON COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOLSON COMPANIES
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
656,831,000
597,911,000
Net inc
b31,491,000
18,841,000
Share earns
.96
.64
b-Includes $4.7 million gain on the sale of real estate.
The company is listed on the Toronto and Montreal stock exchanges.


U.S. Is Considering Ending Suspension of Aid to Panama
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is reviewing whether to resume military and economic aid to Panama, the State Department spokesman, Charles A. Redman, said today.


LEXINGTON SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEXINGTON SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
532,000
307,000
Per share
.23
-
6mo net inc
1,074,000
617,000
Per share
.47
-
The year-ago per share earnings are unavailable; the bank converted to stock form of ownership in December 1986.


HAPPINESS (FOR SOME) IS A TABLE ON A SIDEWALK
LEAD: Peggy Zorski, a waitress at the Life Cafe in the East Village, wouldn't dream of sitting at one of the restaurant's dozen outdoor tables across from a boarded-up building and next to a bus stop.


OLSTEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OLSTEN CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 28
1987
1986
Revenue
96,987,000
76,757,000
Net inc
3,071,000
2,195,000
Share earns
.25
.18
6mo rev
183,405,000
147,400,000
Net inc
5,450,000
4,002,000
Share earns
.44
.33


James River Deal
LEAD: The James River Corporation said it had agreed to acquire 50 percent of Kaysersberg S.A., a subsidiary of Beghin-Say S.A., for $243 million.
Kaysersberg is the leading French producer of sanitary paper, with sales of $648 million, James River said.
Kaysersberg's net income in 1986 was $17.8 million.


PAR PHARMACEUTICAL reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAR PHARMACEUTICAL (NYSE)
Qtr to June 27
1987
1986
Sales
18,272,000
9,853,000
Net inc
2,705,000
1,057,000
Share earns
.24
.10
Shares outst
11,339,000
10,624,000
9mo sales
56,627,000
24,971,000
Net inc
7,648,000
2,730,000
Share earns
.68
.27
Shares outst
11,199,000
9,981,000


PHONEMATE INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHONEMATE INC
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
26,346,000
d22,107,000
Net inc
b503,000
c158,000
Share earns
.23
.07
6mo sales
46,630,000
40,530,000
Net inc
b232,000
c271,000
Share earns
.10
.12
b-Includes a tax credit of $94,000.


SEIBELS BRUCE GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEIBELS BRUCE GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,592,016
c6,294,199
Share earns
.50
-
6mo net inc
b6,551,53
c4,628,643
Share earns
.91
-
b-Includes capital gains of $4,841 for the quarter, and for the 6 months includes a capital loss of $5,289.


LINCOLN NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINCOLN NATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b67,213,000
c63,037,000
Share earns
1.48
1.35
6mo net inc
b172,971,000
c122,539,000
Share earns
3.80
2.61
b-Includes realized investment gains of $754,000 for the quarter and $47,528,000 for the 6 months.


NU-MED INC reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NU-MED INC (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1987
1986
Revenue
107,360,000
89,937,000
Net loss
2,229,000
1,932,000
Yr rev
391,762,000
315,307,000
Net inc
4,360,000
2,019,000
Share earns
.37
.12


LIQUI-BOX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIQUI-BOX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,210,000
18,124,000
Net inc
1,670,000
1,578,000
Share earns
.71
.67
6mo sales
34,717,000
34,081,000
Net inc
2,919,000
2,690,000
Share earns
1.24
1.15


EMC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
28,814,000
16,227,000
Net inc
6,775,000
4,966,000
Share earns
.43
.32
6mo rev
52,924,000
30,996,000
Net inc
12,525,000
9,411,000
Share earns
.79
.64


Dining Out Guide; Lincoln Center Area
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
CAFE DES ARTISTES, #1 West 67th Street (877-3500) - *(May 30, 1986) Dark burnished-wood walls, lead-paned windows and bucolic murals contribute to the gracious and romantic look of this West Side restaurant.


SOUTHWEST BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWEST BANCORP (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Net inc
162,000
b633,000
Per share
.03
.15
6mo net inc
519,000
b1,003,000
Per share
.12
.23
b-After tax credits of $43,000 for the quarter and $90,000 for the 6 months.


INSTRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSTRON CORP
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
22,643,000
21,596,000
Net inc
863,000
1,092,000
Share earns
.14
.18
6mo sales
44,648,000
43,123,000
Net inc
1,473,000
2,029,000
Share earns
.24
.33


COMPUTER PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER PRODUCTS INC (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
29,944,000
29,189,000
Net inc
713,000
b2,716,000
Share earns
.04
-
6mo sales
56,328,000
57,360,000
Net inc
116,000
b6,504,000
Share earns
.01
-


U.S. PROSOSES CURB ON CLINICS GIVING ABORTION ADVICE
LEAD: President Reagan proposed a new set of regulations today that would bar family planning clinics that get Federal funds from counseling clients about abortion.


ITEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ITEL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
321,600,000
71,600,000
Net inc
9,600,000
b2,300,000
Share earns
.20
-
6mo rev
583,000,000
136,700,000
Net inc
2,800,000
b8,300,000
b-Net loss  The company said Anixter Bros., which it acquired at year-end 1986, had sales of $205.5 million in the latest second quarter.


Focus of Blame
LEAD: In a forthcoming autobiography, Lawrence Taylor of the New York Giants admits he was hooked on cocaine during the 1985 season.
He implies that, because of his star status and the Giants' wish not to lose his services, his coaches didn't try very hard to discipline him.


DATA SWITCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA SWITCH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,017,000
10,202,000
Net loss
703,000
b505,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
44,473,000
19,334,000
Net loss
1,155,000
b733,000
Share earns
-
.07


Film: 'Wolf at the Door'
LEAD: At first sight as he struts haughtily through the streets of Paris beneath a broad-brimmed straw hat, behind a macho mustache, throwing a small secret smile to a pretty girl along his route, Donald Sutherland's Paul Gauguin might be returning in triumph from his two years in Tahiti.
But the hat is ratty as well as natty, the way his paintings are loaded on the cart being trundled before him hints that not everybody considers them masterpieces, and his eyes carry anxiety as well as arrogance.


HOGAN SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOGAN SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,386,000
12,132,000
Net inc
b1,918,000
b1,117,000
Share earns
.13
.08
b-Includes tax benefits of $887,000 for the latest quarter and $450,000 for the year-ago period.


Senate Plan Could Leave Key Budget Decisions for Next President
LEAD: Senate Democratic and Republican leaders have endorsed a new proposal to amend the budget-balancing law that could put off major decisions on the deficit and tax increases until after the 1988 elections.


