BRITISH STAMPS THAT LOOK BACK INTO HISTORY
LEAD: THAT stamps can be used as concise history lessons is demonstrated in three recent issues from Britain.
In September, the British issued a set of four stamps titled ''Victorian Britain: Great People; Great Times;'' In July, they released a set of four ''Scottish Heraldry'' stamps and in June, the 100th anniversary of the St.


Telling Players By the Numbers
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


By TODD S. PURDUM
LEAD: A 22-YEAR-OLD white man and two white women are walking down a street in Brooklyn.
Five black youths approach.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. The brick fireplace in our home had been painted by previous owners.
We want to remove the paint and restore the natural brick.
What is the best way to do this?


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: ON THE POLITICAL SIDELINES PETER F. COHALAN and Francis T. Purcell will be working Tuesday, Election Day, but not rounding up votes.
The former Suffolk County and Nassau County Executives will spend what could have been their re-election day busily engaged in new careers.


HOUSE PANEL STALLS BID TO SHIFT U.S. WATER AGENCY TO DENVER
LEAD: The House Appropriations Committee has voted to block the Bureau of Reclamation's plans to move its headquarters from Washington to Denver as part of a major reorientation of the bureau.


THE ECONOMIC HISTORIANS' VIEW: Comparing the Collapses; C.P. Kindleberger: Watch Prayerfully
LEAD: IN the cascade of comment on the stock market debacle of the last two weeks, it is hard for an economic historian who has written on 1929 and on 18th and 19th century booms and crashes to find something to say that is not entirely banal.
Nonetheless I try:


Hits on Parade: Some Lessons of a Top-10 Countdown
LEAD: TAKING THE PULSE, RAN-dom-testing the product, sampling for pollutants -you pick the metaphor, but occasionally it's amusing to look at the Top 10 singles and see how American popular music is doing.


Postings: Codes to Live By; Looking It Up
LEAD: Three new real-estate reference works are now for sale, two that will interest those involved in technical aspects of the industry - the actual construction of apartments - and one that should prove helpful to people looking for a place to live.


The Reagans Attend Funeral For Her Mother in Phoenix
LEAD: President Reagan and his wife, Nancy attended funeral services for Mrs.
Reagan's mother here today, and Mr.
Reagan delivered the eulogy.


Academe Inc.
LEAD:  To the Editor:


TIPS ON REPLACING FLOORBOARDS
LEAD: REPLACING sections of tongue-and-groove wooden floorboards is not difficult if you use the proper tools and work carefully.


DADDY HAS THE BEST GOSSIP
LEAD:  THE LAST OF HOW IT WAS  By T. R. Pearson. 362 pp.
New York: The Linden Press/Simon &amp; Schuster. $17.95.


HITLER AND THE DEMONIC
LEAD: William Safire's article ''Long Time No See'' (On Language, Sept. 20), on the joint communique issued by Roman Catholic and Jewish leaders contained some astute observations.


A MODERN-DAY 'MEDEA' IN YALE DRAMA SERIES
LEAD: CREON'S queen descends upon Corinth in a helicopter.
His daughter has a jeep, operated by remote control.
Jason bears gifts of BB guns and toy aircraft carriers for his sons.
And the Chorus lunges into a rap number.


World Cup Belongs in U.S.
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


FIGHTING ELM DISEASE THE NATURAL WAY
LEAD: WHEN he was growing up in Oklahoma, George Ware remembers, his mother once stood at the door telling a traveling tree salesman that she didn't have several years to wait for his seedlings to begin bearing fruit. ''Well, why not?'' asked the salesman, ''You're going to be waiting anyway.''


How Ugliness Led to Happiness
LEAD: HERE IS DANIEL AUTEUIL, arguably France's hottest young actor these days - or, at least, the one who got the best actor award at the French version of the Oscar ceremonies in Paris this year -and he doesn't look it.


Ten Days That Shook the World
LEAD: The 70th anniversary celebration of the Bolshevik Revolution opens tomorrow, with Mikhail Gorbachev expected to start weaving back into Soviet history some of the many pages long ago torn out.
The Bolsheviks thought themselves the vanguard of a Socialist movement that would sweep the world.
Those who commemorate the


U.S. Sees 'Troubling' Tilt by Pakistan to Iran
LEAD: Some senior Administration officials have expressed irritation over what they call Pakistan's tilt toward Iran in the Iran-Iraq war, manifested most recently in criticism of the Reagan Administration's military buildup in the Persian Gulf without condemnation of Iranian attacks on shipping.


FROM THE RIGHT: Arthur B. Laffer; A Time to 'Undo'
LEAD: Excerpts from an interview with Arthur B. Laffer, a member of President Reagan's Economic Policy Advisory Board and chairman of A. B. Laffer Associates, a brokerage firm.


DREAMING OF BUFFALO
LEAD:  SECOND SEASON  By Joseph Monninger. 245 pp. New York: Atheneum. $19.95.


MEN AND MOLES
LEAD: As a suburban homeowner with a ''mole problem,'' I found Richard B. Elsberry's ''A Farewell to Arms'' right on the mark (About Men, Sept. 27).
As the movie ''Caddie Shack'' demonstrated as well, there is no way to win the battle when trying to eliminate the mole.
A good sense of humor will go a long way.


Former Wedtech Executive Testifies About Bribery
LEAD: A former vice chairman of the Wedtech Corporation, testifying in a conspiracy and mail fraud trial here, has outlined widespread illegal activity involving officials of the South Bronx military contractor.


Rock: The Cars, A Quintet
LEAD: THE Cars were purring at Madison Square Garden on Thursday like a custom-built engine fresh from a tuneup.
Over the years, the Boston-based quintet has achieved a streamlined consistency that is most impressive in person, with one meticulously crafted hit song following another.


Sorry Spectacle at Lincoln Center
LEAD: COMPARED TO THE MAJOR FES-tivals at Cannes, Berlin and Venice, the New York Film Festival has always seemed to be pure -devoted to art, good works and the sanctity of cinema.
New York doesn't give prizes to film makers.
To be invited to participate is the honor it confers.
For 25 years, it has stood tall and serene above the kind of divisive politics and pressures experienced at competitive festivals, which dole out Golden


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bedminster  $172,000
7 Wendover Court
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 3-year-old condominium; fireplace, 2 decks, C/A; monthly maintenance $91.50; taxes $1,462.
Livingston  $400,000
32 Knollwood Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 32-year-old colonial; family room, C/A, fenced yard, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,921.


Compact Disk Shrinks
LEAD: THE COMPACT DISK IS about four and a half inches in diameter - or it was until now.
Two record companies, Delos and Rykodisc, have issued a three-inch compact disk, but it is designed to be an adjunct, rather than a replacement, for the four-inch version.


A Baritone Cancels Dates And the Met Cancels Him
LEAD: RENATO BRUSON, the Italian baritone who had previously withdrawn from three scheduled appearances as Iago in the Metropolitan Opera's production of ''Otello'' in September, has canceled all his dates with the company this season.


Martha Graham's Ongoing Affirmation of Life
LEAD: THE ETERNAL MYSTERIES that lie at the heart of Martha Graham's work came to the fore during the splendid season that closed last week at the City Center with an audience cheering Miss Graham and her company to the rafters.
It was an unusual season, with the powerful level of performance signaling a breakthrough for many Graham dancers in their mastery of technique and dramatic presence.


'The Foreigner,' Romantic Comedy
LEAD: IT has been tough going at the Studio Theater recently, as this once innovative, adventuresome theater has turned to a more lucrative schedule of producing lightweight work with amateur casts.
Fortunately, light entertainment can, when it is well done, make for a delightful evening in the theater, and the current production of ''The Foreigner,'' by Larry


HOLY CROSS ROLLS TO A RECORD OF 8-0
LEAD: Led by Jeff Wiley's 438 yards passing, including four touchdown tosses, Holy Cross rolled over the University of Massachusetts, 54-10, today to remain the only undefeated football team in Division I-AA, at 8-0.


Rise in Executions Widening Debate
LEAD: HOUSTON, Oct. 31 -


WALL STREET'S AGONY: THE VIEW FROM AFAR
LEAD: While the upsetting news from Wall Street battered world stock markets from London to Tokyo last week, the editorial thinkers of major newspapers vigorously assigned blame and prescribed cures.
Excerpts follow from a sampling of written and pictorial comment in 10 countries.
Tokyo


Amy Harless Plans to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Amy Elisabeth Harless to James Stillman Rockefeller Rose, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Harden Rose of New York and Bridgehampton, L.I., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mrs.
Ricardo Deambrosio of Lyme, Conn., and Montevideo, Uruguay, and Theodore James Harless of Port Chester, N


Smoking vs. Life Expectancy
LEAD: A Federal study blames cigarette smoking for 315,120 deaths around the nation in 1984, which represents a loss of 3.6 million years in terms of shortened lifespans, the researchers say.


AFRICA NATION OPENS DOORS TO THE FRENCH
LEAD: Three nights a week, the President of this Spanish-speaking country retires to a quiet room in the palace, flicks on his tape recorder, and practices his French.


BUTOH: DANCE OF DARKNESS
LEAD: BUTOH IS NOT FOR THE FRAIL.
THE AVANT-garde dance form that today is Japan's most startling cultural export does not aim to charm.
Instead, it sets out to assault the senses.
The hallmarks of this theater of protest include full body paint (white or dark or gold), near or complete nudity, shaved heads, grotesque costumes, clawed hands, rolled-up eyes and mouths opened in silent screams.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the Old Dutch Church in North Tarrytown misstated the amount of a state grant to help restore the church.
The state provided a matching grant of $120,000 toward the project, which is expected to cost $500,000.


HOW MANY DEBATES ARE ENOUGH?
LEAD: In ''Two Party Chiefs Vie for Office''  [ Politics, Oct. 11 ] , Frank Lynn writes that Joseph N. Mondello ''is trying to ignore his opponent, limiting debates, for example, to a maximum of three.'' Who is he to say that three is not enough?


WEST; AIKMAN RESCUES U.C.L.A.
LEAD: Troy Aikman passed for two touchdowns to Paco Craig during a 17-point third-quarter surge as U.C.L.A. overcame Arizona State, 31-23, in a Pacific-10 Conference game today.


WIRETAPS LINK LARRY DAVIS TO PLOT TO SLAY A MAN AND ELUDE POLICE
LEAD: Larry Davis, who is charged in the murders of four suspected drug dealers, discussed a plot to kill a man who resembled him in order to trick the police and elude one of the biggest manhunts in New York City history.


THE BEASTS AT BAY
LEAD: Lizard picture frame, $30.
At Bloomingdale's.
Tortoise glass, $12.
At Frank McIntosh at Henri Bendel.
Italian horn cup, $100.
At Barneys New York.
Antique English mastodon tooth box, $900.
At A. Smith Antiques, 235 East 60th Street.
Italian horn salad servers, $150.
At Barneys New York.
Snakeskin-patterned tile, $10 a tile.


Catering's New Role
LEAD: IF ''CATERED AFFAIRS'' HAVE ALWAYS seemed too costly and complicated, but a full schedule makes cooking by yourself impractical, you might investigate the approach of a new breed of entrepreneurs.
These professionals may have attended cooking schools, or worked for restaurants or large caterers, or they may be moonlighting corporate chefs.


GIANT'S LINEBACKING CORPS HAS ONE NEW MEMBER: TURMOIL
LEAD: Think of the Giants' locker room as shaped like a human, and the first thing you see - the head, so to speak - is Harry Carson's locker.
And one stall away is Lawrence Taylor's locker.


MOUNTAIN HIKES, NOW
LEAD: 'Aw c'mon, Mom!
It's an easy climb.
Even you can make it.'' Ever since we bought our cabin near the trail head of Crane Mountain in the Adirondacks, our son Jon has been after me to go up Crane.


Heyden White Wed to Charles Rostow
LEAD: Ariana van der Heyden White, a daughter of Mrs.
Louis J. Hector of New York and Coconut Grove, Fla., and the late Theodore H. White, was married last evening to Charles Nicholas Rostow, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene V. Rostow of Washington and Peru, Vt.
Rabbi Gunter Hirschberg performed the ceremony at Congregation Rodeph Sholom in New York.


MONTH LATER, STORM CLEANUP GOES ON UPSTATE
LEAD: Dozens of 200-year-old hemlock trees lie across the rushing waters of Wappinger Creek at the Cary Arboretum here, their roots jutting into the air, reflecting the light of the midday sun.


CONNECITCUT GUIDE


Sally Keenan is a Bride
LEAD: Sarah Marie Keenan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Willis J. Keenan of Port Washington, L.I., was married there yesterday to Joseph Sferrazza, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Sferrazza of Manhasset, L.I.
Msgr.
Walter Simmons performed the ceremony at St.
Peter of Alcantara Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Sferrazza, known as Sally, and her husband are associates at the law firm of Shaw, Licitra, Eisenberg, Esernio &amp; Schwartz in Garden City, L.I.


Street Fashion; Bear Market in Hemlines
LEAD: FOR those seeking signs of stability on Wall Street, there is some good news.
Despite the heavy volume in recent trading that has turned the Dow Jones into a roller coaster, skirt lengths in the financial district have held steady, closer to the ankle than the knee.


Traveling With a Touchy Tooth
LEAD: ''Ouch!''


RETHINKING PAX AMERICANA
LEAD:  BEYOND AMERICAN HEGEMONY  The Future of the Western Alliance.
By David P. Calleo. 288 pp.
New York: A Twentieth Century Fund Book/ Basic Books. $20.95.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''I made a fortune and lost a large part of it, and now I've got to hunker down.''
Alfred Frank,
editor of The Prudent Speculator,
an investment newsletter


Miss Pomerantz Planning to Wed
LEAD: John J. Pomerantz of New York, Palm Beach, Fla., and Harrison, N.Y., and Mrs.
Sanford Furman of Tenafly, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Andrea Gayle Pomerantz to Mitchell David Lynn, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerry Lynn of New York, Palm Beach and Demarest, N.J.


RISING COST OF HEALTH CARE STILL OUTSTRIP MDEICARE GAINS
LEAD: WHEN legislators and lobbyists win a battle on Capitol Hill, they usually exult in triumph.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article on the music page of the Arts and Leisure section today about the soprano Elly Ameling misidentifies the pianist who will accompany her at Carnegie Hall on Thursday night.
He is Rudolf Jansen, not Dalton Baldwin.


WHICH PEAK IS UPPERMOST?
LEAD: THE two subjects of the debate in northwestern Litchfield County are lofty ones: which of two local mountains can rightfully be called the state's highest.


Lung Cancer Tied to Vapor From Oil in Stir Frying
LEAD: An abnormally high rate of lung cancer among Chinese women may be caused in part by smoky fumes from cooking oils used in stir-frying food, researchers say.


Felonies Down As Transit Police Reorganize
LEAD: New York City's transit police department, in the midst of a major reorganization, is on its way to recording one of the lowest annual subway felony rates in recent years.


Tuscany
LEAD: To the Editor: An article entitled ''Fattoria La Loggia is a farm that also welcomes guests'' appeared in the Travel section on Oct. 12, 1986.
It was written by Mary Davis Suro and described a captivating scene midst the Tuscan hills of Italy - ''a setting evocative of Medici banquets and medieval hunting parties .


FOOD INSPECTION RESULTS
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 14 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


FOR 'MYSTIC PIZZA,' TOWNS AND RESIDENTS 'JUST ACT NATURAL'
LEAD: SOME people couldn't cross the bridge.
Some handled odiferous fish, and others found strangers playing pool at their social club.
But they had few complaints - after all, they were helping to make a movie.


Miss Amoscato, Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Barbara-Jo Amoscato, a lawyer in the investment law division of the New England in Boston, formerly the New England Mutual Life Insurance Company, and James T. Sabaitis, an associate in the Boston law firm of Csaplar &amp; Bok, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Kevin Hanbury performed the ceremony at St.


Q AND A
LEAD: Dialing Weather  Question:I believe there is a telephone service for travelers who want to know what kind of weather they are going into.
How do you get it? -R.
H., Mahwah, N.J.
Answer:The service called WeatherTrak gives weather information for 190 cities in North America and 60 overseas.


Turkish Press: Dailies in Display of Freedom
LEAD: Turkey's eight main daily newspapers, some with a panchromatic flourish of news and some with near-naked flesh, hit the streets each day in a robust display of freedoms gathered since the military withdrew from power four years ago.


WEEK IN BUSINESS
LEAD:  A New Floor For the Dollar?


Ms. Leonard to Marry A Physician on Dec. 6
LEAD: Suzanne Kathleen Leonard, a tax associate at the New York law firm of Proskauer, Rose, Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, plans to be married Dec. 6 to Dr.
Karl-Walter Sykora, a second-year resident in pediatrics at New York Hospital.


McEnroe Sounds Off
LEAD: THEY have their fans, but there are those who resent the likes of pampered professional tennis players who earn huge sums while public servants struggle.
There those who think that professional tennis has lost its dignity as a sport and has generated into a crass business enterprise.


AN ELECTION INSPECTOR FILES REORT FROM THE FRONT LINES
LEAD: I'M an election inspector.


Beth Fuchs Becomes Bride Of R. M. Brenner, Lawyer
LEAD: The marriage of Beth Lois Fuchs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Lewis Fuchs of Roslyn, L.I., to Robert Meade Brenner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Brenner of Roslyn, took place last evening at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.
Rabbi Robert Widom officiated.


Perspectives: Taxes on Offices Raising the Burden on 'Unsold' Buildings
LEAD: THE property-tax burden on office tenants in older buildings in Manhattan that have not recently changed ownership may soon rise sharply.


CORRECTION
LEAD:  How Mutual Funds Have Performed  Best and worst performers since Oct. 15.
Fund
Return*
Objective
*3*Best Performers
Oppenheimer Ninety-Ten
7.98%
Option Growth
Oppenheimer Premium Inc.
4.91
Option Income
Shearson Lehman Sp. Sector
4.32
Capital Appreciation
AMA Inc.


MAVERICK SCULPTOR MAKES GOOD
LEAD: I'M BASICALLY KIND OF A MAVER-ick,'' Martin Puryear says. ''I've always felt - and maybe this goes way, way back to my earliest years - I really feel like an outsider.
I never felt like signing up and joining and being part of a coherent cadre of anything, ideologically, or esthetically, or attitudinally.


URBAN RATS IN FASHION'S MAZE
LEAD:  THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES  By Tom Wolfe. 659 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.95.


Blast Theory in Titanic's Sinking Is Disputed
LEAD: The suggestion that an explosion played a critical role in the sinking of the Titanic 75 years ago is incompatible with accounts by survivors, according to Dr.
Robert Ballard, leader of the expedition that found the wreckage of the giant ocean liner in 1985.


No-Visa Voyage to Leningrad
LEAD: Throughout the 180-mile boat trip from Helsinki to Leningrad I kept thinking that there would be some foul-up at the Soviet end, some piece of red tape that would prevent us from setting foot in Leningrad without visas.
The voyages, which resumed earlier this year after an eight-year hiatus, had been advertised as visa free, providing a daylong tour of the second-largest Soviet city (population five million) after an overnight trip on the Finnish ship Sally


WILDE IN NEW YORK: BEAUTY PACKED THEM IN
LEAD: THE Arizona docked in New York Harbor on the evening of Jan. 2, 1882.
It was too late to clear quarantine until the following morning.
The press, avid to see Oscar Wilde, could not wait.
Enterprising reporters ''came out of the sea,'' as Wilde picturesquely noted, their pens still wet with brine.
In fact, they chartered a launch to bring them aboard.


Parched Conditions Drying Northwest's Economy
LEAD: Everywhere you look in the Pacific Northwest, in the year of the worst drought since records have been kept, nature appears to have been turned inside out and the economy turned upside down.


South Shore Goes to 3-0
LEAD: Arthur Davis ran for two touchdowns as South Shore beat Sheepshead Bay, 15-6, yesterday at South Shore's home field in Brooklyn.
The victory was South Shore's third without a defeat in the Public Schools Athletic League Brooklyn A Division I, and it makes next week's game against Midwood, also 3-0, a pivotal one.


LOW TURNOUT PREDICTED FOR LOCAL ELECTIONS
LEAD: POLITICAL observers expect a low turnout Tuesday when Westchester voters go to the polls to select county legislators, supervisors, mayors, judges and city and town councils.


Eternal Vigilance Is the Price of Feminism
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Navy Lieutenant Wed To Janet L. Weinstein
LEAD: Janet Lynn Weinstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen D. Weinstein of Teaneck, N.J., and Otis, Mass., was married yesterday to Lieut. (j.g.) Richard Mercadante, U.S.N., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent James Mercadante of Randolph, Mass.
The nondenominational ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Dr.


The Point of Contention
LEAD:  To the Editor:


TURTLE BACK PURSUES 'STATE ZOO' STATUS
LEAD: DESPITE criticism that it is not happening fast enough, Turtle Back Zoo on Northfield Avenue here is said to be on its way to becoming the official state zoo, a modernized showplace comprising only species and habitats native to New Jersey.


Group Shares Lotto Jackpot
LEAD: A hectic, record-setting week for the Connecticut state lottery came to an end today when it was disclosed that three winning tickets worth more than $7.5 million each were sold in Newington, Hartford and Milford.
Al Carbone, 42 years old, of Newington, owner of Carbone's Auto Body, apparently holds one of the winning tickets along with nine employees, relatives and friends.


Are Rent Vouchers a Boon or a Bust?
LEAD: SINCE they were authorized by Congress in 1983, housing vouchers - cash substitutes given directly to tenants - have become the centerpiece of Federal policy on low-income housing.


EXCERPTS FROM SUFFOLK DEBATE
LEAD:  FOLLOWING are excerpts from a debate between two candidates for Suffolk County Executive: Michael A. LoGrande, Republican, who also has Conservative and Right-to-Life Party backing, and Patrick G. Halpin, Democrat, who is also running on the People Against Lilco line.
The Liberal Party candidate, John DiLavore Jr., did not attend.


Where a Good Squabble Mellows the Ozark Chill
LEAD: Now that the seasonal tide of tourism is starting to ebb, it is time for this town to turn its attention, once again, to contention.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Luxury Builder Explores a New Market
LEAD: ONE of Connecticut's best-known builders, whose projects have been almost entirely in the affluent communities of Greenwich and Stamford, has ventured for the first time into a more remote location and a lower price range.


St. Anthony Not Caught in Chase
LEAD: With only this weekend of action remaining before the playoffs, most of the teams in the Catholic High Schools Football League are still scrambling for position.
But not St.
Anthony of South Huntington, L.I.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:  PRINTMAKING TODAY  Printmaking has come a long way since flat photographic-images were reproduced by the thousands at low cost, permitting people of limited means to own a ''work of art.'' The Katonah Gallery's new exhibit, ''View From a Workshop: Selections From Tyler Graphics 1974-1987'' will ''give people a sense of how much time and effort goes into prints today, and how original each print has become; It takes weeks and months to create a single print,'' said Carolyn


Ann Morris Colin And Peter Herbst Planning to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Ann Morris Colin to Peter Herbst, a son of Eugenia V. Herbst of New York and the late Frank F. Herbst, has been announced by the future bride's parents, Cynthia Green Colin and Justin Colin, both of New York.
A March wedding is planned.


QUEENS JUDGE FINDS CHANGE TO HIS LIKING
LEAD: Judge Nat H. Hentel of the Queens Civil Court switched from the Republican to the Democratic Party three years ago, and the change paid off this year with a Democratic nomination for the State Supreme Court in Queens.
He was also endorsed by the Conservative and Liberal Parties but not his former colleagues, the


Margaret M. Hearn Engaged to Steven P. Fischer
LEAD: The engagement of Margaret Mary Hearn, the manager of training and development at the Harvard Community Health Plan in Boston, and Steven Patrick Fischer, the chief financial officer and the vice president of financial services at the Milton (Mass.) Medical Center, has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.


66 Are Injured By Toxic Leak At Texas Plant
LEAD: Sixty-six people were seriously injured and 3,000 residents fled their homes Friday after a leaking tank at an oil refinery sent up a cloud of toxic acid vapor.


Ed Bradley's Variation on a Classic
LEAD: FOR THE LONGEST TIME, THE ''60 Minutes'' regular Ed Bradley would not eat shrimp.
In fact, he could barely stand to look at the stuff, an aversion that lingered from the time he spent peeling the tiny creatures in his father's Detroit restaurant.


Devils' Latest Victim Is the Cup Champion
LEAD: The Edmonton Oilers, the defending Stanley Cup champions, are the latest team to find out how much the Devils have improved.


CARROUSELS FAST BECOMING JUST A MEMORY
LEAD: IN LINE with what experts say is a trend, the final remnants of old-time carrousels - the ones with artfully carved wooden horses and menagerie figures that made children merry as they went 'round and 'round - were sold here 'round and 'round - were sold here recently.


CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of an editing error, Peter Ackroyd's essay about Oscar Wilde in The Times Book Review today quotes the Marquess of Queensberry incorrectly in some copies.
His note to Wilde read, ''To Oscar Wilde posing somdomite  [ sic ] .''


NASSAU AND SUFFOLK HEAD FOR THE POLLS
LEAD: AN a rare electoral coincidence, Long Island voters will elect chief executives of both Nassau and Suffolk Counties on Tuesday.


Dance: Joffrey Offers Stevenson's 'Preludes'
LEAD: SOME ballets are like gems: their full value comes through when they are completely polished.
Certainly that is what has happened during the Joffrey Ballet's opening week in its performances of a 19th-century excerpt, the pas de six from ''La Vivandiere'' by Arthur Saint-Leon.


Miss Timmons to Wed T. F. Gibson 3d
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Timmons of Washington have announced the engagement of Mr.
Timmons's daughter Kimberly Anne Timmons to Thomas Fenner Gibson 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gibson Jr. of Indianapolis.
The couple plan to marry in February.


Home Prices Surge Upward
LEAD: THIS sleepy town of two general stores, three gas stations and 1,600 residents is experiencing an upsurge in new home construction.


TIPS ON REPLACING FLOORBOARDS
LEAD: REPLACING sections of tongue-and-groove wooden floorboards is not difficult if you use the proper tools and work carefully.


DICKERSON TRADED TO COLTS
LEAD: In an extraordinary three-team deal that could alter the balance of power in the American Conference East, the Los Angeles Rams sent Eric Dickerson to the Indianapolis Colts yesterday.


Dance
LEAD: Dancing tends to be a youthful art, but maturity does out.
There is nothing quite like the wryly lovable and yeasty performance of Stanley Holden, formerly of England's Royal Ballet, as the Widow Simone in Sir Frederick Ashton's ''Fille Mal Gardee,'' which he will perform Sunday, Tuesday and Wednesday with the Joffrey Ballet at City Center.


WHAT'S ALL THIS DYING, HELMUT?
LEAD:  BREAKERS  By Martin Walser.
Translated by Leila Vennewitz. 305 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $18.95.


FROM THE LEFT: Victor Perlo; Protect Jobs, Not Profits
LEAD: Excerpts from an interview with Victor Perlo, chairman, economic commission, Communist Party, U.S.A.


NEWS SUMMARY SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1987
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 3-29  Moscow may be adopting a strategy for limiting President Reagan's program for a space-based defense system that is subtler and more diplomatic, the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, indicated before leaving Washington.
Page 1  A Soviet state of transition, in which the country is wary of its past and uncertain of its future, coincides with Moscow's 70th anniversary under Communism next week.


Guests at Breakfast: In a Restaurant...And At Home
LEAD: BREAKFAST CAN EASILY BE COUNTED my favorite meal of the day, and so it is an especially enjoyable one to share with guests.


Lois M. Perelson To Wed Nov. 29
LEAD: Lois Marion Perelson, an associate in the municipal finance department at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, and Stewart Koerner Gross, an associate at E. M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Company, plan to be married Nov. 29.
The future bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel S. Perelson of New York, who have announced her engagement to a son of Merle Gross-Ginsburg of New York and New Milford, Conn., and Bernard Gross of Plainfield, N


Debuts; Four Pianists, an Organist and Violinist in Recitals
LEAD:  Andreas Bach


INTERIOR DESIGNERS AND WHAT THEY DO
LEAD: Re: ''Decorate Till You Drop,'' Long Island Sound, Oct. 11: Barbara Klaus's article on her ''design experience'' is little more than ''kaffeeklatsch'' humor to be relegated to her local circle of acquaintances, hardly worthy of the space it received.
She appears to have very little factual information on the design industry as a professional organization.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 1, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $4.95.)
Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New
York family begun in ''Evergreen.''
2
5
A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Warner,
$4.95.) Comdr.


Pretoria Acts to Improve Ties With Zimbabwe
LEAD: The South African Government made an unexpected move this week in an attempt to improve its icy political relations with Zimbabwe, its black-ruled neighbor.


THE ECONOMIC HISTORIANS' VIEW: Comparing the Collapses; John A. Garraty: Contradictory Signs
LEAD: AT first glance, there are many similarities between the extraordinary collapses of stock prices that occurred in October 1929 and the declines we have recently experienced.
Both hit after extended bull markets and amid general prosperity that tempted investors to ignore underlying weak spots in the economy: agriculture, coal mining and textiles in the 1920's, agriculture again and the smokestack industries today.


A SHIFT BY SOVIET TOWARD SUBTLETY ON ARMS FORESEEN
LEAD: The Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, has left Washington after raising the possibility that Moscow may be adopting a new strategy for limiting President Reagan's program for a space-based anti-missile defense.


Market Turmoil: 2 Vital Concerns
LEAD: As the markets fluctuated wildly last week, the debate over stock market volatility intensified.
Questions focused on the role of program trading and portfolio insurance and on the sophisticated instruments called stock index futures that make those techniques possible.
The debate raises an issue that goes right to the heart of capitalism: How to insure that the speculative element inherent in financial markets does not overwhelm the entire system.


Commercial Property: Warehouses; An 'Ugly Duckling' Starts to Get Investors' Respect
LEAD: LONG shunned for their lack of glamour and grandeur, warehouses now produce some of the highest annual returns in the nation's real-estate market.


Question Of the Week; What Will The Yankee Changes Mean?
LEAD: Meddlesome George and Billy the Unprintable are bad news.
How can the Yankees - in spite of their enormous talent and character - be winners with a pair of losers calling the shots?
L.
A.
BROOKS
Lancaster, Pa.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  CRAFTS IN PHILADELPHIA


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended Oct. 17  MANHATTAN  Clinton  $315,000
488 West 37th Street
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,550-sq.-ft. loft condo in a renovated prewar building; wall-to-wall carpeting, oak cabinets, Hudson River view; common charge $430, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Joffee LaSalle)


Question Of the Week; What Will The Yankee Changes Mean?
LEAD: Good news for the Yankees!
Billy Martin is a skilled and demanding manager.
He will unify this team and push each talented player to his limit.
Piniella is a quick study and will learn the general-manager business faster than most.
Lou is the perfect buffer between the ''Boss'' and the volatile Martin.


WHY BLACK ENGLISH DOESN'T ADD UP
LEAD:  TWICE AS LESS  Black English and the Performance of Black Students in Mathematics and Science.
By Eleanor Wilson Orr. 240 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $15.95.


MEN AND MOLES
LEAD: As an ardent nature lover and reluctant city dweller, all my sympathy was with the mole.


Building of Arts Center Progresses at Columbia
LEAD: Columbia University's undergraduate art center is taking shape on the lower two floors of a new 17-story dormitory under construction on campus.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. The brick fireplace in our home had been painted by previous owners.
We want to remove the paint and restore the natural brick.
What is the best way to do this?


Cable TV
LEAD: For movie fans who nourish their habit via cable, this is the week that justifies the subscription - three of last year's most talked-about films served up for the first time: ''Hannah and Her Sisters,'' ''Peggy Sue Got Married'' and ''Top Gun.''


Streetscape: The Corn Exchange Bank; A 'Noble Monument to Thrift' With an Unusually Modern Air
LEAD: MOST landmark controversies close with a bang not a whimper, the end of a crescendo of angry public hearings and threatened lawsuits.
But the old Corn Exchange Bank's unusual skyscraper complex at 11-15 William Street, in an area with more businesses than block associations, is scheduled for demolition without a determination by the Landmarks Preservation


GORBACHEV'S STYLE VEILS HIS SUBSTANCE
LEAD: WITH last week's announcement that Mikhail S. Gorbachev will be coming to Washington Dec. 7 for a summit meeting with President Reagan, Americans are promised a closer look at one of the world's most provocatve figures.


Outdoors; Focusing Clearly On Deer Hunting
LEAD: DEER hunting has begun in portions of the Northeast, including the Adirondacks, and if you are planning to join the venison seekers you should make sure that your rifle shoots where you aim it.


AUDUBON GUIDE TO WALKS IN COUNTY
LEAD: A NEW Audubon walking guide will both appeal to and inform Westchester residents who are hikers, bird watchers and nature lovers.
The guide covers 26 places, among them Ward Pound Ridge Reservation in Cross River, the Arthur W. Butler Memorial Sanctuary in Mount Kisco, the Marshlands Conservancy in Rye, the Eugene and Agnes Meyer Nature Preserve in Armonk, the Mianus River Gorge Wildlife Refuge and Botanical Preserve in Bedford, the Edith G.


Anne Garland Is Married To S. M. Collins, a Lawyer
LEAD: Anne Frances Garland and Steven Morse Collins were married yesterday at the Northside United Methodist Church in Atlanta by the Rev.
William Floyd.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: Rome-Milan Rapid Trains


Unwelcome Man In California
LEAD: WHEN Lawrence Singleton was paroled in California in April after serving 8 years of a 14-year term as a rapist, he became a man no one appeared to want as a neighbor.


Data Update
LEAD:  HOUSING COSTS/N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
$
%change from
% change from
Sept.
Aug.
Sept. 86
Rents[1]
&gt;133.5 -0.2#6.7
Homeowner's costs[1]#135.2 0.4#8.2
Fuel and utilities[2]#377.8 -0.1-1.1
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics


Practical Traveler; Calming the Jitters About Tipping on Cruises
LEAD: It takes no graduate student of body language to see how awkward many people feel about tipping.
They go through pockets and purse, pulling out handkerchiefs, house keys and credit cards, but never come up with a bill of a suitable denomination for the bellman poised by the door.
Eventually, they find a crumpled bill, or mumble something about catching the employee later, and retreat in embarrassment.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  THE DEVIL'S OTHER STORYBOOK  By Natalie Babbitt.
Illustrated by the author. 82 pp.
New York: Michael di Capua Books/ Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $10.95. (Ages 10 and up)


Woman Held in Philadelphia In Kidnapping of an Infant
LEAD: A woman was arrested here Friday on charges of kidnapping a baby boy from his mother's Baltimore hospital room in June.
The infant was being tested to confirm his identity, Federal agents said.


Washington and Managua: A chronology
LEAD:  July 1979 Sandinistas oust Somoza regime; Carter Administration starts economic aid.
January 1981 U.S., disillusioned, suspends $75 million in economic aid.
March 1982 C.I.A. plans to give covert aid to Nicaraguan opposition groups are disclosed.
May 1982 Nicaragua announces $166.8 million Soviet aid pact.


Miss Jacoby Is Affianced
LEAD: Tamar Jacoby, a senior writer for Newsweek magazine, and Eric M. Breindel, a columnist at The New York Post and the editor of its editorial page, plan to be married Jan. 16.
Their engagement has been announced by the future bride's mother, Mrs.
Irving Jacoby of Guilford, Conn.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A chart in some copies of Business Day yesterday showing how 10 mutual funds have performed since Oct. 15 listed Nova-Total Return, Bartlett Corporate Cash and Rightime Fund in the wrong category.


1917: WHEN WOMEN WON RIGHT TO VOTE
LEAD: WHEN Westchester women go to the polls Tuesday, they are unlikely to cause the stir they created 70 years ago in the election of Nov. 6, 1917.


PREPARATIONS FOR SPRING
LEAD: RAKE, rake, rake, blow, sweep or whatever to get the leaves off the lawn; if not kept off the grass, they will smother it and mat; what is more they will be extremely difficult to remove in spring and may even kill a lawn.
If finished using hand tools, wipe them and clean blades by rotating them in a box of sand; rub metal parts with oil or rust preventive.


Le Glorieux, the Favorite, Takes the D.C. International
LEAD: The strains of ''Deutschland Uber Alles'' wafted through Laurel Race Course today, signaling that Le Glorieux had provided West Germany with its first victory in the history of the Washington D.C.
International.
But the colt's triumph was multinational.
The 3-year-old represented West Germany because that is the nationality of his owner, Werner Wolf, but Le Glorieux was sired by an Irish stallion, born in England, trained by a Frenchman and ridden by a


THE FORMALITIES
LEAD: CHOOSING A PROPER EVENING shirt is a straightforward affair.
Or so says Alex Kabbaz, a partner in Pec &amp; Co., the Manhattan custom shirtmaker.


KARPOV AND KASPAROV AGREE TO DRAW IN GAME 7 OF SERIES
LEAD: The challenger, Anatoly Karpov, and the titlist, Gary Kasparov, agreed to a draw today in the seventh game of the world chess championship after a 79-move struggle.


WHY VICTORIAN DRAB? TRY TANGERINE GABLES!
LEAD: IT seems that some of the preservationists in my cliffside village are having a midlife crisis.
Finding themselves in a rut, they have chosen to change their colors.
As far as I'm concerned, it's not a moment too soon.


A 16-Touchdown Game
LEAD: Peter Borjestedt made a 25-yard field goal on Maine's second overtime possession for a 59-56 YankeeConference victory over Delaware today.
His winning field goal came after Delaware's second overtime possession ended when a field-goal attempt was foiled by a bad snap.


Gillian Drake Angle, a Director, Wed To James B. Moorhead in Connecticut
LEAD: At Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport, Conn., Gillian Drake Angle, a daughter of Joan M. Angle of Westport, Conn., and Ludlow, Vt., was married yesterday to James Barr Moorhead, a son of Mrs.
William S. Moorhead of Washington and the Plains, Va., and the late Representative Moorhead of Pennsylvania.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
8.43
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.75
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.84
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
$9.67
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


WILTON GIRL LIFTS U.S. SOCCER HOPES
LEAD: KRISTINE LILLY of the Wilton High School girls' soccer team is on a breakaway, ahead of her teammates but confronted by two defenders and the goalkeeper as she dribbles toward the Greenwich goal at a sprinter's speed last Monday in Greenwich.
Seemingly, it is a mismatch.
But, given Miss Lilly's skills, she has the edge in such a situation.


Debra Lynn Feldman Marries Bruce Kaliner
LEAD: The St.
Regis-Sheraton in Manhattan was the setting last evening for the marriage of Debra Lynn Feldman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Feldman of Boca Raton, Fla., and Bruce Richard Kaliner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Kaliner of Purchase, N.Y., and Boca Raton.
Rabbi David Benedict performed the ceremony.


Hat Whimsies
LEAD: THE outrageous cocktail hat - the kind that leads to conversation betwen strangers and breaks the ice at parties - bobbed about last week at the opening of an exhibition called Surrealism that will run through Jan. 23 at the Fashion Institute of Technology Galleries, 27th Street and Seventh Avenue.


A Nominee With a Short 'Paper Trail'
LEAD: PRESIDENT Reagan's last-minute selection of Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg for the United States Supreme Court left combatants in the long battle over Judge Robert H. Bork scrambling to learn new lines.


B. D. Smith To Be Wed To Miss Day
LEAD: The engagement of Beverly Billings Day to Bradford Delano Smith, a son of Mrs.
Frank Y. Larkin of Greenwich, Conn., and David Shiverick Smith of Washington, has been made known by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mrs.
Vincent C. Banker of Locust Valley, L.I., and Richard W. Day of New York.
The couple plan to marry in


Poll Finds Iowa Voters More Liberal Than Nation
LEAD: Iowa's highly influential voters are more liberal than other Americans on many campaign issues, they like President Reagan less and they are skeptical of the farm spending the candidates regularly promise them, a New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.


EAST; B.C. UPSETS TENNESSEE, 20-18
LEAD: Willie Hislop and Tim Frager ran for touchdowns in the first nine minutes of the second half as Boston College upset Tennessee, 20-18, today.


Guest Observer; A Magazine Junkie
LEAD: I'M HOPELESS WHEN IT comes to books.
I can't go past a bookshop without slipping in to buy some classic I've never read before -one of those handsome Penguin editions of Dickens or Jane Austen, a volume of Henry James's correspondence or the poems of Wordsworth.
The old-fashioned illustrations on the cover, the crisp pages, the unbroken spine: they give off powerful emanations of culture, promise self-improvement, a subtle deepening of the mind.


The Cocktail Party
LEAD: ATTENTION TO SMALL details can make a cocktail party anxiety-free and just as enjoyable for you as it is for the revelers.
Here are some tips to help you plan successfully.


MIDWEST; INDIANA SLIPS AS IOWA RALLIES, 29-21
LEAD: Chuck Hartlieb led a 86-yard drive that was capped by a 1-yard dive in the fourth quarter by David Hudson as Iowa rallied to stun Indiana, 29-21, today in a rain-drenched Big Ten game.


DEVELOPMENT: STRIKING A BALANCE
LEAD: IT is not very difficult for most of us to agree that overdevelopment has a negative impact on our lives and tranquillity, but have we considered properly what benefits could be derived from continued expansion?


Kenyan Police and Moslems Fight After Rally Is Canceled
LEAD: Police used tear gas to quell a riot by thousands of Moslems that began after officials broke up an Islamic religious rally in Mombasa, a witness and newspaper report said today.


Concert: Barattelli Group
LEAD: THERE is always a danger of provincialism on the new-music scene.
New York performing groups naturally tend to favor local or at least American composers, with only occasional representation from abroad.
And since new music doesn't ''sell,'' visits by entire foreign ensembles devoted to the new are rare.


A Lively Diversity Marks a New Label
LEAD: WHEN THE CD CATALOGUE of a small independent record company features such dissimilar entries as ''Lisztronique: Electronic Performances of Music by Franz Liszt,'' four volumes of Bach preludes and fugues with the organist Anthony Newman, and ''Larry Adler Live at the Ballroom,'' you just know that a lively imagination is at play behind the scenes.


MOVIES
LEAD:  That Hamilton Woman  Starring Vivien Leigh, Laurence Olivier. 1941.
Embassy Home Entertainment. 125 minutes. $19.95.
When we first see Lady Hamilton, she is an impoverished, sepulchral creature.
Asked to tell her story, she painfully relates one of history's most tragic love affairs - her momentous liaison with Adm.


A Very Moving 'Night, Mother'
LEAD: DOWNSTAIRS from the Main Stage at Theater Three in Port Jefferson is a smaller, cabaret-style open space in which shows geared to a more theatrically sophisticated audience are presented.
So, while Theater Three offers Neil Simon comedies or musicals such as the recent ''Show Boat'' on the Main Stage, it balances its own artistic needs by using the downstairs space for more challenging, creative endeavors.


Race Looks Short on Stars, but Long on Intrigue
LEAD: There are no big names to boast about.
And it is extremely doubtful that today's New York City Marathon will be run in the best of times, challenging the course record or the world best.
But this could be one of the more intriguing runs through the five boroughs in recent years, perhaps offering a sprint to the finish in Central


U.N. Agency Faces a Bitter Election
LEAD: In a bitter election campaign for the top job at the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the incumbent's personality and management style have become a matter of global politics.


Beneath the Glitter of Tinseltown's Golden Days
LEAD: WHEN BUDD SCHULBERG, F. Scott Fitzgerald and John O'Hara wrote about prewar Hollywood, their fiction helped create the imperishable fable of Tinseltown, the land of the studio mogul in the heyday of the picture palace.
Certainly, too, there was a legendary aspect to these writers' close and complex relationship: It was Mr.


Theater
LEAD: The Wooster Group, the SoHo-based experimental collective that has nurtured talents as diverse as the monologuist Spalding Gray and the film star Willem Dafoe, remains one of the last bastions of intense avant-garde seriousness in the contemporary theater.
Guided by its intrepid director Elizabeth L


MEROLA, BRONX DISTRICT ATTORNEY, EULOGIZED AS A MAN OF CONSCIENCE
LEAD: Hundreds of Mario Merola's friends, relatives and political colleagues - as well as some of his most bitter courtroom enemies - filled a Bronx parish church yesterday to pay their final respects to Mr.
Merola, who died Tuesday after a political career that included more than 15 years as the Bronx District


Looking Ahead, With Statistics and Tea Leaves
LEAD: ON Wednesday, when car makers report their sales for the last 10 days of October, those seeking to divine the course of the economy will pore over the figures as never before.
As the first solid piece of statistical evidence of consumer behavior since the stock market collapse, the numbers, depending on their strength or weakness, are sure to be seen as harbingers of continued moderate economic expansion or impending malaise.


OSCAR WILDE: COMEDY AS TRAGEDY
LEAD: GEORGE MEREDITH once described Oscar Fingal O'Flahertie Wills Wilde as ''a mixture of Apollo and a monster.''


RACING FOR LIFE
LEAD: I read with mixed emotions Joshua Korman's article about heart transplants (''Racing for Life,'' Sept. 20).
Andrew Dela Pena is a beautiful child and certainly has the right to a full life.


3-Day Blizzard in Himalayas Strands Nearly 200 Climbers
LEAD: Heavy snow kept nearly 200 foreign climbers from leaving Himalayan mountains after a freak snowstorm, but sketchy reports reaching Beijing today said the mountaineers were well-equipped for the stay.


Why It's Time for Public TV to Go Private
LEAD: PUBLIC TELEVISION IS SUP-posed to be in crisis: Where is its soul, its reason, its purpose, the spirit that would make it, as E. B. White once wrote, ''our Lyceum, our Chautauqua, our Minsky's and our Camelot''?
It is hard to say, although for some time now the crisis has been cast in terms of God overcome by mammon.


Dance: Ballet Hispanico In Bill of Five Works
LEAD: BECAUSE the members of Ballet Hispanico of New York simultaneously took pleasure and gave pleasure by dancing on Friday night, it was appropriate that three of the five works they presented at Davis Hall of City College celebrated the act of dancing itself.


Nicaragua Leader Seeks More Aid in Moscow
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra departed today for Moscow, where he is expected to seek a renewal of Soviet aid commitments.


Greek Role as Refugee Haven Brings Problems
LEAD: For seven days or so, until he seemed too tired to do so, Newi Celali told his story to anyone who would listen as he protested his plight by staging a solitary and largely unnoticed hunger strike outside the United Nations refugee office here.


Cash-Rich Funds Hold Out for Fire Sale
LEAD: MONEY managers who had built substantial cash positions as a defensive strategy before the stock market's collapse were in no hurry last week to return to buying common stocks.
Even in the face of prices that would have appeared irresistible a month ago, the prevailing feeling among some of the country's more conservative investors, some of whom had as much as 50 percent of their portfolios in cash, was that the risk of a further decline outweighed any opportunity.


LOVE IN THE BACK 40
LEAD:  DANCING AT THE RASCAL FAIR  By Ivan Doig. 405 pp. New York: Atheneum. $18.95.


CARING FOR THE CONDOR
LEAD: Is it possible that the endangered condors are unsuccessful in mating because of those awful names, AC-4 and UN-1?


RENAISSANCE TONES IN WILTON
LEAD: THE concert week includes more than a dozen choice entries.
Starting with today's, the avid music lover can first escape to the tonal niceties of an earlier era with Calliope, then bask in the classical-romantic delights promised by Music from Marlboro.


A Day or a Night At the Ball Park?
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


A VOTING MACHINE LEVER CAN ALSO BE A SAFETY VALVE
LEAD: THIS is an off year in national politics, but there is one element of the electoral process that never quite shuts off.


BICYCLISTS FIND FUN AND HEALTH IN CLUBS
LEAD: A TORRENTIAL rain did not deter Dan Weaver and Mark Covello from going out for a nine-mile bike ride one recent Sunday. ''When you're hooked on riding like we are, the rain doesn't bother you,'' said Mr.
Weaver.


N.F.L.'S Integrity Hurt by Owners
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Verbatim:; Hard Times
LEAD: ' Any major calamity affects fund-raising.
I remember when George Wallace was shot, when John Kennedy was shot, even when Reagan was shot, people stopped giving.
This time it's even worse.
People are old enough to remember the Depression. '
Bruce W. Eberle
Republican fund-raiser, noting the plunge in political contributions since the stock market debacle.


ITALIAN FOOD IN AN UNLIKELY SPOT
LEAD: GREAT RIVER, known for trees, country clubs, the Connetquot River and nearby Heckscher State Park, is an unlikely spot for a restaurant.
Monte Cristo Italian Restaurant and a nearby deli are the only beacons of light, as early autumn darkness settles among the houses and trees.


Gulotta: Tireless Executive
LEAD: THOMAS S. GULOTTA'S schedule one recent Sunday included appearances at a bicycle ride for charity, a civic association award ceremony, a Columbus Day parade, a ribbon-cutting at a new photography store and a party for a Long Beach man celebrating his 102d birthday.


THE ECONOMIC HISTORIANS' VIEW: Comparing the Collapses; Eugene N. White: Parallel Dilemmas
LEAD: THE parallels between the crash of the stock market in 1929 and 1987 are too strong to ignore.
Nevertheless, the recent collapse does not necessarily portend a new Great Depression.
The 1929 crash shook the economy, but it was other problems - some similar to today's dilemmas - that caused the collapse.


Nehemiah Plan
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Super-VHS Enters the Market
LEAD: OFTEN THERE IS A LAG of several months between the announcement of a new product and the time it appears in the shops.
That is why Super-VHS video recorders, hailed earlier in the year as one of the few genuine advances in the field, are only now beginning to reach the retailers.
Supplies may still be short for a while, but anyone considering a new V


CAN THE CONTRAS GO ON?
LEAD: James LeMoyne's article ''Can the Contras Go On?'' (Oct. 4), was an impressive portrayal of a sad band of young people who are neither ''freedom fighters'' nor terrorists but, rather, the inevitable dispossessed losers in a long-finished revolutionary war.
They are not unlike the Loyalists of our own Revolution, who were forced to flee to Canada and elsewhere.


Farms' Future On Pennsylvania Ballot
LEAD: People who are alarmed that houses and industrial parks are sprouting where crops once grew are campaigning for passage Tuesday of a $100 million state bond issue that would encourage farmers to stay on their land.


PORTRAITURE AND PERILS
LEAD: IT'S the kind of offer you can't refuse.
A friend calls - one of the nicest people you know - and explains that she needs her picture taken in a hurry.
She knows you're a capable photographer; you've done it before and she liked the results.
How soon does she need it? ''How about tomorrow?''


Question Of the Week; What Will The Yankee Changes Mean?
LEAD: What will the Yankee changes mean? Answer: More changes.  JAY KREISBERG
New Rochelle, N.Y.


Question Of the Week; What Will The Yankee Changes Mean?
LEAD: What will the Yankees changes mean?
A little more press coverage for Steinbrenner when halfway through the season he says he's unhappy with Martin's managing and is thinking of replacing him with Reggie Jackson.
MITCH NADEL
Danville, Pa.


Patricia Turner Is Married To Reginald E. Kavanaugh
LEAD: Patricia Claire Turner and Reginald Edward Kavanaugh, newspaper reporters in New Jersey, were married yesterday at Three Mile Run Church at East Jersey Olde Towne in Piscataway, N.J., by Judge Richard S. Cohen of the Appellate Division of Superior Court in New Brunswick, N.J.


Recital: Levine and Noda
LEAD: Museum on Thursday night.


Jersey Republicans Seek To Control Legislature
LEAD: With only days left before the legislative elections, Governor Kean is traveling the state on a quest for something that has eluded him in his six years in office - Republican control of the Legislature.


HOW TO MAKE IT A SUCCESS
LEAD: THIS IS THE TIME of year to think about festive gatherings of family and friends.
But it is also the time when holiday chores and social and business commitments can reach daunting proportions.
An entertaining success, then, lies less in creating ''the perfect party'' with the maximum amount of time and resources than in working out a plan to bring pleasure and a sense of celebration to the party giver as well as to the guests.


Indira Gandhi Remembered
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi placing a wreath yesterday on the spot where his mother, the Prime Minister, was shot and killed three years ago.
At left was Mr.
Gandhi's wife, Sonia. (Agence France-Presse)


BILLS SEEK CLEARER ADDRESSES
LEAD: IT IS 1:40 in the morning, and a rural volunteer ambulance squad, responding to a call for help after a traffic accident, is having trouble finding the spot.


Worse Is Imaginable
LEAD:  To the Editor:


AMID TURMOIL, YALE'S GAY STUDIES CENTER HOLD CONFERENCE
LEAD: One of the nation's first centers for homosexual studies held its inaugural conference at Yale University Friday and today, a reaction to an article in The Wall Street Journal calling Yale ''a gay school.''


Race for Kentucky Governor Growing Personal
LEAD: After weeks of debating such serious state issues as a lottery, a budget deficit and taxes, the most expensive gubernatorial campaign in Kentucky history has got back to the sort of personal attacks that have been traditional in the state's politics.


Stephen G. Bowen Jr. Wed to Susan B. Stout
LEAD: At the Crescent Avenue Presbyterian Church in Plainfield, N.J., Susan Bohlen Stout, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Stout of Plainfield, was married yesterday to Stephen G. Bowen Jr., the president of J. Walter Thompson USA Inc., the advertising agency in New York.
The Rev.
William R. Harvey, the pastor of the church, and the Rev.


Maria Ascione Marries
LEAD: Maria Lisa Ascione, a daughter of Francine Goode of Riverhead, L.I., and Richard Ascione of Fairfax, Va., was married yesterday at the Ethical Culture Society in New York to David Lambert, the son of Julia Vieland of Philadelphia and Robert Lambert of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and Bute, Scotland.
Dr.
Robert Berson, a leader of the Ethical Society of Northern Westchester, officiated.


ADVERSARIES AT THE START
LEAD:  PRINTERS AND PRESS FREEDOM  The Ideology of Early American Journalism.
By Jeffery A. Smith. 233 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $24.95.


A DIFFERENT INDEPENDENCE DAY
LEAD:  For many black Americans, the anniversary of the day their ancestors were freed from slavery is an independence day meriting at least as much to-do as the Fourth of July.
In O FREEDOM!
Afro-American Emancipation Celebrations (University of Tennessee, $24.95), William H. Wiggins Jr., a fellow of the Folklore Institute at Indiana University, brings much-deserved scholarly attention to the longstanding black American tradition of emancipation celebrations.


SYRACUSE WINS NO. 8
LEAD: As they were coming off the field after the game, the two coaches hugged and Mike Gottfried of Pitt said to Dick MacPherson of Syracuse, ''Go win the national championship.''


PLAN FOR OLD MINE ROUSES CORTLANDT
LEAD: WOMEN smoothed their fingernails for three-quarters of a century with emery, a substance almost as hard as diamonds, that came from the mines of Cortlandt, once among the largest producers of emery in the world.


Brunswick Goes to 7-0
LEAD: Brunswick moved its record to 7-0 with a handy 27-12 win over Salisbury, setting up next week's Fairchester League showdown with Fieldston, who shut out Dalton, 21-0.


MOZART MILESTONE SLIPS BY IN PRAGUE
LEAD: With a minimum of fanfare, Prague let one of the great anniversaries of operatic history slip by on Thursday night.
Two hundred years ago, in this city, Mozart conducted the first performance of ''Don Giovanni.''





Halfway Through A 2-Year Quest For Greatness
LEAD: THE last remaining magnums of champagne were still on ice when Pat Riley began implementing his plan, his blueprint for success.
The red lights above the dozen or so minicams in the victorious Laker locker room were still beaming.
And the players, just minutes after achieving their fourth title in this decade, were still wallowing in their euphoria.


YANKEES TO STAY IN NEW YORK CITY
LEAD: New York Yankee baseball in the Bronx, a 64-year tradition that spans 22 world championships, will continue for at least 45 more years under terms of an agreement announced last night.


TIPS ON REPLACING FLOORBOARDS
LEAD: REPLACING sections of tongue-and-groove wooden floorboards is not difficult if you use the proper tools and work carefully.


Involvement Found Up Among Reform Jews
LEAD: A new study of Reform Jewish leaders has found them more religiously involved than their parents and generally more liberal on social issues than other American Jews.


FOR A PLEASANT REPAST, DUCK, SALAD AND MOUSSE
LEAD: SOMETIMES after the theater or movies, it is more fun to eat at home than in a restaurant.
The menu given below is perfect for a late-night meal, not too heavy and easy to prepare ahead of time.
It also makes a pleasant weekend lunch.
Ducks are roasted with thyme, ginger, garlic and soy sauce and served at room temperature with a salad made from yellow split peas and collard greens.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Challenge for Chile
The confrontation between ideological purity and political compromise is much on the minds of Chileans as they struggle to frame their political future.
Page 22.
Ethnic Strife in Yugoslavia
Acts of violence by ethnic Albanian nationalists are increasing in Yugoslavia, leading to fearful talk of civil war.


Food Banks
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; What Will The Yankee Changes Mean?
LEAD: If the Yankees go into the next season with the same team as last season Billy Martin won't last the year.
If they get a pitcher and a frontline catcher he will.
But he better take the dugout phone off the hook because we all know someone will be calling.
ROBERT A. NISSEN
New York


Borough President To Give Arts Awards
LEAD: Borough President David Dinkins of Manhattan will present awards for excellence in the arts in a ceremony tomorrow night at 7:30 in Davis Hall at City College, Convent Avenue and 134th Street.


FINDING GRACE IN THE AWKWARD HUMANITY OF PEOPLE
LEAD: HELEN LEVITT WAS THE FIRST American photographer to fully comprehend the essence of Henri Cartier-Bresson's photographic message and put it into practice.
Like Cartier-Bresson, she understood how to combine intuition and intellect to forge sophisticated, lyrical compositions from commonplace events.


Soviet Survey of Moscow Residents Finds a Wide Range of Political Views
LEAD: Moscow residents approve of giving exit visas to Soviet citizens who want to emigrate, but they disapprove of releasing dissidents from prison or exile.


Writing One For the Gipper
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


'NEW VERSIONS OF THE FIGURE,' FROM THE WHITNEY COLLECTION
LEAD: ''NEW Versions of the Figure'' is Lehman College Art Gallery's new show, but the newness of its contents - a score or so figural sculptures drawn from the Whitney Museum's collection - is only relative.


On the Firing Line
LEAD: Hey, the field of Republican candidates looks pretty good.
At the debate conducted on Bill Buckley's ''Firing Line'' last week, our six-pack came across as both more experienced and comfortable in its own skin than the Democratic six- pack did on the same program.


Umpire's Work Not Up to Par
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


THE MINNESOTA TUNES THE NEW YORK BOY
LEAD: WHEN Sweet Music Viola - who, it happens, never played a musical instrument in his life, other than to drum fastballs into a catcher's mitt - came to town the other day to pick up a car from Sport magazine for being selected the Most Valuable Player in the World Series, he touched on differences between life in Queens, where he grew up, and life in


158 MUNICIPALITIES TO VOTE ON OFFICES
LEAD: FROM Greenwich to Thompson, voters in 158 of Connecticut's 169 cities and towns will go to the polls Tuesday to choose their municipal officials for the next two years.


NOT ALL BLACK MAYORS HITCH FORTUNES TO JACKSON'S STAR
LEAD: WITH the Democratic National Convention still nine months away, Mayor Harold Washington has done what he would not do in 1984: He publicly endorsed the candidacy of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, a fellow Chicagoan, for President.
In contrast, for two other black Mayors, W. Wilson Goode in Philadelphia and Harvey Gantt in Charlotte, N.


BEIJING IS GLIDING EVER MORE WESTWARD
LEAD: IF not capitalism, at least a capitalist ethic is seeping into the marrow of China.


DON'T RULE OUT TAX INCREASES
LEAD: AN arcane, theoretically fail-safe procedure called ''program trading,'' in which investment decisions involving hundreds of millions of dollars can be taken and implemented without human intervention, has been indentified as a factor in the stock market collapse.
Computer-driven program trading raised the peaks, deepened the valleys and compressed market cycles.


Agatha Christie's Canon
LEAD:  To the Editor:


POSTINGS: New Complex for Trenton; Bullish on Offices
LEAD: As more and more corporations settle in the New Jersey suburbs, Trenton, the state capital, is making its own push to become a first-class office center.
Already, about 10 office buildings - with two million square feet of space - are under construction, a bullish pace considering that the entire private sector now occupies only a half-million square feet.


Headliners; Into Philanthropy
LEAD: For 17 years, as president of Wesleyan University in Middletown, Conn., Colin G. Campbell has had all the college administrator's usual concerns about fundraising.


If You're Thinking of Living in:; Turtle Bay
LEAD: THE past is not only inscribed in the minds of the loyal, longtime residents of Turtle Bay; it is reflected in the streets themselves.


THE CITY'S PROSPECTS SEEM DOWN WITH THE DOW
LEAD: IN the wake of the stock market's crash two weeks ago and its erratic behavior since then, economists and market analysts have been unable to agree whether New York's economic future, which is so closely linked to the fate of the securities industry, looks disastrous or merely dim.


MEN AND MOLES
LEAD: I would like to point out that there is a safe method for ridding the home garden of moles.


BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 1, 1987
LEAD:
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
KALEIDOSCOPE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
$18.95.) Three sisters, separated by fate, and the
lawyer whose mission is to find and reunite them.
2
2
19
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.


DANCING DAYB, THEN
LEAD: RARELY have I come home from a movie with such an urge to write.


Exchange Is Facing Clerical Staff Strike
LEAD: Officials of the New York Stock Exchange, trading companies and the New York Futures Exchange, who are facing a possible strike by most of their clerical workers, continued contract negotiations with union officials yesterday and are scheduled to resume their talks tonight, a spokesman for the exchange said yesterday.


COURT CHOICE IN FOCUS: A PORTRAIT OF GINSBURG
LEAD: Douglas H. Ginsburg, President Reagan's new choice to fill the vacancy on the Supreme Court, is best known in Washington as an advocate of a conservative philosophy of government regulation, prodding agencies to decide regulatory questions according to a strict comparison of the social costs and benefits.


'First Amendment Demands a Hide That Tough'
LEAD:  To the Editor:


India Is Battling Pornographic Movie Posters
LEAD: Dozens of policemen swept through the capital's movie theaters last week, pulling down movie posters showing semi-nude women and sexually explicit scenes, to show the authorities' determination to enforce a new law on obscenity.


Question Of the Week; What Will The Yankee Changes Mean?
LEAD: What will the new or rather renewed Yankee changes mean?
Suffering for the fans, pressure on the players, field days for the media and finally - reruns of that old sitcom in the Bronx called the Yankees.
ANDREW SIFF
Middletown, Conn.


Watson Retains A 4-Stroke Lead
LEAD: Three years and three months since his last victory, Tom Watson played just well enough today to maintain his four-shot lead going into Sunday's final round of the richest golf tournament, the $3 million Nabisco Championships.


Linda Bradshaw To Wed in April
LEAD: The engagement of Linda Patrice Bradshaw to David Karim Lakhdhir, the son of Noor and Ann Hallan Lakhdhir of Westport, Conn., has been announced by her parents, Gail Bradshaw of Derwood, Md., and Thomas T. Bradshaw of Rockville, Md.
The couple plan to marry in April.


SOUTHWEST; Texas Reaches 3-0 In Conference, 41-27
LEAD: A Texas safety, John Hagy, returned both an interception and a punt for touchdowns as Texas defeated Texas Tech, 41-27, to remain atop the Southwest Conference.


Bottle Bill on Ballot in Capital
LEAD: A ballot initiative to require deposits on beverage containers sold in the District of Columbia could spur action in other states because of the high profile of the nation's capital, proponents say.


TRENDY MOUNTAIN BIKES POSE UNEXPECTED THREAT TO WILDERNESS TRAILS
LEAD: THE bicycle once seemed the environmentalist's dream machine, a solution to air pollution, traffic jams and flabby muscles.
But that was before bicycle makers here in Marin County added gears to some old fat-tire Schwinns and launched the latest rage to roll out of California: the mountain bike, a machine capable of climbing trails and scaring hikers as it roars like a roller coaster in a cloud of dust.


THE LAWYER'S SIDE OF THE MALPRACTICE ISSUE
LEAD: I would like to respond to ''Curing Those Who Sue Their Doctors''  [ Opinion page, Sept. 27 ] .
Dr.
K.
J.
Lee suggests that plaintiffs' lawyers are bringing too many groundless medical malpractice cases and are being unjustly enriched in the process.
I disagree.


MARKET EXPECTED TO INFLUENCE ELECTIONS
LEAD: VOTERS will go to the polls Tuesday to elect all 120 members of the State Legislature and scores of county and local officials, and to decide six statewide public questions, including three new spending proposals that could be affected by the stock market decline.
The polls will be open from 7 A.M.


SOVIET CRITICIZES U.S. ROLE IN GULF
LEAD: A senior Soviet envoy on a peace mission in the Persian Gulf criticized the United States Navy's presence here today, saying that one nation acting alone cannot bring about a cease-fire between Iran and Iraq.


Allyson Sass, a Violist, Marries Bradley Sklar
LEAD: At Temple Beth-El in Cedarhurst, L.I., Allyson Beth Sass, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
I.
Lawrence Sass of Tappan, N.Y., and Lee, Mass., was married last night to Bradley Frisch Sklar, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Barrett Sklar of Plainview, L.I.
Rabbi Reuben Katz performed the ceremony.


Jakarta
LEAD: To the Editor: I appreciated reading Barbara Crossette's ''A Neighborhood Tour of Jakarta'' since I returned a year ago from having lived in Jakarta for nine months, and because of the truth in her comment about its seeming inexhaustibility for ''unadvertised corners.'' Unfortunately, I didn't visit all of the sites she described.


SOUTH; AUBURN ROUTS FLORIDA AND LIMITS SMITH TO 72 YARDS
LEAD: Jeff Burger, who regained his eligibility last Thursday, passed for 218 yards and a touchdown to lead Auburn to a 29-6 rout of Florida in a Southeastern Conference game tonight.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Lendl vs.
Mecir: Ivan Lendl struggled past Pat Cash and Miloslav Mecir overwhelmed Mats Wilander yesterday to advance to the final of the $923,000 European Community Championship in Antwerp, Belgium.
Lendl relied on stamina to power him past Cash, 6-4, 7-6.
Mecir, ranked fifth in the world, used a variety of daring strokes to beat Wilander, 6-1, 6-3.


Estate Affairs
LEAD:  To the Editor:


The Woman Who Beat The Klan
LEAD: IN HER DREAM, THERE was a steel-gray casket in her living room.
Who was the dead man laid out in a gray suit?
She couldn't tell.
And every time she moved closer to the coffin, someone she didn't know said, ''You don't need to see this.'' But Beulah Mae Donald knew that she did, and so she woke from her dream at two in the morning in Mobile, Ala., on March 21, 1981.


UP IN ARMS IN ARIZONA
LEAD: THE NOTION OF CON-servative Barry Goldwater, the most prominent politician in Arizona history, calling for the resignation of an Arizona Republican Governor would once have seemed less likely than a blizzard in Phoenix.
Yet when he did so, on Oct. 9, nobody was deeply shocked.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''So I say to the leaders in Congress, let's roll up our sleeves, pull together.'' - President Reagan, on the budget talks.


TIBET COMMUNISTS LINK RIOTS TO DALAI LAMA
LEAD: Communist officials from Tibet today accused the Dalai lama, its exiled spiritual leader, of fomenting the recent Tibetan rioting.


G. S. Makela, Stockbroker, Weds Elizabeth Porter Hill
LEAD: Elizabeth Porter Hill, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Hill of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to Gregory Strickler Makela, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Makela of New Smyrna Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Anne Kimball performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.


The Tango Meets Jorge Luis Borges
LEAD: TWO BROTHERS, SO CLOSE IT was said that to quarrel with one of them was to reckon with two enemies, fall in love with the same woman, who comes to live with them in their shack.
They try to share her, but jealousy begins to fester between them.
They try to get rid of her, selling her to a whorehouse - but each sneaks off to visit her in secret, so the brothers finally buy her back, the trust between them now tainted by mutual deception.


Chicago Mother Traded Her Child for Cocaine
LEAD: The authorities have started paper work to deny a pregnant drug addict custody of her two babies.
The work began one day after the mother looked through a glass partition and identified a 22-month-old boy as the child she had traded for $50 worth of cocaine.


Rebels Burned Bus Passengers, Survivors in Mozambique Say
LEAD: Survivors of an ambush on a convoy said rebels burned buses that were crowded with passengers, the national press agency reported today.
At least 211 people were reported killed.


Americans in Philippines Face Security Curbs
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino flew to Clark Air Base today to demonstrate her concern over the killing of three Americans on Wednesday, as Americans in the Philippines faced heightened security restrictions.


CARING FOR THE CONDOR
LEAD: ''Caring for the Condor'' certainly feathered our nest of bird lore, joyously informing us that endangered California condors are finding refuge at the San Diego Wild Animal Park and the Los Angeles Zoo (Works in Progress, by Bruce Weber, Oct. 4).


White at The New Yorker
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


An Evening of Song
LEAD: WITH A LOG FIRE CRACKLING in the fireplace and delicious aromas emanating from the pear tarte tatin in the oven and the saddle of venison just roasted, Hugh and Tiziana Hardy's Greenwich Village town house was a welcoming place.


Elizabeth Finch, Psychiatrist, to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Dr.
Elizabeth Lathrop Finch to Peter Goodwin Coe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm D. Coe of Bassett, Va., has been announced by her parents, Elizabeth J. Finch of New York and Quogue, L.I., and Edward R. Finch Jr. of New York and Westhampton Beach, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.


SEPTEMBER COUPLES
LEAD:  SURVIVING THE SEASONS  By Fern Kupfer. 327 pp.
New York: Delacorte Press. $17.95.


MANAGING AN ORCHESTRA: A FEW 'RELATED POINTS'
LEAD: Congratulations on Robert Sherman's ''How an Orchestra Fell Silent: Postlude''  [ Oct. 11 ] .
Mr.
Sherman goes beyond fund-raising to highlight critical, common problems of nonprofit management.


GRUNEWALD: OUTSPOKEN ADVERSARY
LEAD: AS a trial lawyer and formal Federal prosecutor, Raymond B. Grunewald has earned a reputation as a tough and savvy courtroom foe.


NO -- IT'S THE WRONG IDEA AT THE WRONG TIME
LEAD: Perhaps the most important vote that New Jerseyans will cast on Tuesday is on the $185 million bond issue to build a baseball stadium in Lyndhurst, in the Meadowlands.


Making Arrangements - For Under $25
LEAD: WHILE IT IS TRUE THAT THE IS-land of Manhattan was bought in 1626 for less than what most people pay for a floral arrangement today, according to several Manhattan floral designers it is not necessary to pay top prices - or use fancy flowers - for holiday decorations.


Music: Leinsdorf Offers Mozart and Stravinsky
LEAD: FOR his current New York Philharmonic subscription program, Erich Leinsdorf has chosen to bracket Mozart with Stravinksy, and in particular early Stravinsky in late revisions.
This interesting concept -Mr.
Leinsdorf has long been about the most stimulating program-builder among present-day conductors - allows one to hear Mozart refracted through the prism of a young Stravinsky colored by his own mature reflections (as well as the hyper-modernist clarity of Avery Fisher


Dance: By Linda Mussmann
LEAD: LINDA MUSSMANN'S ''Blue Scene Grey,'' performed by her Time and Space Limited company on Friday at the Marymount Manhattan Theater, operates on a number of levels.
The first part of a four-part piece called ''Civil War Chronicles,'' the cantata jogs through 80 years of American history, from 1781 to 1861, in a manner that often makes schoolroom history come alive.


Nassau Executive Foes Clash in Style and Views
LEAD: The battle for Nassau County Executive matches two candidates with clashing styles and divergent views on the future of the county.


DOCUMENTARY
LEAD:  World Without Walls: Beryl Markham's African Memoir  Narrated by Diana Quick and Lyle Talbot.
Wild Wing Productions. 60 minutes. $29.95.
Beryl Markham, who in her youth looked as striking as Vanessa Redgrave, died last year in Nairobi.
Suddenly, she is more acclaimed in death than in life.
Her memoir, ''West With the Night,'' rediscovered and reprinted after 40 years, has been on the best-seller charts all during 1987, with a half-million copies in print from North Point Press of Berkeley, Calif.


FROM THE RIGHT: George Gilder; Overseas Decline Is The Culprit
LEAD: Excerpts from an interview with George Gilder, author of ''Wealthy and Poverty'' and ''The Spirit of Enterprise:''


Why Not a Blockbuster?
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Film Is the Weapon, Apartheid the Target
LEAD: IT WAS SPRINGTIME IN PRETORIA, THE SOUTH African capital, a time when the city is ablaze with the purple of jacaranda trees, the air on the highveld clear and crisp.
But in the somber, wood-paneled office of the Prime Minister, Balthazar Johannes Vorster, it was the onset of another, more bitter kind of season.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  'DISTINGUISHED ARTISTS'  Just in case anyone has any doubt about what Oyster Bay thinks of the performers it books for its music series, the town provides a lavish hint.
The programs come under the umbrella of Distinguished Artists Concerts, and today, when the current series opens, that distinction falls upon Mike Carubia and the Great South Dixeland Jazz Band.


Tuscany
LEAD: To the Editor: Enthused by the piece about the Fattoria La Loggia in Firidolfi, I reserved and paid by last February the entire amount of the rental for an apartment consisting of two twin-bedded rooms and a living room.
Upon arriving at La Loggia at the end of June this year, I was made to wait for Mr.


'MASTER HAROLD' ON EMELIN STAGE
LEAD: IN its own sure way, the Emelin Theater has not only established a noteworthy record of sensibly selected and impressively produced plays but also is building an honorable tradition of consequential professional theater in the county.


FOR A PLEASANT REPAST, DUCK, SALAD AND MOUSSE
LEAD: SOMETIMES after the theater or movies, it is more fun to eat at home than in a restaurant.
The menu given below is perfect for a late-night meal, not too heavy and easy to prepare ahead of time.
It also makes a pleasant weekend lunch.
Ducks are roasted with thyme, ginger, garlic and soy sauce and served at room temperature with a salad made from yellow split peas and collard greens.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. The brick fireplace in our home had been painted by previous owners.
We want to remove the paint and restore the natural brick.
What is the best way to do this?


Train Crash Kills Crewman
LEAD: A slow-moving freight train struck a tanker truck filled with 8,000 gallons of gasoline Friday, killing a train crewman and injuring four other men, officials said.
The crash ignited an explosion and fire that shot flames 100 feet into the air; smoke could be seen 16 miles away, witnesses said.
The truck was straddling the railroad tracks, waiting to turn onto a highway, when the train hit it, splitting the vehicle in two, the authorities said.


FROM THE LEFT: Anwar A. Shaikh; The Crisis Underneath
LEAD: Excerpts from an interview with Anwar A. Shaikh, professor of economics, graduate faculty, New School for Social Research, and member, Union for Radical Political Economics.


The George Factor
LEAD: DURING a visit to the Meadowlands Sports Complex several years ago, George Steinbrenner surveyed the football stadium, the indoor arena and the race track.


Ann Walden and Scott Corwin to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
William D. Walden of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ann Elizabeth Walden, to Scott Laurence Corwin, a son of Mrs.
Herbert M. Greenberg of Princeton, N.J., and Nantucket, Mass.


Diana Gaston Weds
LEAD: At St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien, Conn., Diana Brooke Gaston, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Keiley Gaston 3d of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher Arthur Lindon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Hopkins Lindon of Rockville Centre, L.I.
The Rev.
Stephen Parker performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


Report Links Youths to 40% of Arson Arrests
LEAD: Juveniles accounted for 40 percent of arson arrests last year, with 6.6 percent of those arrests involving children under 10 years old, according to a report by the National Fire Protection Association.


Pleasantville Struggles
LEAD: Pleasantville - undefeated and ranked first in the C Division - faced what seemed to be an inferior opponent but found its stiffest challenge of the season yesterday, managing to hold off Valhalla in the closing minutes by a score of 13-12.


Anne C. Weisner Weds Patrick Joseph Dooley
LEAD: At St.
Peter of Alcantara Roman Catholic Church in Port Washington, L.I., Anne Catherine Weisner, a lawyer at Chemical Bank, and Patrick Joseph Dooley, an associate in the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert Clerkin performed the ceremony.


Tuscany
LEAD: To the Editor: My family and I recently spent about six weeks in Tuscany, three of them at the Fattoria La Loggia.


INTERIOR DESIGNERS AND WHAT THEY DO
LEAD: The Dorises of the article bear as much resemblance to professional interior designers and architects as the Tammy and Jim Bakkers look like the Pope and the Vatican.


Change in Leadership of Japan's Ruling Party
LEAD: Noboru Takeshita leading a cheer at the Liberal Democratic Party convention in Tokyo after he was named the party's president.
He succeeds Yasuhiro Nakasone, right, who will continue as Prime Minister until Nov. 6.
Behind Mr.
Takeshita was Shintaro Abe, secretary general of the party. (AP)


Deborah S. Pilla, A Dentist, Is Wed
LEAD: Dr.
Deborah Susan Pilla, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick A. Pilla of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Dr.
David O. Volpi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Orlando Volpi of Belle Vernon, Pa., were married yesterday afternoon at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Thomas Joyce performed the ceremony.


Ex-Judge Is Accused of Tenant Harassment
LEAD: The former superintendent of a Queens apartment house has testified that the owner of the building - who later became a judge - had asked him if he knew anyone who would rape, rob or assault elderly tenants so they or assault elderly tenants so they would move out of their rent-stabilized apartments.


Symbols That Matter
LEAD: A financial world fearful of incompetence in the American Government is looking desperately for reassuring symbols.
People want a sign that Washington understands the seriousness of the economic threat.
They want to see a willingness to put aside political fancies in a search for common purpose.


Two Worlds in the South Seas
LEAD: The South Pacific archipelago of Vanuatu is charmingly schizophrenic: some people wear gowns or three-piece suits, others wear only grass skirts or grass sheaths.
Some carry gold cigarette lighters, others carry smoldering sticks.
Some drink Bordeaux, others drink kava, a local intoxicant with less cachet but more effect.


Frank Talk on AIDS Brings Praise for Uganda
LEAD: The people of this verdant East African country are being admonished to practice ''zero grazing.''


Q&amp;A
LEAD: A Caveat on Co-ops Question: I read recently about an improperly managed cooperative apartment house where the owners lost their equity to a bank and became renters of their apartments instead of owners.
I am considering buying a co-op apartment and want to know if there is any type of insurance I can buy to cover this contingency.


SHAKE-UP IN THE FRONT OFFICELEAVE SOME HOT SEATS EMPTY
LEAD: SEVERAL winters ago, Dave Bristol was dismissed as the San Francisco manager on his way into the managers' luncheon at the annual December baseball meetings.
Two winters later, the managers gathered for their luncheon with reporters who covered their teams, but the Yankees' table had an empty chair.


NEW YORK'S POLICE FEEL THE CHILL OF RACIAL TENSION
LEAD: NEW York City has experienced a widely perceived increase in racial tensions this year - notably in connection with the Howard Beach trial, in which four white youths are charged with murder in connection with an allegedly racially motivated attack on three blacks - and tensions within the police department have to some extent reflected those of the city.


High-Quality Audio at Midprice
LEAD: THOSE IN SEARCH OF sound equipment at this season will, as always, find optimal dollar values in the midprice range rather than among the least expensive models, which were discussed in this space last week.


Language in 'Sting of the Bee'
LEAD:  To the Editor:


U.S., CONTRAS AND SANDINISTAS FACE A RECKONING ON PEACE PLAN
LEAD: A HISTORIC deadline arrives in Nicaragua this week.
The deadline on Thursday closes the first phase of the ambitious Arias plan designed to bring peace to Central America generally and particularly to end the guerrilla erally and particularly to end the guerrilla war that has killed 40,000 Nicaraguans since the Sandinistas took power in 1979.


CAN THE CONTRAS GO ON?
LEAD: James LeMoyne's rendering of the contras and his experience of chumming with them and giving away his T-shirts is a strangely naive portrait of a group that has become notorious for the war atrocities it has committed against the Nicaraguan people.


A KOREAN DIPLOMAT RANSOMED IN BEIRUT IS SILENT ON CAPTIVITY
LEAD: A South Korean diplomat taken hostage in Lebanon 21 months ago and freed after payment of a ransom arrived in Geneva today, looking exhausted and declining to speak with reporters who greeted his plane.


EXPECTING THE WORST LESSENS THE DISTRESS OF REMODELING
LEAD: BEFORE we decided to have an addition put on our house, we had heard so many tales of horror that I'm still amazed that we went ahead and did it.
I put it right up there with our bravest acts, like picketing Richard Nixon in 1968 and adopting a pregnant cat in 1979.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE NANTUCKET DIARY OF NED ROREM: 1973-1985.
By Ned Rorem. (North Point, $30.) Frank O'Hara is said to have remarked that Ned Rorem's ''Paris Diary'' ''reads like 'The Alice B. Toklas Cook Book' without the recipes.'' In his ''Nantucket Diary'' Mr.
Rorem corrects this omission.
Kept between the ages of 49 and 62, a period during which Mr.


Prospects; Battling the Budget Deficit
LEAD: America's stubborn budget deficits - roughly $150 billion in the last fiscal year - are widely blamed for contributing to the Crash of '87.
New York Times reporter Lawrence M. Fisher asked three former members of the Council on Economic Advisers for their views on what should be done about it.


Lakers Own the West, but East May Be Wide Open
LEAD: The following analysis of the National Basketball Association teams was prepared and written by Sam Goldaper.


Headlines and Stock Quotes on Call
LEAD: THERE I was, sitting at my desk, when the phone rang.
The better to exercise, I stood up to answer it. ''Are you sitting down?'' my friend asked. ''You'd better sit down.'' I sat, fearing the worst.  ''The Dow is down 500 points.''


Question Of the Week; What Will The Yankee Changes Mean?
LEAD: More chaos and nerve-wracking tension!
The Yanks desperately need frontline pitching, a slick-fielding shortstop and a power-hitting catcher - not a disruptive, recycled manager or a figure-head of a general manager who seems to have very little self-respect.
NICHOLAS D. DeCURTIS
New York


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Amnesty Offered By Harrisburg


Where the Sick Lie in Chains
LEAD: The images lend a grim whiff of the Middle Ages to modern New York City hospitals: Patients in desperate straits - devastated victims of AIDS, pregnant women on the verge of labor - lie shackled and chained to their beds.


Budget Negotiators Consider Cuts In Some Cost-of-Living Increases
LEAD: Budget negotiators from Congress and the White House, who met today on ways to reduce the deficit, have discussed the possibility of lowering cost-of-living increases in some Government programs, officials said.


IS THERE LIFE AFTER FOOTBALL?
LEAD: Peter Applebome's article ''Is There Life After Football?'' (Oct. 4) was well done, but it didn't address the issue: Did Southern Methodist University do anything wrong?


AN UPBEAT MCNEIL IS TRYING TO GET BACK IN STEP
LEAD: Although the Jets' 17-16 loss to Washington last week was not sealed until a last-minute field goal, signs of trouble could have been seen in the first few minutes of play.


Softening Tone, Jackson Delivers Dual Message
LEAD: As he campaigns tirelessly across the country, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson is presenting a dual message, as a mainstream politician reaching for the support of a broad spectrum of voters and as a candidate whose positions are well to left of the others seeking the Democratic Presidential nomination.


ABOUT LONG ISLAND
LEAD: IT took my friend Judy Huttner to open my eyes to what was happening all around me, without my noticing.
Judy is an artist, but primarily she is an art-tour guide, conducting trips to museums and galleries and studios for Long Islanders interested in the graphic arts.


Therapists Protest Award to Member of Reagan AIDS Panel
LEAD: Dr.
Theresa Crenshaw, a member of the President's commission on AIDS, drew renewed criticism at a meeting of 3,400 family therapists here this weekend.


200 REPORTED HELD BY POLICE IN CHILE
LEAD: The police detained about 200 dissidents today in several Santiago neighborhoods as they passed out pamphlets that called for an open presidential election, witnesses reported.


Greece to Study Charges of Bugging the Press and Politicians
LEAD: A parliamentary panel is to investigate opposition charges that Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou's supporters ordered the bugging of telephones used by journalists and politicians, including those of former allies in the Greek Communist Party.


TURNING OVER NEW LEAVES - IN GOLD
LEAD: ''GOLD LEAF,'' observed Charles Prendergast early in this century, ''is like a half-solidified piece of sunlight.''


CRIME
LEAD: By now Jonathan Valin's series about Harry Stoner, the Cincinnati private eye, is well established.
It started in 1980 with ''The Lime Pit,'' and the new FIRE LAKE (Delacorte, $14.95) is the seventh Stoner case.
Stoner is in the classic tradition of the American private eye.
He is a big, tough man who does not throw his strength around but nevertheless is not one to be trifled with.


Alice Albright Wed in Capital
LEAD: Alice Patterson Albright, a daughter of Madeleine Korbel Albright of Washington and Joseph Medill Patterson Albright of Rome, was married at the Washington Cathedral yesterday to Gregory Bigelow Bowes, the son of Judith G. Bowes of Chevy Chase, Md., and David B. Bowes of Washington.
Bishop John T.


PRINCETON DEFENSE HALTS PENN
LEAD: Princeton, controlling the game on offense and defense, beat Penn today, 17-7, the Tigers' first victory over the Quakers since 1982.


FEMALE COMPOSERS SEEKING PARITY
LEAD: WHEN Elizabeth Bell was in college in 1950, she was told that women couldn't be composers. ''Women don't have the strength,'' a teacher said.


WAS MAN MEANT TO FLY?
LEAD: AMERICANS have always been on the move, but never have so many moved so far so fast.


Economicsese
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Signing Up Einstein
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Piano: William Wolfram
LEAD: WILLIAM WOLFRAM seems to have survived the competition process with most of his sensibilities intact.
He is a busy warrior in the field, and fresh from his victory in the William Kapell piano contest at the University of Maryland, Mr.
Wolfram gave a piano recital at Alice Tully Hall on Friday night.


Stepping Up the War on Discrimination
LEAD: THE tactics used to combat housing discrimination in New York City are expanding, city officials and fair-housing watchdog groups report.


Radio Days
LEAD:  A PRAIRIE HOME COMPANION: THE LAST SHOW  Starring Garrison Keillor (in photo), with Chet Atkins, Leo Kottke and Jean Redpath.
Walt Disney Home Video. 114 minutes. $29.95.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  BORN TO PAY: The New Politics of Aging in America.
By Phillip Longman. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Phillip Longman is a young writer and Washington activist who worries a lot.
He believes his generation, baby boomers born from the mid-1940's to the early 1960's, are destined for hard times indeed.


LOGRANDE: PLANNER'S PHILOSOPHY
LEAD: MICHAEL A. LoGRANDE, the Acting County Executive in Suffolk County and the Republican nominee for the post, came to Long Island in 1967 as a registered Democrat. ''I was a registered Democrat when I lived in Flushing,'' he said in a recent interview, ''and I was still a registered Democrat when I moved to Hauppauge.


Pierre Franey's Holiday Supper
LEAD: EVERY YEAR, I LOOK FORWARD TO the marathon of holiday entertaining with both anticipation and trepidation.
The season's social calendar overflows with cocktail parties, concerts, theater, sports events and the like, which often leave few moments for serious cooking.
This is also the time, however, when hosts are expected to show off their plumage with dazzling dishes.


TRAILBLAZER RECALLED
LEAD: Every year, on the last Sunday of October, hikers from New Jersey join those of neighboring states to memorialize Raymond H. Torrey, co-founder of the New York-New Jersey Trail Conference and one of the area's legendary outdoorsmen.


Miss von Strasser Weds Fabian Graf von Einsiedel
LEAD: At Our Lady of Perpetual Help Roman Catholic Church in Pelham Manor, N.Y., Daisy Felicitas von Strasser became the bride yesterday of Fabian Graf von Einsiedel, a son of Walburga Grafin von Einsiedel of Frankfurt and the late Wittigo Graf von Einsiedel.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rudolf von Strasser of Pelham Manor and Vienna.


Now Just Suppose Mrs. Reagan Had Been a Medicare Patient
LEAD:  To the Editor:


FOR A PLEASANT REPAST, DUCK, SALAD AND MOUSSE
LEAD: SOMETIMES after the theater or movies, it is more fun to eat at home than in a restaurant.
The menu given below is perfect for a late-night meal, not too heavy and easy to prepare ahead of time.
It also makes a pleasant weekend lunch.
Ducks are roasted with thyme, ginger, garlic and soy sauce and served at room temperature with a salad made from yellow split peas and collard greens.


Jakarta
LEAD: To the Editor: Barbara Crossette's ''Neighborhood Tour of Jakarta'' (Travel, July 5) provides first-time visitors with a fine introduction to Jakarta's historical districts.
On my first trip, though, I was disappointed that this bustling third world city had so little of historical interest still standing.


FROM THE LEFT: Harry Magdoff; A Free-Market Failure
LEAD: Excerpts from an interview with Harry Magdoff, co-editor, with Paul Sweezy, of Monthly Review, a socialist magazine:


T. P. Kikis to Wed Laura Best Yorke
LEAD: The engagement of Laura Best Yorke to Thomas Peter Kikis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter T. Kikis of New York and Lyford Cay, the Bahamas, has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Lane Harvey Yorke of New York and Aaron Jones Yorke 4th of New York and Southampton, L.I.
A January wedding is planned.


Prosecutor Resigns in Florida
LEAD: Florida's first statewide prosecutor has resigned, saying his effectiveness was undermined by an investigation into his purchase of stolen suits from a Miami tailor.


Question Of the Week; What Will The Yankee Changes Mean?
LEAD: The return of Billy Martin brings new excitement and anticipation to New York baseball.
We can all sit on the edge of our seats waiting for Billy to make his inevitable indiscretion.
Will he punch out a fan, another of his players, an opposing player or perhaps even an umpire?
Or will 1988 see Billy make the ultimate move?


FOOTBALL IS BACK, AND A HUSBAND RUNS WITH THE WIND
LEAD: ''MARVELOUS!
Did you see that?'' my husband shouts.
He's sitting alone in the den watching TV.
It's a Sunday afternoon and it's football time.
Close by, in another part of the house, I'm reading or painting.
Sometimes during a game, I'll hear my husband on the phone talking to our son. ''Can you believe that run?


Midnight Comes, And King's a Bullet
LEAD: Bernard King, once the pride of the Knicks, officially became a Washington Bullet last night.


What's Doing in Sydney
LEAD: Five years ago, when tourism to Australia was just beginning to take off, the Australian writer Germaine Greer observed that ''what most people mean when they say they'd like to go to Australia is that they'd like to go to Sydney and its suburb, Ayers Rock.''


FORDHAM RALLIES BEHIND FRESHMAN
LEAD: Dave Olsakowski, a freshman quarterback who replaced the injured Bob Hagen in the second quarter, ran for one touchdown and passed for another to lead Fordham to a 38-13 victory over Iona in a Liberty Conference game yesterday in the Bronx.


ELIZABETH STRIKE: SHAME ON ALL OF YOU
LEAD: As you enter Elizabeth on Route 1, there is a sign that reads, ''Elizabeth - A Proud Lady.'' After the performance on the school dispute, or lack thereof, by those responsible for the leadership in our city, I suggest the sign be redone to read: ''Elizabeth -A Lady of Shame.''


Offices Grouped With Homes
LEAD: Bernard and Marc Nevas are taking advantage of a special zoning district in Westport, Conn., in which developers may combine clusters of apartments and offices on a single plot as long as they limit building size and height.


'Double' Wedding At the George St.
LEAD: IT'S April 19, 1956, the wedding day of Grace Kelly and Prince Rainier in Monaco and of and Rosemary Fazzari and Sal McDonald in Perth Amboy.


Colombia Says Rebels Killed Ten Policemen
LEAD: Ten police officers, including a captain, were killed when their vehicle was blown up by a mine in an ambush by guerrillas in northeastern Colombia, a military spokesman said today.


In Yugoslavia, Rising Ethnic Strife Brings Fears of Worse Civil Conflict
LEAD: Portions of southern Yugoslavia have reached such a state of ethnic friction that Yugoslavs have begun to talk of the horrifying possibility of ''civil war'' in a land that lost one-tenth of its population, or 1.7 million people, in World War II.


Lori and Debra Miller to Marry Medical Students
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Miller of Manhasset, L.I., have announced the engagements of their daughters Lori Beth Miller and Debra Sue Miller to Daniel Jay Kase and Alan Jay Schefer, respectively.


Hysteria Goes On
LEAD: IT was a long time coming, and they wanted it so much they could taste it.
Now that they have it, fans of the Minnesota Twins apparently plan to keep on savoring their World Series victory, at least until Wheaties gets tired of printing ''Breakfast of Champions'' boxes showing the champion Twins celebrating their triumph.


UNCERTAIN SOVIET MARKS MILESTONE
LEAD: The Soviet Union enters its eighth decade under Communism next week in a state of transition, wary of its past and uncertain about its future.


BACK-TO-BACK DINNERS
LEAD: BACK IN THE NEAR-MYTHIC PAST -at least 10 or 15 years ago - the dinner party was a happy ornament of middle-class life.
In the modern world, however, with the two-career family becoming the national mode, many couples are finding precious little room in their lives for these kinds of social gatherings, and the prospect of giving a dinner party, let alone two, may well throw them into a panic.


Home Rule Debate Stirs Vermonters
LEAD: T. Hunter Wilson lives on the land that his ancestor, Boomer Jenckes, farmed after the American Revolution.


Question Of the Week; What Will The Yankee Changes Mean?
LEAD: What changes?
Steinbrenner dismissing a Yankee manager?
Steinbrenner rehiring Billy Martin?
Steinbrenner publicly criticizing Yankee players?
Steinbrenner threatening to leave the City of New York?
Sadly, they are all too predictable.
Nothing has really changed in the Steinbrenner years except maybe a little loss of Yankee legend.


WATCHING HER BODY WORK
LEAD:  RUNNING TIDE  By Joan Benoit with Sally Baker.
Illustrated. 213 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.


COMPUTER SHOWS IT CAN BEAT A HUMAN MASTER
LEAD: The most significant finding on the progress made by chess-playing computers was the victory in the recent Pennsylvania State Championship Tourney by Hitech, a program by Dr.
Hans Berliner of Carnegie-Mellon University.
Hitech scored 4 1/2- 1/2 to share first


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Eastchester, N.Y.$675,000
12 Sunny Brae Place
7-bedroom, 4-bath, 62-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, playroom, maid's room; taxes $9,064.
New Rochelle, N.Y.  $287,500
59 Darling Avenue
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old frame ranch; eat-in kitchen, terrace, skylight, playroom; taxes $3,621.


Cole Porter's Lyrics Depend On the Music, But Even Solo They're So Easy to Love
LEAD: IF YOU'VE FORGOTTEN WHAT it's like to leave a theater walking on air, a remedy lies ready to hand.
The revival of ''Anything Goes'' at the Lincoln Center's Vivian Beaumont Theater is wonderfully exhilarating and euphoria-inducing; Patty LuPone's Reno Sweeney is only one - though the most memorable - of an array of fine performances, and whatever minor imperfections the production may have are soon lost sight of in the glow cast by its energy and joie de vivre.


Tokyo Bars Sanctions Against Iranians
LEAD: Japan told the United States today that it would not go along with American sanctions on trade with Iran, but suggested that it would at least try to hold imports of Iranian oil at present levels.


A Holiday Sampler
LEAD: EVERY BIG AMERICAN CITY HAS ITS LIGHTED Christmas trees and its Thanksgiving or New Year's parades.
But most cities also have their own, characteristic ways of celebrating.
A selection follows:  BOSTON


'FEDERALIST' BIRTHDAY
LEAD: LAST week was a busy one for the first Chief Justice of the United States, John Jay.
His constitutional contributions were discussed by Justice Harry A. Blackmun of the United States Supreme Court in a speech in Justice Jay's home town of Rye, while the debate over the future of Jay's boyhood home continued in Albany.


A CONCERT OF MINSTREL'S POETRY AND SONG
LEAD: FROM ''Travels With Oswald'' to ''Marriage at the Eiffel Tower,'' the music week promises an unusually wide variety of tonal fascinations.
Oswald von Wolkenstein, as Grove's Dictionary tells us, was an Austrian ary tells us, was an Austrian minnesinger, a minstrel, in the first very stirring and adventurous life, in the course of which he traveled over the greater part of Europe.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Times Magazine last Sunday about dissension among Republicans misidentified one group that Pat Robertson hopes will support his Presidential bid.
The group should have been identified as opponents, not advocates, of gun control.


Broadcast TV
LEAD: Some meaty dramas adapted from best sellers await viewers this week. ''The Snake Pit'' (1948) - Wednesday at 2 A.M. on Channel 5 - is a bold, forceful drama about a young woman's collapse and confinement in a mental institution, from Mary Jane Ward's book.
Olivia de Havilland was cited by the New York Film


In Defense of the Sweet
LEAD: SAUTERNES AND BARSAC FROM France, trockenbeerenauslese from Germany, late-harvest riesling from California: all luscious sweet wines, all masterpieces of the winemaker's art - and all virtually ignored by the wine-drinking public.


PUERTO RICAN PAINTING AT SQUIBB GALLERY
LEAD: IF DOUBTS remain about the symbiotic relationship between art and politics, ''Puerto Rican Painting: Between Past and Present'' should put them to rest once and for all.


Reagan Renews Appeal to Act Soon on Nominee
LEAD: President Reagan insisted anew today that the Senate should act quickly on his nomination of Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg to the Supreme Court, saying he wanted ''no delays to gear up opposition or support for this nomination.''


How Reagan Created the Crash
LEAD: Start with the French theologian Georges Bernanos: ''The worst, the most corrupting lies are problems poorly stated.''


TENSE MANILA DEBATES HOW BEST TO FIGHT THE REBELS
LEAD: WHETHER the gunmen who killed three American servicemen and a Filipino businessman near Clark Air Base in the Philippines last week were Communists is not certain.
An anonymous caller claimed responsibility for the Communists' Alex Boncayo Brigade.
American and Philippine authorities said the ambush followed the pattern of assassinations by Communists, but it was still possible that a right-wing group had killed the Americans, hoping the


Vermont Moves to Decertify Former Bennington Educator
LEAD: The State Education Commissioner, Stephen Kaagan, has asked for the decertification of George Sleeman, the former Bennington area school superintendent.


HOW RISK RATTLED THE STREET
LEAD: ONCE upon a time, there were mostly stocks, bonds and bank accounts, and it was a much simpler age.


Douglas Yeager Wed To Rev. Linda Higgins
LEAD: The Rev.
Linda Higgins, the daughter of Betty Higgins of New York and the late Elliott Higgins, was married yesterday to Douglas Yeager, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Yeager of Paramus, N.J.
The Rev.
Patricia DeJong, assisted by the Rev.
Robin Bickel, performed the United Church of Christ ceremony at the Riverside Church in New York.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A report in Travel Advisory on Oct. 11 incorrectly listed the languages included in a new book, ''The Wander Woman's Phrasebook.'' The phrases in the book are translated into Spanish, not German, as well as into French and Italian.
In addition, the publisher was misidentified; it is the Shameless Hussy Press.


Researchers Report Progress In the Treatment of Cirrhosis
LEAD: A drug used to treat gout has significantly extended the lives of cirrhosis victims and even reversed the damage that cirrhosis does to the liver, researchers working in Mexico have reported.


FOR EQUESTRIANS, EVERY DAY IS A DAY FOR RIDING OR PRACTICING
LEAD: ALONG with the glut of people in New Jersey, the most heavily populated of the 50 states, there are now more than 100,000 horses, whose growing population includes standardbreds and thoroughbreds, ponies and palominos, many born and raised on horse farms in the state.


Books From The Times
LEAD:  CITY SLICKERS.
By William E. Geist. (Times Books, $16.95.) He came from the Midwest to a city he suspects is ''as different from mainland America as Botswana.'' William E. Geist's impressions filled the About New York column of The New York Times as he explored a city he found ''exciting, yes, but in a terrifying kind of way.


Can Nations Set Aside Their Parochialism in Time?
LEAD: IN placing their money, modern investors leapfrog national frontiers.
From Tokyo to London to New York, bankers shift billions daily at the shiver of a Eurodollar rate or the flick of an arbitrager's computer keys.
Today the sun may set on the British Empire, but never on the pulsing financial markets.


Howard Beach Lawyers to Attack 2 Accounts
LEAD: Defense lawyers in the Howard Beach murder trial have signaled the ways they will attack the accounts of two key prosecution witnesses who are expected to testify this week.


Fashion; IMITATION OF LIFE
LEAD: FABRICS THAT ARE STRIPED, SPOTTED AND scaled with animal and reptile prints never seem to fade into extinction.
But there are times when their presence is as difficult to ignore as a thundering stampede.
Now, for instance.


AMID ETHICS STRUGGLE, PORT CHESTER TURNS TO FIGHT CONNECTICUT
LEAD: Hard-pressed Port Chester officials, facing breach-of-ethics charges for buying condominiums before they became available to the public, have received some good news in another dispute in their village.


On Language; Goons and Ginks and Company Finks
LEAD: SCAB BALL'' WAS THE label pinned on the professional football played by replacements or substitutes by such sportswriters as Tony Kornheiser of The Washington Post.
The owners' use of scab labor -usually a union member's derogation of an employee who works during a strike -prevailed, and the players' strike was broken.


The Reagan-Bush Accord
LEAD: Vice President George Bush is constantly asked to demonstrate how he is independent of President Reagan.
When the question came up again in the Republican candidates' debate in Houston last Wednesday, his answer pro-duced both an exclamation mark and a question mark.


Dance: Susan Murphy's Trapeze Program
LEAD: SUSAN MURPHY called her program of trapeze-dances ''Up Is a Good Place,'' on Thursday at the Anita Shapolsky Gallery, and ''up'' did look like a serene place to be.


Search of Pittsburgh Pupils Leads to a Suit by A.C.L.U.
LEAD: Parents of 21 elementary pupils who were ordered to disrobe partially during a search for a missing watch have sued a school district.


The Flight to Money Market Funds
LEAD: THE rout on Wall Street has produced at least one clear winner: money market funds. ''Panic in the equity markets creates a flight to safety, and money funds are one of the few groups to benefit from the general market turmoil,'' said Glen King Parker, publisher of Income and Safety, a Fort Lauderdale,


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  WHITES, by Norman Rush. (Collier/Macmillan, $6.95.) From 1978 to 1983, Norman Rush was co-director of the Peace Corps in Botswana, an experience that led him to write short stories about the invisible barriers separating black Africa from its would-be saviors.
This ''admirable collection'' is about ''disillusionment and loss of conviction,'' Leslie Marmon Silko wrote in The Book Review last year.


HERBERT MAYES, 87, A FORMER TOP EDITOR OF MAGAZINES, DIES
LEAD: Herbert R. Mayes, who built a reputation as one of the country's most respected magazine editors at Good Housekeeping and McCall's, died of pneumonia Friday evening at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 87 years old.
Having headed Good Housekeeping, a Hearst publication, for 20 years, Mr.


MORE WOMAN SEEK X-RAYS OF BREASTS
LEAD: In the two weeks since Nancy Reagan's surgery for breast cancer, more women have been seeking mammograms, the X-ray tests that can detect breast tumors before they can be felt palpably.


Sipping Whiskies
LEAD: LIKE FINE WINE, PREMIUM WHISKY should be sipped and savored.
And, like fine wine, each variety and brand of premium whisky is distinguished by its own color, bouquet, flavor, texture and lingering taste.


Lions Glimpse Promised Land
LEAD: Columbia managed to get a lead for the first time in a year, but the edge didn't last long yesterday and by the end of the afternoon the Lions had been beaten for the 38th straight time.


Social Events
LEAD: Having Fun, Aiding Others  Exotic Fare in Newark  Nov. 1 - ''A Night in Old Lhasa'' with Tibetan food, fashions, music, folk dancers, jewelry and art will benefit Tibet House in Manhattan and the new Tibetan galleries at the Newark Museum.
The party, from 5:30 to 9, will be at the museum, 49 Washington Street in downtown Newark.


A Decisive Struggle Looms in Chile For a 'New' Pinochet and His Foes
LEAD: At a luncheon some months ago, the leader of one of Chile's small center-right parties turned to a Socialist leader and raised an issue that has plagued Chilean public life for more than two decades.


Opera: First 'Boheme' of Met Season
LEAD: FRANCO ZEFFIRELLI'S ''Boheme'' returned to the Metropolitan Opera Friday evening for its first performance of the season.
The director's six-year-old staging of the Puccini opera remained the most striking characteristic of the production.
Rodolfo's garret continued to pose a challenge for the singers, who had to project their voices from far back on the stage as well as engage in some uncomfortable swordplay on some uncomfortable swordplay on the rooftops of Paris.


'MOBY DICK' MEANINGS AND MISQUOTATIONS
LEAD: When Herman Melville, in ''Moby Dick,'' attributed the line ''I only am escaped alone to tell thee'' to Job, he was referring to the Book of Job, and not to the character.
Actually this line was uttered in the Bible by four separate messengers to Job.
There is quite a difference between having the victim cry that he has escaped alone and having a servant tell the victim of the latter's losses.


WHY NOVELISTS ARE SO SANE
LEAD:  EVERY PERSON'S LIFE IS WORTH A NOVEL  By Erving Polster. 193 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


SWISS TO PROVIDE RECORDS OF CONTRA AID ACCOUNTS
LEAD: Records of secret bank accounts held by Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and other major figures in the Iran-contra affair will be handed over to the United States next week, Switzerland has announced. week, Switzerland has announced.


CAN THE CONTRAS GO ON?
LEAD: James LeMoyne's sympathetic account of the battle-weary contras needs to be balanced by some coverage from the other side.


A FAIRY-TALE MUSICAL GROWS UP
LEAD: OFTEN A SONG CAN BE THE KEY TO THE evolution of a musical.
With ''Into the Woods,'' the new Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine show opening Thursday at the Martin Beck Theater, the turning point came when the composer wrote the second-act ballad, ''No One Is Alone.'' The song is sung by Cinderella after her prince has disappeared, to Little Red Ridinghood, as they huddle together in the wake of a cataclysm.


WRIGHT'S VISION OF THE CIVILIZED WORKPLACE
LEAD: THERE ARE TWO KINDS OF COR-porations that embark on serious building projects - those that believe, with not a little cynicism, that the chief benefit of architecture is its publicity value, and those that go about the business with more earnestness.
The Johnson Wax Company was firmly in the latter camp 50 years ago, when it began work on an extraordinary complex of buildings designed by Frank Lloyd


Nyerere, in Shift, Remains Tanzania Party Leader
LEAD: Julius K. Nyerere, who ruled Tanzania for 24 years, was overwhelmingly re-elected chairman of his country's sole political party today, casting doubt over the future of current economic changes that moderated his Socialist principles.


MAYOR OF INDIANAPOLIS KEEPING OPTIONS OPEN
LEAD: Mayor William H. Hudnut has acknowledged that he is seeking the presidency of the University of Tennessee, but he says he will withdraw his application if he is re-elected to a fourth term next week.


Items Treasured By China's Sages
LEAD: TIMED TO COINCIDE with the impressive presentation of art works from the Shanghai Museum on view in ''The Chinese Scholar's Studio: Artistic Life in the Late Ming Period,'' at the Asia Society, is a dealer's exhibition organized by James J. Lally that expresses in a generous assortment of art and objects the traditional taste of the educated elite in


Summit Meeting: Just a Handshake?
LEAD: Now that Mikhail S. Gorbachev has finally set a date for visiting the United States, the next question is what kind of summit meeting it will be.


Postings: Home Builders Forum; Looking at 1988
LEAD: In planning its conference on the outlook for the real estate industry, the National Association of Home Builders could not have predicted that the stock market would take a nose dive two weeks ago.


Filtering Airwaves For Indecency
LEAD: ELEVEN years after issuing an order banning indecency in broadcasting, the Federal Communications Commission acted six months ago to enforce the order.


San Francisco's Own Bread
LEAD: San Francisco sourdough is a proud tradition in the city by the bay, dating back to the 19th century when Basque shepherds and 49-ers arrived in the tent town with a bit of sourdough starter, or ''mother,'' bundled in their knapsacks.
They sustained themselves in the mountains and remote gold country by making a simple bread.


ENSLAVED BY PALSTIC, FREED BY CALLIGRAPHY
LEAD:  THE GOLDEN DROPLET  By Michel Tournier.
Translated by Barbara Wright. 206 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $16.95.


ANTISMOKING CAMPAIGN IS PLANNED FOR NEW YORK
LEAD: Speakers at an antismoking conference said Friday that an advertising campaign would target members of the New York City Council who fail to support a bill to restrict smoking in public places.


FROM THE RIGHT: Henry G. Manne; Let the Markets Settle
LEAD: Excerpts from an interview with Henry G. Manne, dean of law and director of the Law and Economics Center at George Mason University.


Maine Sees a Crossroad, and It's Busy
LEAD: Just after daybreak each morning, Weyman Billings sits before his living room window to watch a solitary loon swimming in the clear waters of Donnell Pond.
He wonders how long the loon will be there.


'The Chalice and the Blade'
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Whose Words Are They, Anyway?
LEAD: IN the past 20 years, J. D. Salinger has undoubtedly become the most famous - as well as the most read - recluse in the world.
He has rarely been sighted in public, has not given an interview since 1953 and, although he continues to write fiction, hasn't published any of it since a short story appeared in The New Yorker in 1965.


Jazz: Buck Clayton Band
LEAD: THE 13-piece band that Buck Clayton is leading at Fat Tuesday's, Third Avenue at 17th Street, through today reflects his years of experience as one of the major stars of Count Basie's orchestra during its rise to fame in the late 1930's and early 40's and his work as a composer and arranger that began in his Basie days and has continued ever since.


Other Solutions
LEAD:  To the Editor:


HALPIN: RELENTLESS CHALLENGER
LEAD: PATRICK G. HALPIN, the first Democrat to win in his State Assembly district in 112 years, shocked the political establishment in Suffolk County four years ago by coming within 22,000 votes of defeating the incumbent County Executive, Peter F. Cohalan.


FICTION
LEAD:  THE AUTOMOTIVE HISTORY OF LUCKY KELLERMAN.
By Steve Heller. (Chelsea Green, Paper, $9.95.) ''On his sixty-fifth birthday Frank Kellerman locked himself inside an old stone schoolhouse filled with honey bees,'' begins Steve Heller's subtle first novel.
For the next seven days, Frank (or Lucky, as he was called before old age, diabetes, injury and loneliness took their toll), tells his life story to his only friends, the bees.


Jordana Pomeroy To Marry in May
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Harris Pomeroy of New York and Garrison, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jordana Pomeroy to Tyler Anbinder, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen B. Anbinder of New York and Washington, Conn.
The couple plan to wed May 22.


Robbie Robertson Waltzes Back Into Rock
LEAD: ROBBIE ROBERTSON, WHO WAS the guitarist and producer for the Band and wrote ''The Weight,'' ''The Night They Drove Old Dixie


Winner Laments
LEAD: THERE is more than one way to win a driving championship, and Nelson Piquet of Brazil, who won his third Formula One title yesterday, was lamenting that he could not have found a better way to his.
Piquet, who came to the Grand Prix of Japan with 73 points, 12 more than his teammate and closest rival, Nigel Mansell of Britain, captured the title by default when Mansell, who could have taken the championship by winning the Japan and Australian races, was injured and forced to withdraw from the Japanese race.


Staging an Open House
LEAD: AN OPEN HOUSE IS NOT YOUR everyday kind of affair,'' said Roulhac Toledano, as she rushed around her family's 10-room apartment, trying to tie up loose ends before her 60 guests arrived. ''But it's good for lots of different people who may not know each other.'' She might have added that it is also good for hosts: Because people tend to arrive at different times, it's possible to entertain large numbers in the space of a day or an evening.


Traficant of Ohio Planning Regional Presidential Effort
LEAD: Representative James Traficant Jr. has decided to mount a regional campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination that will put him on the ballot in ''rust belt'' states like Pennsylvania and his native Ohio.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  SCHOONER SAILINGS  The Richard Robbins, a schooner built in 1886 in Greenwich, has returned for a few days of sailing on the Cohansey River.
Two-hour trips aboard the restored vessel are being sponsored today, tomorrow and Tuesday by the Cumberland County Historical Society of Greenwich, which numbers among its members Rebecca Robbins


PRACTICING VEGETARIANISM
LEAD: As a vegetarian, I was deeply disturbed and offended by Priscilla Feral's remarks about animal issues in general and Friends of Animals policy in particular  [ ''Connecticut Q&amp;A,'' Oct. 11 ] .


For Coaches, Ties Don't Always Bind
LEAD: EARLIER this season, Florida State tried a 2-point conversion with 42 seconds remaining in its football game against Miami.
The 2-pointer failed, and Coach Bobby Bowden's Seminoles lost, 26-25.


PIERPOINTE PROJECT CALLED BOON TO YONKERS
LEAD: Critics of the plan to build a new residential community on the Hudson River with shops and public waterfront access  [ ''High Rises Draw Protest in Yonkers,'' Sept. 27 ]  completely lose sight of this proposed development's most significant impact: it will provide stimulus to the well-being and economy of all of


An Elegant, Low-Calorie Feast
LEAD: HOLIDAY FARE IS GENERALLY laden with richness - and calories.
With a microwave oven, however, you can create a low-calorie meal so festive and delicious that no one will miss the usual indulgences.
Because microwave cooking requires no fat, and allows vegetables and herbs to retain their flavor, and fruits their sweetness, you won't be tempted to add extra butter, salt or sugar.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 6 about the Sea Islands off Georgia referred incorrectly to Clifford West, former chairman of the Georgia Marshlands and Islands Association.
Mr.
West is alive, in Norwich, Vt.


DIOXIN: HOW MUCH IS TOO MUCH?
LEAD: THE state has picked incineration as the technology to rescue Connecticut from a mounting pile of trash, but safety questions are growing about the smokestack emissions and the ash.


DATA BANK: NOVEMBER 1, 1987
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'87
I Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,831.2
$3,735.3
$3,718.0
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
3.8
2.5
1.4
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'87
I Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$134.5
$136.6
$138.0


Old English Conductors
LEAD:  To the Editor:


CRITIC OF GORBACHEV OFFERS TO RESIGN HIS MOSCOW PARTY POST
LEAD: A top Communist Party official confirmed today that the Moscow party leader, Boris N. Yeltsin, offered to resign last week at a meeting of the party Central Committee.


THE ECONOMIC HISTORIANS' VIEW: Comparing the Collapses; Moses Abramovitz: No Panic Now
LEAD: EVERY serious depression in business, and virtually every recession in American economic history, has been accompanied by a serious decline of stock prices.
Not every serious decline of stock prices has led to a depression or even a recession.
Moreover, when the two came together, it cannot be said that the stock market collapse was the cause of the business contraction.


GROUP HELPS DISABLED FIND WORK
LEAD: A YOUNG organization is telling employers that disabled people make good workers.


REPUBLICAN CONTENDERS MEET IN ROUND 1
LEAD: ''WE'RE HERErrxh to get the flavor of six candidates,'' said William F. Buckley Jr. last week, and at times the flavor was peppery in the first debate of the contenders for the Republican Presidential nomination.
Vice President Bush slipped several verbal punches and hit back strongly, protecting his front-runner status, according to polls and politicians.


About Men; One Man's Kids
LEAD: I TEACH FIRST GRADERS.
I LIVE in a world of skinned knees, double-knotted shoelaces, riddles that I've heard a dozen times, stale birthday cakes, hurt feelings, wandering stories and one lost shoe (''and if you don't find it my mother'll kill me'').
My work is dominated by 6-year-olds.
It's 10:45, the middle of snack, and I'm helping Emily open her milk carton.


Streaks Continue
LEAD: Bergen Catholic's strong team kept two impressive streaks alive yesterday as it turned back St.
Joseph of Montvale, 17-0, at Oradell.


Coming to Our Economic and Military Senses
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Quandary in Gulf: Success Brings Escalation
LEAD: Iran's decision to resort to the use of Silkworm missiles, because all other military options have been neutralized by United States operations in the Persian Gulf, illustrates the quandary of American military strategists in the region: Military success only seems to lead to escalation.


Garbo Talks
LEAD:  CAMILLE  With Greta Garbo and Robert Taylor (both in photo).
MGM/UA Home Video. 110 minutes. $24.95.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. The brick fireplace in our home had been painted by previous owners.
We want to remove the paint and restore the natural brick.
What is the best way to do this?


Interesting Facts Finally Noticed
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Question Of the Week; What Will The Yankee Changes Mean?
LEAD: TweedleBoss and TweedleBilly.
The other Yankees are only supporting players in their perpetual drama.
Nothing changes.
TREBOR LLOYD
New York


Directors' Operas: Sport for Lazy Minds
LEAD: AS I SAT AT ''AIDA'' IN HOUSTON the other evening watching a throng of dangerously inept spear carriers trying to persuade me that they were ferocious Egyptian warriors celebrating a victory over the Ethiopians, I was struck by how much energy and money opera houses regularly expend nowadays to dispel illusion.


Dickerson Is Happy to Become a Colt
LEAD: ''I'm ready to play,'' an exhausted Eric Dickerson said today after a whirlwind chain of events made him a member of the Indianapolis Colts.


BOARD MIGHT NAME TEMPORARY CHIEF
LEAD: The search for a new Schools Chancellor, which New York City officials had originally hoped to complete by early this month, will almost certainly not be finished when Nathan Quinones leaves the post Dec. 31, according to the head of the search committee.


DINING OUT MEXICAN, WITH ALL THE TRIMMINGS
LEAD: ONE swallow does not a taste trend set, but Pancho's and Gringo's in Brookfield shows promise of setting new standards of authenticity for Mexican restaurants in Connecticut.


FOR A PLEASANT REPAST, DUCK, SALAD AND MOUSSE
LEAD: SOMETIMES after the theater or movies, it is more fun to eat at home than in a restaurant.
The menu given below is perfect for a late-night meal, not too heavy and easy to prepare ahead of time.
It also makes a pleasant weekend lunch.
Ducks are roasted with thyme, ginger, garlic and soy sauce and served at room temperature with a salad made from yellow split peas and collard greens.


Miss Ekberg Wed To Gerald Tsai Jr.
LEAD: Cynthia Ann Ekberg, a vice president of Kidder Peabody &amp; Company in San Diego, and Gerald Tsai Jr., chairman and chief executive officer of the Primerica Corporation in Greenwich, Conn., formerly the American Can Company, were married yesterday at the Hotel del Coronado in Coronado, Calif.
Judge Runston G.


Alaska Outbreak May Signal What's Ahead in Flu Season
LEAD: Federal flu-watchers say the Taiwan flu, which plagued the nation last winter, may not be the dominant strain this winter.


UNIFORM RULES ON SENTENCING TO TAKE EFFECT IN U.S. COURTS
LEAD: Despite the objections of some judges and lawyers, a new and, some say, stricter uniform system of sentencing will go into effect Sunday in Federal district courts.


Pension Funds Weather the Market Collapse
LEAD: DESPITE some staggering losses, the nation's pension funds, and their beneficiaries, have come through the great market collapse of 1987 in relatively good shape - so far.


Baby M's Mother Is Pregnant Out of Wedlock, Lawyer Says
LEAD: Mary Beth Whitehead, the New Jersey surrogate mother who lost custody of Baby M after a bitter court fight, has become pregnant by a man other than her estranged husband, the court-appointed lawyer for Baby M said today.


TIPS ON REPLACING FLOORBOARDS
LEAD: REPLACING sections of tongue-and-groove wooden floorboards is not difficult if you use the proper tools and work carefully.


HARVARD TAKES FIRST PLACE
LEAD: Brown, whose two previous defeats were before parents' day crowds on the road, made it 3-for-3 today - this time at home - when the Bruins fell to Harvard, 14-9, before a Parents' Day gathering of 16,800.
The defeat knocked the Bruins out of a three-way tie for first place in the Ivy League and elevated


Inspired Islanders Clobber Rangers
LEAD: The result had been decided long ago, but at last the rout was complete.
In the locker room, there was talk of redemption and enthusiastic conversation of a renewed commitment.
Brent Sutter moved through the motivational mayhem, patched up a cut and left quietly.


How Zoos Compare
LEAD: TURTLE BACK ZOO'S 195 species of animals, 16 acres and $840,000 annual operating budget are modest when compared with those of the Bronx and Philadelphia Zoos.


Uniondale Ends Hempstead Streak at 34
LEAD: The 34-game unbeaten streak of the powerful Hempstead Tigers (5-1) ended yesterday as the Tigers lost to Uniondale, 13-12.


GROTON FIGHTING TO REGAIN THE CROAKER
LEAD: THE submarine Croaker is gone from Groton, and Groton wants it back.


U.S. Skater Trails Canadian
LEAD: Debi Thomas, who lost her United States and world figure skating championships earlier this year, took a big step toward regaining her former prominence today by winning at Skate Canada, a major pre-Olympic competition.


LEARNING TO DEAL WITH AIDS AT WORK
LEAD: ''THE first time I realized he had an AIDS-related illness is when I went to visit him in the hospital,'' said the president of a manufacturing company in lower Westchester, referring to one of his clerical employees. ''Two weeks later, he was able to come back to work.
However, due to a company restructuring that took place before he went to the hospital, he works on the night shift, alone, so


HOW TO SPARKLE
LEAD:  MAKING PEOPLE TALK  Larry Farber. 263 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $14.95.


AT N.Y.U., A CRASH COURSE
LEAD: WHEN the students need a breather or something for the stomach, the really good place to go is Over the Counter.
Not the market, but the cafeteria on the 14th floor of Merrill Hall.
While you eat your sandwich, you can watch the two illuminated tickers on the wall, where the trades on the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock


Lawmakers Act to Bar Inmates' Book Profits
LEAD: The embarrassment of law-enforcement officers over a police captain who robbed a bank and stole Civil Service examinations has scarcely faded before the former officer has infuriated Massachusetts lawmakers by turning a profit on the robbery.


MOVIES
LEAD:  52 Pickup  Starring Roy Scheider and Ann-Margret.
Directed by John Frankenheimer.
Media Home Entertainment. 111 minutes. $69.95.
In this movie, based on the Elmore Leonard novel of the same name (and with a script co-written by Mr. Leonard), Roy Scheider is a steel executive who's being blackmailed for his fling with a young woman he met in a bar.


Synagogue in Mahopac Is Defaced for 3d Time
LEAD: A synagogue in Mahopac, N.Y., was spray painted with swastikas and Nazi slogans Friday night or early yesterday, the third such attack on the synagogue in recent months, the police said.


Guests at Breakfast: In a Restaurant...
LEAD: NOTHING HELPS SCENERY LIKE ham and eggs,'' said Mark Twain, one of this country's most perspicacious travelers.
Americans have always regarded breakfast as a serious and uplifting meal, whether it is a prelude to a Twain-like country excursion or the setting for a high-powered corporate confab.


A WELL-STAGED EVENT
LEAD: THE world team championships that ended in Ocho Rios, Jamaica, eight days ago were, perhaps, the most completely satisfactory ever staged.


L.I.R.R. RITUAL
LEAD: EACH morning on the Long Island Rail Road's Hicksville 7:15, 7:29, 7:35 and 7:40 trains, women who appear neither sirens nor hussies (many wear navy suits and sensible shoes, whatever those are) whip out foot-long ermine brushes with martinet precision.


Generous Servings
LEAD: BIG IS BOLD, BIG IS GENEROUS, BIG IS welcoming - and so are the oversize objects that are asserting themselves on the most fashionable table tops across the country. ''In the old days, everything had to be on a small scale, but today, overstatement is what looks good,'' explained Mario Buatta, the well-known New York City interior decorator.


HOW TO VISIT THE COLLEGE OF YOUR DREAMS
LEAD: THIS is the time of year when many high school juniors start devoting a good deal of thought to their future and the college application process, part of which consists of becoming familiar with the colleges you think you are interested in and that - joy of joys -might return the interest.


Special Today:
LEAD: Entertaining/Magazine Part 2
The Party Season: How to Make It a Success, includes these special reports:
A host's guide to the well-planned cocktail party.
When and how to include the children.
An unusual idea that makes dinner for 30 workable.
Tips from floral designers on how to make inexpensive arrangements.


Headliners; Out of the Market
LEAD: A decade ago, a crooked Kansas City lawyer named Arthur H. Katz began, with the help of the Federal witness protection program, a metamorphosis that turned him into Arthur Kane, a Miami civil servant with a talent for playing the stock market.
But when the market crashed, Mr.
Kane's new life went with it.


GROWING UP THANKLESS
LEAD:  THE RADIANT WAY  By Margaret Drabble. 408 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Wildlife Refuge Named For Stewart McKinney
LEAD: A Federal wildlife refuge consisting of four islands in Long Island Sound was renamed and rededicated today as the Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge, in honor of the late Representative, who led efforts to preserve the area.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  A Miscellany of Anxieties
What are the ingredients of a contemporary short story?
Ann Beattie offers her answer to this question in her introduction to ''The Best American Short Stories 1987'' (Houghton Mifflin), edited by Ms.
Beattie and Shannon Ravenel.


THE NEED TO ESCAPE AND THE PLACE TO DO IT
LEAD: WHEN my mother needed to escape from the noise and confusion generated by five children, she would go out and work in the yard.
She couldn't have picked a better refuge.
We children considered trimming, raking and mowing akin to torture.
We always offered to help, though, knowing full well that Mom would decline the offer.


Securing the Lean In Tower of Pisa
LEAD: NOBODY in the Italian Government wants to straighten the Leaning Tower of Pisa; its tilt keeps the tourist lire flowing.
But in January, the Government approved a $25 million project to keep the 800-year-old tower from tipping farther.


Talking: Closings; Surviving Market's Turmoil
LEAD: THE recent turbulence in the stock market is causing many concerns for buyers who are poised to close on a home or an investment property.


NEW YORKERS, ETC.,
LEAD: JOHN MAZZOLA is convinced that his wife, Sylvia, lives by the maxim ''Don't get into any vehicle that's not moving.'' If this maxim is not a familiar one, it is not surprising because, he said, his wife made it up.


The Disturbing Power Of Duchamp's Epiphanies
LEAD: A PROTECTIVE DISCRETION SUR-rounds what is in effect, though not in name, the Marcel Duchamp museum within the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
Though known to enthusiasts the world over as the largest single repository of Duchamp's work, the galleries in question occupy a distant and almost a secret place in the huge congeries of the Philadelphia Museum.


Who Fines OSHA?
LEAD: If the Occupational Safety and Health Administration is correct, the building collapse that killed 28 workers in Bridgeport, Conn., last April could have been prevented for far less than $5.11 million.
Now it will cost the companies involved that much just to pay OSHA's fines.


HOW A BOLD DIRECTOR HAS TRANSFORMED A REGIONAL THEATER
LEAD: IN THE SPRING OF 1983, WHEN MANY of his peers in the nonprofit theater were embarking on hard-won sabbaticals, Adrian Hall was named artistic director of the Dallas Theater Center.
The head of the Trinity Square Repertory Company in Providence, R.I. - one of the country's best resident professional theaters -Mr.


With a Little Bit of Luck, a Conducting Career Flourishes
LEAD: ''OPPORTUNITIES IN THE music world are a combination of reputation, of people watching you work, and perhaps a bit of luck and timing,'' observes Kent Nagano, the 36-year-old conductor who is making his debuts with both the Brooklyn and New York Philharmonic in the next couple of weeks.
His career certainly illustrates the theory.


Toy for Cribs Being Recalled As a Hazard of Strangulation
LEAD: Crib Soft Playgrounds for cribs and playpens are being recalled because a Minnesota child died after catching his head between the loosely tied toy and his crib's mesh, the Consumer Product Safety Commission reported Thursday.


Escaping To the Freedom Of the Seas
LEAD: If the addicts of ocean cruising, those who need their marine fix two or three times a year, were to devise an emblem, it would surely feature an empty suitcase.


Amy K. Connolly Planning to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Amy Kendall Connolly to Michael Peter Doherty has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur G. Connolly Jr. of Wilmington, Del.


Correction
LEAD: The author identification accompanying an article last week on political aspects of the stock market collapse was incomplete.
Amitai Etzioni, a professor at George Washington University, is the Thomas Henry Carroll Ford Foundation Professor for 1987-88 at the Harvard Business School.


Chinaware
LEAD: To the Editor: When my wife and I returned from England in July, the next issue of the Travel section (Aug. 2) carried an Advisory item regarding the bankruptcy of Reject China Company in London.
We were aghast, having just placed a rather large order for Coalport china.
I wrote to Reject China Shops, 33-35 and 56-57 Beauchamp Place, in London, to cancel our order.


Kimberly Ann Flahive Wed to Mark E. Wasik
LEAD: Kimberly Ann Flahive, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Henry Flahive of Yardley, Pa., and Mark Eugene Wasik, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Eugene Wasik of Montpelier, Vt., were married yesterday at St.
Ignatius Roman Catholic Church in Yardley.
The Rev.
John C. Marine performed the ceremony.


Ruthann Pritchard to Wed in February
LEAD: The engagement of Ruthann Mary Pritchard to Howard Alan Silverstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Silverstein of New York and Delray Beach, Fla., has been announced by the future bride's mother, Margaret Pritchard of Oakville, Ontario.
A February wedding is planned.


Headliners; Out of the Running
LEAD: Louisiana's gambling Governor, Edwin Edwards, decided early last Sunday morning that a fourth term was not in the cards.
Mr.
Edwards, known for scandal-scarred administrations and a love of high-stakes recreation in Las Vegas, dropped his bid for re-election after finishing second in the Democratic gubernatorial primary.


Providence Rallies Around Targets of Anti-Semitic Incidents
LEAD: An outbreak of vandalism against synagogues and Jewish-owned businesses in Providence, R.I., last month raised concern there about anti-Semitism but also brought support from other religious, ethic and racial groups for those who were the objects of the acts. .


Next Week; Who Should Be the M.V.P.'s In Baseball?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


TOLL IN SRI LANKA SHAKES INDIA AIDES
LEAD: Indian Army losses to Tamil rebels in Sri Lanka this month have shaken the Indian military establishment and raised questions among many experts about the quality of New Delhi's military intelligence and planning.


CAN THE CONTRAS GO ON?
LEAD: Mr.
LeMoyne discounts the possibility of the contra leaders' returning to Managua, saying, ''The fight for popular support inside Nicaragua promises to be extremely risky, testing the rebels where they have been weakest.'' In other words, the contras have little support inside Nicaragua.
Mr.
LeMoyne forgets that guerrillas with popular support inside their own country do survive on scant funds.


Vermont's Homeless Double
LEAD: Vermont's homeless population has more than doubled in three years, largely because of soaring housing costs, a new state report says.
The surcosts, a new state report says.
The survey of services for the homeless also said that in Bennington, Franklin, Grand Isle and Essex counties, there are no homeless shelters.


Separated Twins Gain Weight And Are Off the Critical List
LEAD: The West German twins who were joined at the head at birth have been taken off the critical list and have gained weight steadily since they were separated in a 22-hour operation Sept. 6, officials at Johns Hopkins Hospital said Friday.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bellport$120,500
17 Third Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, 0.5 acre; taxes $1,200.
Commack  $247,000
5 Leslie Court
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-year-old ranch; basement, C/A, deck, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $4,600.
Hauppauge


Diane Hallock, A Banker, Wed To B. P. Winder
LEAD: At St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien, Conn., Diane Baird Hallock, a daughter of Charles H. Hallock of Darien and Lucy T. Hallock of Los Angeles, was married yesterday to Bayly Philip Winder, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Bayly Winder of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Walter Taylor performed the ceremony.


Works in Progress; THE GIFT OF GARB
LEAD: ''WE FIGURED 250 COSTUMES, give or take a few,'' says Patricia Zipprodt.
A celebrated costume designer whose achievements include three Tony Awards, she's referring to the mammoth production of ''The Sleeping Beauty'' that the New York City Ballet is planning for an unspecified future season.
Lincoln Kirstein and George Balanchine, co-founders of the City Ballet, conceived of the project more than a decade ago.


Housing Group Rebuilds in Newark
LEAD: Begun in the smoldering ruins of the riots here 20 years ago, the New Community Corporation has developed into a veritable city-within-the-city on 45 acres of the Central Ward.


AMNESTY FOLLOWS SLAYING OF RIGHTS LEADER
LEAD: THE National Assembly of El Salvador last week approved an amnesty that will free hundreds of leftist guerrillas and prevent the prosecution of any members of rightist death squads.
The law was approved the day after the murder of a prominent advocate of human rights, Herbert Anaya Sanabria.


WHERE TO GET MORE DETAILS
LEAD:  ACT/Pace Line, 1 World Trade Center, Suite 8101, New York, N.Y. 10048 (212-775-1500; 800-221-8164 outside New York State).
Admiral Cruises, 1220 Biscayne Boulevard, Miami, Fla. 33132 (305-374-1611).
American Canadian Line, Post Office Box 368, Warren, R.I. 02885 (401-247-0955; 800-556-7450 outside Rhode Island).


SAFEGUARD HEALTH ENTERRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAFEGUARD HEALTH ENTERRISES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,014,000
15,612,000
Net inc
806,000
384,000
Share earns
.11
.05
9mo rev
51,944,000
46,061,000
Net inc
2,105,000
1,320,000
Share earns
.28
.17


Burnett Bolloten
LEAD: Burnett Bolloten, a writer and scholar on the Spanish Civil War, died Tuesday at his home in Sunnyvale, Calif., of prostate cancer.
He was 78 years old.


Quarterly Refunding Package Set
LEAD: Treasury auctions this week run the gamut from short-term bills to 30-year bonds.


Sports of The Times; The N.F.L.'s Biggest Trade
LEAD: AFTER only 24 hours with the Indianapolis Colts, Eric Dickerson was familiar with only six plays: four runs, two passes.
But during yesterday's 19-14 victory over the Jets, he moved straight upfield to the line of scrimmage, cut to his right, turned and caught a short pass from Jack Trudeau, hurried away from the lunging arms of Troy Benson and faked Rich Miano into sprawling on the artificial turf before other


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Nov. 1, 1987:
MONDAY
Airborne Freight
Lockheed Corp
Carpenter Technology
MBIA Inc
Data-Design Labs
NCH Corp
General Motors
Stride Rite Corp
Jefferson-Pilot
TUESDAY
Adams-Millis
Manor Care
Diamond Shamrock
Monarch Mach Tool
Emerson Electric
Scientific-Atlanta
General Housewares
Scotty's Inc
Hershey Foods
Sealed Air Corp
Kansas City Pwr &amp; Lt
Source Capital
Liberty Corp
Southdown Inc
WEDNESDAY
Carlise Cos
Koger Properties
Eagle-Picher Indus
McKesson Corp
Great


Pop: Blossom Dearie
LEAD: BLOSSOM DEARIE has developed a repertory of songs that are so perfectly suited to the superficial innocence of her high sweet voice that there is rarely any room for expansion in her programs from year to year.


Auburn's Burger Stars
LEAD: The college football career of Jeff Burger, curious and charmed, continued on Saturday when the Auburn quarterback led his unbeaten team to a 29-6 victory over Florida.


DYNATECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYNATECH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
88,101,000
77,006,000
Net inc
5,677,000
6,372,000
Share earns
.50
.56
6mo sales
172,330,000
149,831,000
Net inc
10,708,000
12,256,000
Share earns
.94
1.08


Susan P. Kaplan Bride Of Matthew T. Gerson
LEAD: Susan Paula Kaplan, counsel to the subcommittee on the Constitution of the Senate Judiciary Committee, and Matthew Ted Gerson, general counsel to the committee's subcommittee on technology and the law, were married yesterday at Temple Emanuel in Worcester, Mass., by Rabbi Alan Ullman.


VERSA TECHNOLOGIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERSA TECHNOLOGIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,890,000
10,466,000
Net inc
1,364,000
1,001,000
Share earns
.35
.26
6mo sales
23,641,000
21,622,000
Net inc
2,842,000
2,119,000
Share earns
.73
.55


SYMBOLICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYMBOLICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 4
1987
1986
Revenue
23,954,000
23,450,000
Net loss
4,458,000
18,611,000
The latest first quarter includes a pre-tax restructuring charge of $480,000, compared with $13,115,000 for the year-earlier period.


Maine Voters to Decide Fate of Nuclear Plant
LEAD: On Tuesday, Maine's voters will settle the year's most hotly debated argument: whether the state's only nuclear power plant should be forced to close by next July.


Advertising; N.W. Ayer Chairman Begins Reorganization
LEAD: In an effort to streamline his operation before all of this year's new business hits, Louis T. Hagopian, chairman and chief executive of N. W. Ayer, the country's oldest agency, has restructured the organization, creating a domestic company, Ayer U.S.A., and breaking the New York office's account service and creative operations into five units.


Purchasers Report Expansion
LEAD: The nation's industrial economy continued to expand in October, despite the crisis in the stock market, the National Association of Purchasing Management said in its monthly report to be released today.


DEMOCRATS ASSAIL G.O.P. ON POLLUTION
LEAD: Five candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination gathered here today to talk about environmental protection.
They all were strongly for it.


GARTNER GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GARTNER GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,986,000
5,813,000
Net inc
389,000
289,000
Share earns
.10
.08
6mo rev
17,466,000
11,712,000
Net inc
1,088,000
758,000
Share earns
.28
.21


Ilyse Wolfe Wed To L. M. Tretter
LEAD: At the Harmonie Club in Manhattan, Ilyse Wolfe, an associate in the New York law firm of Hart &amp; Hume, was married last evening to Lyndon Mitchell Tretter, an associate in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
Rabbi Kenneth Brickman performed the ceremony.


CALMAT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALMAT CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
168,224,000
163,979,000
Net inc
15,514,000
14,234,000
Share earns
.50
.46
9mo sales
510,381,000
453,330,000
Net inc
b62,604,000
31,296,000
Share earns
2.03
1.02


One-Woman Race With a New Soloist
LEAD: A one-woman race is old hat bynow.
In the last 15 years of the New York City Marathon, the female champion has crossed the finish line unchallenged, alone in the spotlight, at least one minute ahead of her nearest competitor.
Yesterday, beneath a blue autumn sky, it was Priscilla Welch of Britain, a 42-year-old former member of the Royal


Sports World Specials; Extra Effort
LEAD: On Oct. 15, the women's basketball team at Fordham filed into the Rose Hill gymnasium in the Bronx and began to stretch out their off-season kinks.
Jeanine (J. J.) Radice was among them, still very much in the playing shape that has allowed her to amass 1,000 points in her first two seasons at the school.


GORBACHEV BOOK BEING ISSUED IN SOVIET AND WEST
LEAD: A book by the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, on his policies at home and his view of the world was formally published today.


CHRIS-CRAFT INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHRIS-CRAFT INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
56,356,000
51,663,000
Net inc
747,000
4,198,000
Share earns
.03
.19
9mo rev
170,784,000
156,421,000
Net inc
2,922,000
2,295,000
Share earns
.12
.09


MAJOR REALTY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAJOR REALTY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,535,665
483,511
Net inc
b8,229,330
c687,691
Share earns
1.25
-
9mo rev
13,032,253
1,925,316
Net inc
b11,808,062
c2,864,570
Share earns
1.88
-


VISUAL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VISUAL INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,374,139
7,035,571
Net inc
29,985
91,056
Share earns
.01
.03
6mo rev
12,641,774
14,083,173
Net inc
56,019
285,873
Share earns
.02
.08


LIFE TECHNOLOGIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIFE TECHNOLOGIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
31,772,000
25,522,000
Net inc
3,561,000
b765,000
Share earns
.26
-
9mo rev
91,289,000
73,944,000
Net inc
8,714,000
2,056,000
Share earns
.64
.16


Mutual Funds' Top Gainers
LEAD: Like most stocks, many mutual funds have taken a battering as the market tumbled.


DISSIDENT JUDGE SLAIN IN PANAMA
LEAD: A Supreme Court justice who frequently criticized human rights abuses under Panama's Government has been shot to death, relatives said today.


Prosecutors Say Tapes Show Mob Infiltrating Carpenter Union
LEAD: Secretly recorded conversations show how members of the Gambino organized-crime family infiltrated one of New York City's largest carpenters' unions, prosecutors say.


Hunt Tax Trial to Start Today
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service is seeking more than $350 million in taxes from the Hunt family of Dallas in connection with write-offs the family claimed from its buying binge of silver futures in 1979-80.


VULCAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VULCAN CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,833,570
5,739,443
Net inc
80,642
115,222
Share earns
.05
.07
9mo rev
21,585,311
16,339,560
Net inc
80,773
1,743,828
Share earns
.05
1.11


One-Party Strength Likely to Continue in 3 States
LEAD: Voters in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut will select the officials who run their counties, towns and villages tomorrow in elections that will very likely confirm the one-party domination of most areas in the three states.


Midland Bank Closure
LEAD: Britain's Midland Bank P.L.C. is closing its off-shore banking unit in Bahrain in a move to rationalize its operations, a bank official said today.
The unit, which has operated in Bahrain for 11 years, is the bank's sole branch in the Middle East and has a staff of seven, according to Collin Pettit, the manager.


Rate of Violent Crime Reported on the Wane
LEAD: The rate of violent crime nationwide has declined substantially in recent years, according to a report made public today by the Justice Department.


At Finish, a Chute Full of Idiosyncrasies
LEAD: As they raced under the digital timers and across the blue finish line yesterday, the runners in the New York City Marathon stepped into a zone known as the chute.


Islanders Edge Bruins in Overtime, 6-5
LEAD: The building, with its circumscribed rink dimensions and intimate overhangs, is renowned for inducing claustrophobia in opposing teams.
For the last seven years at the Boston Garden, though, the Islanders had suffered from a much more disabling malady: a prolonged case of amnesia.
They plainly had forgotten how to win.


Outdoors: Hunting Deer Indirectly
LEAD: ALTHOUGH I enjoy a venison steak singed on the outside and red in the middle more than any other fare save rare wild duck, most of the deer meat I eat has been given to me.


Labor Talks Continue at Exchanges
LEAD: Officials of the New York Stock Exchange, trading companies and the New York Futures Exchange, who are facing a possible strike by most of their clerical workers, continued contract negotiations with union officials last night, a spokesman for the exchange said.


Chargers Triumph On Overtime Kick
LEAD: Vencie Glenn, a free safety, intercepted Bernie Kosar's first pass attempt in overtime today to set up a 33-yard field goal by Vince Abbott that gave the San Diego Chargers a 27-24 victory over the Cleveland Browns.


DORCHESTER HUGOTON LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DORCHESTER HUGOTON LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,214,000
630,000
Net inc
603,000
196,000
Share earns
.33
.11
9mo rev
2,890,000
1,842,000
Net inc
1,287,000
624,000
Share earns
.71
.34


KENYAN AND BRITON WIN THE MARATHON
LEAD: A human wave was massed on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, a now familiar but nonetheless impressive sight, signaling the start of the New York City Marathon.
Although the crowds of well-wishers along the route appeared smaller than in recent years, they were still able to generate plenty of vocal support.


SOFTWARE PUBLISHING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOFTWARE PUBLISHING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,700,000
6,400,000
Net inc
1,500,000
500,000
Share earns
.20
.06
Yr rev
38,600,000
23,700,000
Net inc
5,200,000
700,000
Share earns
.69
.10


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: In Dave Johnson's only four seasons as a major-league manager, his Met teams have won 90 or more games each year.
Has any manager done better in his first four years?


McMahon Again Sparks Bear Victory
LEAD: Jim McMahon passed for three touchdowns, including a 38-yarder to Willie Gault with 4 minutes 44 seconds left today, to lead the Chicago Bears to a 31-28 comeback victory over the Kansas City Chiefs.


NORTHWEST NATURAL GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHWEST NATURAL GAS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,376,000
18,760,000
Net loss
1,976,000
2,490,000
9mo rev
100,320,000
98,730,000
Net inc
14,194,000
13,417,000
Share earns
1.24
1.18


TELXON CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELXON CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,100,000
24,500,000
Net inc
3,000,000
b3,200,000
Share earns
.22
.24
6mo rev
54,700,000
47,100,000
Net inc
6,300,000
b5,800,000
Share earns
.46
.43


Put Supertrains On Northeast Run
LEAD: To the Editor:


Korean Takes Campaign to Rival's Door
LEAD: Kim Dae Jung ventured today into the home province of his chief rival in the opposition and drew enthusiastic crowds, showing that he could be a political force on alien terrority as he campaigns in South Korea's first direct presidential election in 16 years.


Advertising; New Job: Reassuring Investors
LEAD: NOW IS the time for all good men (and women) whose companies' images have been buffeted by the Wall Street bears to turn to public relations for a repair job.


The Street-Price-of-Drugs Dodge
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kellenberg Defeats St. Dominic for Title
LEAD: The Kellenberg Memorial Firebirds of Uniondale, L.I., clinched the Catholic High Schools Athletic League A Division title yesterday with a 21-9 victory over St.
Dominic of Oyster Bay.


OHIO CASUALTY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OHIO CASUALTY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b21,683,000
c30,444,000
Share earns
.96
1.35
9mo net inc
b91,863,000
c81,201,000
Share earns
4.07
3.59
b-Includes an investment loss of $469,000 for the quarter and investment gains of $19,531,000 for the 9 months.


X-RITE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*X-RITE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,148,917
3,774,013
Net inc
1,144,939
535,357
Share earns
.44
.21
9mo sales
13,228,653
10,465,645
Net inc
2,312,584
1,408,205
Share earns
.89
.61


BALDWIN PIANO &amp; ORGAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALDWIN PIANO &amp; ORGAN (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
25,505,000
22,306,000
Net inc
1,483,000
937,000
Share earns
.36
.30
9mo sales
71,273,000
65,610,000
Net inc
4,352,000
b2,622,000
Share earns
1.05
.83


Ailing Deaver Is Hospitalized; A Delay for Trial Is Uncertain
LEAD: Michael K. Deaver, the former Presidential aide whose trial on perjury charges began last Tuesday, was hospitalized here Saturday evening for treatment of acute pain related to kidney stones.


A Moment of Truth
LEAD: During his quick visit to Havana and Moscow, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua has a decision to make that shouldn't be hard.
Either he returns to Managua this week ready to negotiate a cease-fire with the so-called contras, as he agreed when he accepted the Arias peace plan for Central


USACAFES LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USACAFES LP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,399,000
5,912,000
Net inc
2,272,000
880,000
Share earns
.33
.13
9mo rev
19,085,000
16,081,000
Net inc
7,369,000
2,868,000
Share earns
1.07
.44


HOUGHTON MIFFLIN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOUGHTON MIFFLIN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
153,340,000
145,686,000
Net inc
26,736,000
26,725,000
Share earns
1.88
1.90
Shares outst
14,226,188
14,091,795
9mo sales
281,809,000
265,641,000
Net inc
26,873,000
27,769,000
Share earns
1.89
1.97
Shares outst
14,192,844
14,079,236


PIEMONTE FOODS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIEMONTE FOODS INC
Qtr to Aug 29
1987
1986
Sales
5,193,262
5,293,039
Net loss
151,915
b61,034
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income.


Plunge Unnerves Hong Kong
LEAD: Stock markets fell everywhere last month, but in Hong Kong the crash was the steepest, most palpable and perhaps most telling.
On Oct. 26 prices fell by one-third - among the worst session-to-session plunges of any stock market in history.


BIRMINGHAM STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIRMINGHAM STEEL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
80,551,000
44,281,000
Net inc
5,245,000
2,615,000
Share earns
.72
.36


HEALTHCO INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTHCO INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
102,803,000
89,841,000
Net inc
3,211,000
2,649,000
Share earns
.40
.35
9mo rev
288,724,000
247,496,000
Net inc
9,350,000
21,514,000
Share earns
1.16
2.84
Shares outst
8,047,416
7,570,638


ROPAK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROPAK CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,487,000
13,582,000
Net inc
420,000
604,000
Share earns
.17
.24
9mo sales
51,157,000
35,465,000
Net inc
b1,066,000
1,451,000
Share earns
.43
.58
b-Includes costs of approximately $340,000 associated with the abandonment of a proposed acquisition.


SELAS CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SELAS CORP OF AMERICA (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,397,000
8,508,000
Net inc
b306,000
c164,000
Share earns
.28
-
9mo sales
25,958,000
18,705,000
Net inc
b328,000
c750,000
Share earns
.30
-


Amgen Chief Confident On Biotechnology Gains
LEAD: Seven years after leaving the cushion of a corporate research post to catch what he saw as the ''wave of the future,'' George Rathmann is beginning to feel confident that biotechnology will fulfill its promise.


Two Support Groups for Political Families
LEAD: Nestled among the floor-to-ceiling books and papers in his cramped office at the University of Vermont here, Dr.
Arthur Kunin was counting his blessings.
He was proud of his career as a kidney specialist, he said, and proud of his four children.
And he was particularly proud of the accomplishments of his wife, Madeleine, who is now in her second term as Governor of


DIVERTING ATTENTION FROM CITY'S WOES
LEAD: The night before, humiliation loomed.
I was sure I hadn't trained diligently enough to be able to go the distance.
It began to seem like one of the more ill-conceived ideas I'd ever had, to run a marathon.


Viability Is Stressed At L.F. Rothschild
LEAD: In the midst of last week's market tensions, Andrew L. Berger was quietly named president of the brokerage firm of L. F. Rothschild Inc., which is a unit of L. F. Rothschild Holdings Inc.


Stake in Savings Unit
LEAD: The Financial Corporation of Santa Barbara said Friday that a Los Angeles couple had acquired a 9.9 percent interest in it, making them the company's largest shareholders.
Leonard M. and Merri Jean Ross said they intended to seek permission to increase their stake in the thrift institution holding company above 10 percent.


Current of History
LEAD: The fact that President Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev will meet on the anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor was lost on no one in Washington.


Concert: The Toronto
LEAD: THE middle, therefore the bottom, just about fell out of Sunday afternoon's concert by the Toronto Symphony at Carnegie Hall.
Jon Vickers, who was to have sung Mussorgsky's ''Songs and Dances of Death'' reported in ill Saturday night, leaving the ever-present Itzhak Perlman with his ever-present Beethoven Violin Concerto to substitute.


ATLANTIS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTIS GROUP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,596,000
14,064,000
Net inc
1,179,000
878,000
Share earns
.20
.16
9mo rev
74,971,000
38,758,000
Net inc
3,094,000
2,188,000
Share earns
.54
.40


Hebrew Union's Temple Gets a New-Style Ark
LEAD: Not much is traditional about the Minnie Petrie Synagogue of the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion.
Its walls are paneled in blond oak, its plain chairs have brilliant magenta seat cushions, and its six subtly colored stained-glass windows, designed by Yaacov Agam, an Israeli artist, and symbolizing the Twelve Tribes of Israel, are totally abstract.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Graf Tops Mandlikova: Top-seeded Steffi Graf of West Germany swept past second-seeded Hana Mandlikova, 6-2, 6-2, yesterday to win the $150,000 European Indoors women's tournament in Zurich.
Graf opened the match with a service ace and never looked back in winning the $27,000 first-place money.


TORSTAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TORSTAR CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
247,329,000
192,496,000
Net inc
b13,945,000
c7,370,000
Share earns
.36
.19
9mo rev
664,262,000
559,919,000
Net inc
b55,767,000
c43,513,000
Share earns
1.44
1.13


Officer Kills Bronx Man; Shooting Reports Differ
LEAD: A 38-year-old man was shot and killed across the street from his Bronx home late Saturday night by a police officer responding to a report of a man with a gun.


Dollar Declines in Tokyo Trading
LEAD: - Despite quick intervention by the Bank of Japan, the dollar slipped in early trading today.
It opened at 137.70 yen, down nearly 1 yen from Friday's close of 138.55 yen, and dropped to 137.35 yen after 9:30 A.M.


Cultures Clash as Farms Become Suburbs
LEAD: Don Bowlby, Paul Kuhl and Roger Everitt have rejected offers of millions for their farmland.
They are the minority, the last of the old guard.
Most of their farming friends have sold to developers, pocketed their profits and left.


Bank Takeovers: A Key Issue in Peru
LEAD: Three months after President Alan Garcia Perez ordered the nationalization of Peru's private banks, what was intended to be a momentous revolutionary act has turned instead into a long-running soap opera.


COMPONENT TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPONENT TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,067,000
3,133,000
Net inc
239,000
122,000
Share earns
.13
.06
Shares outst
1,897,909
2,072,052
9mo sales
12,139,000
11,219,000
Net inc
727,000
404,000
Share earns
.38
.20
Shares outst
1,926,197
2,069,444


Honing the Rapier to Skewer Yuppies
LEAD: First came the horror stories of young stockbrokers too poor or shaken to order radicchio and warm goat cheese salads at their favorite track-lighted restaurants.


Market Place; Picking Stocks After the Selloff
LEAD: THERE'S nothing like a record-sized crack in equity prices to send Wall Street's research departments back to the drawing board for a fresh set of stock selections.


COMMERCIAL FEDEARAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCIAL FEDEARAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,755,000
b4,455,000
Share earns
.41
-
b-Net loss and after an extraordinary loss of $357,000.


LANGER BIOMECHANICS GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANGER BIOMECHANICS GROUP INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,075,373
2,598,270
Net inc
200,629
326,865
Share earns
.07
.13
Yr rev
11,209,538
9,280,721
Net inc
36,691
b366,152
Share earns
.01
-


How to Stand Out In a Sea of Runners
LEAD: Running a marathon would seem to be difficult enough with both hands free, but several of yesterday's runners chose to do it a hard way, carrying flags attached to heavy poles.
One was the banner of the Charlottenburg Sports Club of Berlin; it was carried in turn by four club members, including Ralf Schultz.


TOTAL RESEARCH reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOTAL RESEARCH
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,074,686
4,181,978
Net inc
18,463
174,486
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
5,624,041
4,860,000


Europeans Sweep U.S. in Festival
LEAD: European horses completed a sweep of the Laurel Race Course's International Turf Festival today by scoring easy victories over outclassed American 2-year-olds in both the Laurel Futurity and the Selima Stakes.


STANDARD MOTOR PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD MOTOR PRODUCTS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
92,136,000
71,034,000
Net inc
4,556,000
4,550,000
Share earns
.34
.34
9mo sales
267,281,000
204,615,000
Net inc
13,016,000
13,645,000
Share earns
.98
1.03


SCOTT'S LIQUID GOLD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCOTT'S LIQUID GOLD INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,321,600
4,213,900
Net inc
b545,800
c91,700
Share earns
.06
-
9mo rev
12,506,900
12,583,200
Net inc
b1,624,400
d151,800
Share earns
.19
.02


VIEW-MASTER IDEAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIEW-MASTER IDEAL GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
37,216,000
31,895,000
Net inc
506,000
2,311,000
Share earns
.10
.47
9mo sales
71,671,000
56,061,000
Net loss
3,491,000
b2,648,000
Share earns
-
.55


MARTEN TRANSPORT LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARTEN TRANSPORT LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,316,014
14,301,439
Net inc
788,979
718,500
Share earns
.23
.29
Shares outst
3,420,606
2,005,549
9mo rev
42,144,375
39,795,828
Net inc
2,071,860
2,005,549
Share earns
.61
.80
Shares outst
3,420,606
2,510,000


Advertising; Four Agencies Win Additional Accounts
LEAD: Levine, Huntley Schmidt &amp; Beaver, a Grey Advertising subsidiary, will be working for the friendly folks at the Beneficial Management Corporation, known for their willingness to lend money.
Although no new ad budget has been set, it is known that the client spent about $10.8 million last year.
The former agency, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton, had benefited from


Administration Assails Soviet Car-Export Plan
LEAD: A plan by the Soviet Union to export cars with Volkswagen engines to the United States is drawing criticism from the Reagan Administration.


Babbitt in Car Accident, but Not Seriously Injured
LEAD: Former Gov.
Bruce Babbitt, a Democratic Presidential candidate, and his son were involved in an automobile collision Saturday, but were not seriously injured.


FORUM GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORUM GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,455,000
22,559,000
Net inc
b2,424,000
4,396,000
Share earns
.07
.12
6mo rev
44,141,000
47,510,000
Net inc
b4,415,000
8,316,000
Share earns
.13
.23


Mary Reilly Becomes Bride Of John Alle, an Executive
LEAD: The Church of Our Saviour Roman Catholic Church in New York was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Mary Reilly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Reilly of Mattituck, L.I., to John E. Alle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Emil J. Alle of Pacific Palisades, Calif.
Msgr.
Paul Dotson, assisted by the Rev.


VERTICOM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERTICOM INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,416,000
2,290,000
Net inc
43,000
154,000
Share earns
.02
.06
9mo sales
9,511,000
5,649,000
Net inc
531,000
238,000
Share earns
.19
.10
The latest 9 months' results include a tax credit of $179,000, or 6 cents a share.


EDO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EDO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
29,988,000
29,258,000
Net inc
1,511,000
1,637,000
Share earns
.22
.21
9mo sales
93,312,000
82,213,000
Net inc
4,998,000
4,861,000
Share earns
.71
.64


Victoria Vossen Marries Lawyer
LEAD: Victoria Anne Vossen, an assistant District Attorney in Manhattan, and David Charles Bloomfield, an assistant corporation counsel for the City of New York, were married yesterday at the Montauk Club in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Howard Handler officiated.
The bride, the daughter of William J. Vossen of Falls City, Neb., and the late Maxine M.


BRUSH WELLMAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRUSH WELLMAN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
72,600,000
57,600,000
Net inc
4,300,000
5,700,000
Share earns
.23
.30
9mo sales
221,400,000
178,100,000
Net inc
17,600,000
16,500,000
Share earns
.93
.87


SYLVAN LEARNING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYLVAN LEARNING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,318,142
1,999,154
Net inc
b757,051
c539,387
Share earns
.10
-
9mo rev
9,446,152
5,206,457
Net inc
b2,237,309
c1,041,265
Share earns
.30
-


After Auspicious Beginnings, Public Art Finds Itself at Odds With the Public
LEAD: It was intended, in the words of the Manhattan artist who created it, as a kind of civic monument to St.
Louis's natural history: a dense clump of native Missouri trees, planted atop a shaped mound of earth and surrounded by a formal French garden - all of this on a wedge-shaped city block near downtown.


SOFTWARE SERVICES OF AMERCA reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOFTWARE SERVICES OF AMERCA
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,916,128
474,819
Net inc
85,292
109,285
Share earns
.04
.05


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  Construction Spending...
Sept.
Inventory-Sales Ratio...
August  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  None  Friday  None


Recital: Lynn Harrell, Cellist
LEAD: LYNN HARRELL'S evening of cello solos at the Metropolitan Museum on Saturday night had a sandwichlike symmetry to it - Bach suites at the beginning and end and in between, two 20th-century pieces.


New and Mighty Piano Makes Carnegie Debut
LEAD: Yesterday's Carnegie Hall concert of the Leningrad Philharmonic, conducted by Aleksandr Dmitriev, was completely traditional.
But not so the instrument upon which Lazar Berman played the Liszt Piano Concerto in A. It was a Fazioli F 308 concert grand, a 10-foot-2-inch monster with four pedals, a tripartite lid propped by three sticks and a fighting weight of 1,518 pounds.


Taiwan Trade Curbs Urged
LEAD: The House-Senate Joint Economic Committee today called on Taiwan to assess ways to cut its trade surplus to help end world trading imbalances that are threatening the global economy.


New York State's Curriculum on AIDS Criticized
LEAD: New York City's Health Commissioner criticized state education officials yesterday for approving an AIDS curriculum that does not advocate the use of condoms to slow transmission of the deadly virus.


TASS SENDS REPORT ON PARTY DISSENT, THEN CANCELS IT
LEAD: On Saturday evening Soviet newspapers received a report from the press agency Tass that Boris N. Yeltsin, head of the Moscow party organization and a nonvoting member of the Politburo, had threatened to resign at a recent party meeting.


Dance: Robert Banta
LEAD: THE tumult of Halloween Parade merriment raged outside on Saturday night.
But in the Nikolais-Louis Choreospace there was gentle humor under quiet contemplation of human foibles as Robert Banta set about establishing a charming little world of his own.


AMERICAN CARRIERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CARRIERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
105,350,000
98,819,000
Net loss
2,268,000
b949,000
Share earns
-
.16
9mo rev
298,176,000
301,150,000
Net loss
4,937,000
b3,426,000
Share earns
-
.67


Stage: From Gershwin, 'Reaching for the Moon'
LEAD: THIS year's many theatrical commemorations of George Gershwin on the 50th anniversary of his death have already brought us the Brooklyn Academy of Music's concert productions of ''Let 'Em Eat Cake'' and ''Of Thee I Sing,'' the American concert premiere of the English musical ''Primrose'' at the Library of Congress and a spiffy revival of ''Lady, Be Good!


Sports of The Times; The Psyching Team to the Rescue
LEAD: SURE, he had trained hard for the New York City Marathon and was fit.
And, yes, he had figured out a strategy regarding time and he was confident.
But he had a serious problem.


Relationships; After A Child Is Molested
LEAD: THE plight of women whose mates have sexually abused their children is painful and poignant.
Rage, bewilderment and a sense of helplessness were palpable as six women in that situation gathered in Brooklyn to discuss their trauma and its aftermath.


A Folksy Dukakis Marches on South
LEAD: He verged on folksiness in Texas, where he stood on the steps of the Gregg County Courthouse and thanked the ''good Lord'' for clear skies.


Lives of a Backstage Dresser
LEAD: During his nearly 50 years in the theater, Harry Edwards has worked with Sir Noel Coward, Sir Laurence Olivier, Rex Harrison, Marlon Brando, Judy Holliday, Richard Burton, Barbra Streisand, Jim Dale and Jason Robards.
But he has never been on stage with them.


Hanna Nickel to be Sold
LEAD: The United Consolidated Companies of Fremont, Ohio, plans to buy the Hanna Nickel Smelting Company, reopen its smelter here and produce a steel-making agent instead of mining nickel.
United Consolidated has signed a contract with the M.A.
Hanna Company of Cleveland to buy Hanna Nickel's assets, most of which will be sold, Bill Niggemeyer, United's president, said last week.


SUNGARD DATA SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNGARD DATA SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,519,000
16,853,000
Net inc
2,129,000
1,628,000
Share earns
.20
.18
Shares outst
10,556,000
8,855,000
9mo rev
66,184,000
49,033,000
Net inc
5,917,000
4,561,000
Share earns
.59
.54
Shares outst
10,086,000
8,482,000


TRUS JOIST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRUS JOIST CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
77,718,000
59,310,000
Net inc
5,250,000
3,596,000
Share earns
.75
.50
9mo sales
195,068,000
132,558,000
Net inc
10,865,000
6,965,000
Share earns
1.56
.96


HAVERTY FURNITURE COS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAVERTY FURNITURE COS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
56,835,000
49,103,000
Net inc
2,294,000
2,074,000
Share earns
.39
.34
9mo sales
161,020,000
136,379,000
Net inc
6,416,000
4,947,000
Share earns
1.08
.82


RELIABILITY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RELIABILITY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,089,000
6,313,000
Net loss
227,000
18,000
9mo rev
20,529,000
15,751,000
Net inc
691,000
b834,000
Share earns
.16
-
b-Net loss.


Malaysian Crackdown Shatters a Bright Image
LEAD: Among the free-enterprise nations of Southeast Asia Malaysia always seemed poised for long-term success, diplomats and business leaders say.


Current Comment
LEAD: At his White House briefing Friday, Marlin Fitzwater, the President's spokesman, was asked about legislation that would ban smoking on many domestic flights.


A&amp;W BRANDS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*A&amp;W BRANDS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
21,239,000
11,841,000
Net inc
172,000
b93,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
8,300,000
3,604,000
9mo sales
57,696,000
32,044,000
Net inc
898,000
6,000
Share earns
.14
-
Shares outst
6,423,000
3,604,000


U.S. Asserts Iran Rebuffed Offers Of Direct Talks
LEAD: The United States has asked Iran for face-to-face meetings for several months but has been rebuffed, according to Reagan Administration officials.


The Russian Coup of 1917
LEAD: The 70th anniversary of the Russian Revolution will be commemorated this week, and it appears that Mikhail S. Gorbachev is preparing a commemoration with candor.


BISCAYNE HOLDINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BISCAYNE HOLDINGS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
23,339,000
9,997,000
Net inc
b2,520,000
c1,773,000
Share earns
.31
.23
9mo rev
58,098,000
17,275,000
Net inc
b5,065,000
c3,031,000
Share earns
.63
.66
Shares outst
8,011,939
4,800,461


INVESTORS SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INVESTORS SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
667,000
3,773,000
Share earns
.08
.62
9mo net loss
6,842,000
b10,048,000
Share earns
-
1.89
b-Net income


TONS OF TOYS reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TONS OF TOYS
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,765,000
1,345,000
Net loss
118,000
87,000


Metro Matters; Battered Women Find System Slow to Change
LEAD: For all the suffering she endured, for all the anguish that lingers, Karen Straw was one of the lucky ones.
Invoking the so-called battered woman defense, she was acquitted by a Queens jury in September of murdering her estranged husband.


SCIENTIFIC SYSTEMS SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCIENTIFIC SYSTEMS SERVICES
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
710,921
1,368,770
Net loss
532,412
97,291


What Closing a Base Did for a Community
LEAD: To the Editor:


SHARED MEDICAL SYSTEMS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHARED MEDICAL SYSTEMS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
99,072,000
96,418,000
Net inc
10,858,000
13,533,000
Share earns
.43
.53
9mo rev
291,647,000
276,193,000
Net inc
34,369,000
17,714,000
Share earns
1.36
.70


NUVISION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUVISION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,500,000
9,148,000
Net inc
b691,000
596,000
Share earns
.23
.19
9mo sales
39,669,000
25,634,000
Net inc
b2,688,000
2,494,000
Share earns
.88
.84


COMPUGRAPHIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUGRAPHIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
92,049,000
84,192,000
Net inc
2,687,000
1,507,000
Share earns
.32
.18
9mo rev
272,193,000
254,137,000
Net inc
7,576,000
888,000
Share earns
.91
.11


NOXELL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOXELL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
125,324,000
111,402,000
Net inc
10,095,000
8,710,000
Share earns
.25
.22
9mo sales
374,309,000
328,675,000
Net inc
33,148,000
28,150,000
Share earns
.82
.70


CYTOGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CYTOGEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,046,000
1,719,000
Net loss
1,083,000
229,000
Shares outst
11,910,000
11,896,000
6mo rev
8,937,000
2,544,000
Net loss
1,854,000
2,189,000
Shares outst
11,909,000
9,730,000


STANDARD PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
82,868,195
73,873,256
Net inc
11,336,934
5,522,309
Share earns
.41
.24
Shares outst
27,074,276
23,362,650
9mo rev
229,580,272
199,002,791
Net inc
31,489,314
b17,285,075
Share earns
1.15
.74
Shares outst
27,099,390
23,343,548


Radiation Team Sent to Brazil Saves Two With a New Drug
LEAD: Members of the international medical team that treated victims of the Chernobyl disaster have spent more than two weeks in Brazil where they used an experimental technique to save two of the most gravely injured victims of a radiation accident.


DICKEY-JOHN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DICKEY-JOHN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,447,000
5,579,000
Net inc
54,000
b24,000
Share earns
.04
.02
b-After net from discontinued operations of $102,000.


SPIEGEL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPIEGEL INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
213,241,000
202,311,000
Net inc
8,885,000
b6,836,000
Share earns
.23
.18
9mo sales
602,927,000
580,168,000
Net inc
19,823,000
14,612,000
Share earns
.51
.37


Kean Helps Dedicate Memorial Honoring Veterans
LEAD: Governor Kean at a dedication ceremony yesterday in Howell Township, N.J., for a memorial honoring those who served in the Korean and Vietnam Wars.
Among the dignitaries attending the ceremony were Representative Christopher H. Smith and State Senator S. Thomas Gagliano. (Harvey L. Bilker)


Jury Awards Former Student $30,000 for Hazing Injuries
LEAD: A jury has awarded a former University of Delaware student $30,000 for burns he suffered when a caustic oven cleaner was poured over his head in a fraternity hazing rite in 1980.


New Yorkers to Decide on Changes to Constitution
LEAD: New York State voters will decide tomorrow whether to enact two amendments to the State Constitution, one dealing with ski trails and the other with civil service examinations.


TV Review
LEAD: 'Shaka Zulu,' a 5-Part Mini-Series


Shot Into Apartment Kills Boy, 5
LEAD: A 5-year-old boy was killed yesterday when a friend of the child's mother, angry that he had been locked out of their apartment, shot a .45-caliber pistol into the apartment hitting the boy, the police said.


U.S. to Burn All Toxic Soil Removed From Love Canal
LEAD: The Federal Environmental Protection Agency has decided to burn all the dioxin-contaminated soil taken from sewers and creeks around the former chemical dump known as Love Canal.


In New York City, Rats Survive the Man Race
LEAD: We of the long tails!
We of the presentient whiskers!
We of the perpetually growing teeth!
We, the serried footnotes to man, his proliferating commentary.
We, indestructible!


SYMBOL TECHNOLOGIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYMBOL TECHNOLOGIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,985,000
8,223,000
Net inc
4,551,000
b1,409,000
Share earns
.48
.24
Shares outst
9,421,000
6,076,000
b-After a tax credit of $648,000.


WHY KIRKPATRICK SAYS (OTHER) WOMEN SHOULD RUN FOR OFFICE
LEAD: Dr. Jeane J. Kirkpatrick feels strongly that a woman should run for President.


ST JUDE MEDICAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ST JUDE MEDICAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,978,000
15,464,000
Net inc
4,458,000
3,187,000
Share earns
.42
.32
9mo sales
56,549,000
46,738,000
Net inc
13,173,000
9,195,000
Share earns
1.27
.92


ADVANCE ROSS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANCE ROSS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,627,000
693,000
Net inc
466,000
15,000
Share earns
.22
-
9mo sales
6,752,000
2,483,000
Net inc
b2,252,000
79,000
Share earns
1.04
.02
b-Includes a gain from the sale of discontinued operations of $1,354,000.


Rise in Prices Flattens Out
LEAD: The sharp move to lower interest rates that coincided with the Oct. 19 break in stock prices seems to have lost some momentum in the past week as the enthusiasm that carried bond prices straight up last month is being leavened by the skepticism and caution of institutional investors.


British Sporting Art Fails to Sell at Auction
LEAD: The auction of 25 British sporting paintings in Sotheby's sale of 19th-century art last Thursday fared poorly; 18 of the works did not find buyers.
However, the most important paintings in the collection, which art dealers have said was owned by Nelson Bunker Hunt, brought higher prices than Sotheby's had expected.


European Officials Leave Exchange Rates Intact
LEAD: European officials decided this weekend not to realign their currencies, but several officials said a falling dollar might make re-evaluation necessary.


VARCO INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VARCO INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,139,000
8,662,000
Net loss
1,440,000
3,749,000
9mo sales
24,557,000
35,621,000
Net loss
6,095,000
6,592,000


JP INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JP INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
114,206,000
61,707,000
Net inc
4,080,000
2,911,000
Share earns
.36
.26
Yr sales
386,516,000
233,654,000
Net inc
14,773,000
10,812,000
Share earns
1.32
1.08


Karpov and Kasparov Show Stubborn Spirit
LEAD: Anatoly Karpov and Gary Kasparov challenged each other spiritedly and stubbornly before agreeing to a draw in the seventh game of their world championship chess match in Seville, Spain, on Saturday.


Jenkins the Old Pro Enjoys New Status
LEAD: Just when it seemed that there were no surprises left for Rodney Jenkins, the most successful equestrian the United States has ever delivered to the international show-jumping circuit, he suddenly found out that, at the age of 43, he had the chance to retrieve his amateur status and ride for his country at the Olympic


STANFORD TELECOMMUNICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANFORD TELECOMMUNICAIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,788,000
13,697,000
Net inc
38,000
450,000
Share earns
.01
.10
9mo rev
26,046,000
25,145,000
Net loss
957,000
b804,000
Share earns
-
.18


UTL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UTL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,073,476
7,210,150
Net inc
b597,201
1,149,374
Share earns
.14
.24
b-After a gain of $45,588 from the early retirement of debt.


PIONEER SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIONEER SYSTEMS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 29
1987
1986
Sales
5,688,000
10,810,000
Net loss
1,142,000
b1,136,000
9mo sales
20,476,000
28,617,000
Net loss
2,699,000
298,000
b-Includes a loss of $1,040,000 from discontinued operations and an extraordinary charge of $213,000 attributable to a 1986 tax loss carryforward.


INVITRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INVITRON CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,356,561
6,786,579
Net inc
980,834
1,016,552
The company had its initial public offering Oct. 7.


BARNES GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARNES GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
113,000,000
113,000,000
Net inc
5,200,000
5,000,000
Share earns
.80
.78
9mo sales
343,200,000
334,900,000
Net inc
13,200,000
b13,600,000
Share earns
2.06
2.10


RAILROAD SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAILROAD SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
487,214
b536,852
Per share
-
.71
9mo net inc
234,490
1,396,349
Per share
.31
1.86
b-Net income and includes a one- time gain of $181,312 from the sale of a mortage banking unit.


HARTFORD STEAM BOILER INPECTION &amp; INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARTFORD STEAM BOILER INPECTION &amp; INSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b14,624,000
c14,537,000
Share earns
.72
.69
Shares outst
20,316,682
21,221,840
9mo net inc
b44,342,000
c39,978,000
Share earns
2.16
1.88
Shares outst
20,518,520
21,236,768


Therapists Protest an Award For Member of AIDS Panel
LEAD: Dr.
Theresa Crenshaw, a member of the President's commission on AIDS, drew protests at a meeting of 3,400 family therapists here this weekend.


Sports World Specials; The Racing Bug
LEAD: Truckers plying the Stuart Highway between Australia's north and south coasts this week may be forgiven for gawking at some of the unlikeliest forms ever seen on a highway.
A squadron of insect-like race cars that resemble weird crosses between bicycles, the Apollo mission lunar rover and the vehicles featured in the Australian Mad Max movies are participants in the Pentax World Solar Challenge, an ecologist's answer to the


700 NBC WORKERS FACING DISMISSAL
LEAD: NBC, its longest strike now over, will begin a long-range job-reduction plan today to eliminate about 700 network jobs by the end of next year, according to officials at the company.


STARTEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STARTEL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,655,000
2,900,000
Net inc
12,000
83,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
6,850,000
8,459,000
Net loss
1,141,000
b235,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


TIMBERLINE SOFTWARE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIMBERLINE SOFTWARE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,761,000
1,348,000
Net inc
103,000
b218,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
5,571,000
5,096,000
Net inc
204,000
b408,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


CROSS, A T CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROSS, A T CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
45,435,286
35,339,494
Net inc
6,624,334
4,221,117
Share earns
.40
.26
9mo sales
118,519,365
98,393,122
Net inc
16,115,139
10,907,633
Share earns
.97
.66


Rene Levesque, Separatist Leader And Quebec's Ex-Premier, Is Dead
LEAD: Rene Levesque, who led an often bitter and ultimately unsuccessful struggle to separate Quebec from Canada and who served as the province's Premier from 1976 to 1985, died at his home in Montreal today after a heart attack, a police spokesman there said.
He was 65 years old.


DENG STEPS DOWN AMID SIGNS POLICY WILL SURVIVE HIM
LEAD: Deng Xiaoping retired in triumph today from the Central Committee of China's Communist Party as part of a sweeping overhaul that seems to promise continuation of his policies for economic change.


Academic and Parental Pressure
LEAD: According to a Brandeis University researcher, a drug commonly used to control high blood pressure may also relieve the extreme anxiety that paralyzes some students when confronted with a test.
The finding could mean welcome relief for those few young people who are profoundly afflicted.
But it also raises a disturbing question about parental pressure to achieve.


A Break for Debtor Nations
LEAD: One unexpected result of tumult in the stock markets is the help it is giving developing countries in coping with the debt crises.


Hot Words Bring No Peace to Mideast
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Official Says Missile Treaty With Soviet Is Nearly Completed
LEAD: Frank C. Carlucci, President Reagan's national security adviser, confirmed today that the Soviet-American treaty to eliminate medium- and short-range nuclear weapons is now all but completed.


PARKER DRILLING COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARKER DRILLING COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
24,292,000
31,430,000
Net loss
31,157,000
b25,484,000
Yr rev
112,627,000
196,225,000
Net loss
89,571,000
b70,839,000
b-Includes charges of $7,858,000 for the quarter and $10,858,000 for the year for disposal of a plant and writedown of oil and gas properties.


XYVISION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XYVISION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
9,203,000
5,304,000
Net inc
b867,000
c956,000
Share earns
.14
.15
6mo rev
16,707,000
10,406,000
Net inc
b1,111,000
c1,747,000
Share earns
.18
.34
Shares outst
6,076,000
5,188,000


TV Review; 'First Eden,' Mediterranean History
LEAD: ''THE First Eden,'' a four-part series, is an excursion to the Mediterranean and all the lands around it.
Tonight's episode, on Channel 13 at 10 P.M (and on Channels 21, 31 and 49 at 8), looks at the distant past.
Continents collide, an ocean is formed, new animals proliferate.
The episode, ''The Making of the


New York Must Provide for Its Children in Need
LEAD: To the Editor:


PHOENIX MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHOENIX MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,501,000
2,589,000
Net inc
296,000
b576,000
Share earns
.19
-
9mo sales
9,403,000
8,252,000
Net inc
854,000
b703,000
Share earns
.56
-
b-Net loss.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


Soviet Flight Of Armenians Heads for U.S.
LEAD: A flash flood of Soviet Armenians seeking to move to the United States has deluged the American Consulate here in the last six months, reaching new high levels as the month of October closed.


Dawkins's Wife Dies
LEAD: Police were investigating the death this morning of the estranged wife of Darryl Dawkins, the former New Jersey Nets player, authorities said.


6 Upstate Teen-Agers Die as Train Hits Their Car
LEAD: Six western New York teen-agers returning from a Halloween party died when a freight train slammed into their car as its driver apparently tried to beat the train past a crossing early today, the authorities said.


Fraud Charged in Sale Of Steel to Atom Plants
LEAD: Federal prosecutors have charged three companies and three executives with intentionally selling ordinary steel as nuclear quality, forcing its removal from some power plants.


Contraction Is Wall Street Theme As Industry Plans for Major Cuts
LEAD: Wall Street, shaken by the turmoil in the stock market, is slamming the brakes on what had been the greatest boom in American financial history.
After a decade of unprecedented growth, fueled by a huge flow of profits, a new word is working its way into the financial lexicon: contraction.


Egg-Throwing Results In a Death in Flushing
LEAD: A Queens teen-ager was arrested and charged yesterday with the fatal stabbing of a man who threw eggs at the youth's van on Halloween night, the police said.


Gibraltar Loss Of $155 Million Special to The New York Times
LEAD: The Gibraltar Financial Corporation said it had a third-quarter net loss of $154.6 million, after taking a $147.1 million write-down and adding $92 million to its loan loss reserves.
A year earlier, Gibraltar earned $13.3 million, or 69 cents a share.


Futures Shock, Misplaced
LEAD: What caused the Black Monday stock market crash on Oct. 19?
The search for reasons, and scapegoats, has turned to ''portfolio insurance,'' ''program trading'' and other computer-paced investment strategies linked to hybrid securities called stock index futures.


The Art of the Chinese Scholar
LEAD: A man sat at a desk and wrote down what he considered the essential conditions for a full and happy life:


An Iran Affair Is Emerging in France
LEAD: In an affair that echoes the furor over the Reagan Administration's secret arms sales to Iran, French Defense Ministry officials have charged that a Defense Minister in the former Socialist Government approved sales of 450,000 artillery shells to Iran in violation of French law.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 2, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


MILTON ROY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MILTON ROY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,784,000
28,950,000
Net inc
930,000
b2,928,000
Share earns
.22
-
9mo sales
82,262,000
88,110,000
Net inc
2,520,000
b2,165,000
Share earns
.60
-


Girl, 3, Undergoes 4-Organ Transplant
LEAD: Surgeons completed the transplant of a liver, a pancreas and part of a stomach and intestine today into a 3-year-old girl who has never eaten solid food because of a defect in her digestive system.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The leadership role that has been played by Comrade Deng Xiaoping has not been determined by his post.
Though he has left the Party Central Committee now, his prestige and wisdom will insure him a major role in the work of both the party and the state.''  - Zhu Muzhi, a spokesmanfor the party congress.


CITY GAS CO OF FLORIDA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITY GAS CO OF FLORIDA (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,674,824
7,451,624
Net inc
358,591
589,482
Share earns
.13
.22
6mo rev
18,209,055
15,892,123
Net inc
1,073,839
1,299,784
Share earns
.39
.48


MAYS, J W INC reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAYS, J W INC
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,741,518
19,521,672
Net inc
b154,398
694,521
Share earns
.07
.32
Yr sales
78,248,987
81,366,031
Net inc
b1,862,986
c1,078,535
Share earns
.86
-
b-Includes extraordinary charges of $446,000 for the quarter and $459,000 for the year.


Going Out Guide
LEAD:  Two for Tea


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD:  Allied-Signal Inc., Morris Township, N.J., an advanced-technology company, said Forrest N. Shumway, vice chairman and a director, would take early retirement, effective Jan. 1.
Butler National Corp., Lenexa, Kan., which provides aircraft-modification products and has acquired HSD Inc., a Kansas City, Mo., consulting engineering firm, named HSD's chairman, John Dixon, president of Butler.


Begun's Dilemma
LEAD: To the Editor:


France Sees Threat To Share Offerings
LEAD: Minister, Edouard Balladur, has been struggling to keep the country's huge privatization program from being drowned in the world's stock market maelstrom.


ZONDERVAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZONDERVAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,293,000
25,369,000
Net inc
804,000
b2,463,000
Share earns
.19
.60
9mo sales
69,935,000
71,819,000
Net loss
1,094,000
bc2,154,000
Share earns
-
.52


Ronald Reagan's Luck
LEAD: The President's famous faculty for coming up a winner seems to have deserted him.
His party lost the Senate last year, just as the Iran-contra story started trickling out.
He bet a pile on Robert Bork for the Supreme Court, and lost.
World stock markets crashed.
Waves of criticism surge in daily.
Just when a sound, inspiring leader is needed, he appears more out of touch than ever.


RADIONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RADIONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,065,000
7,265,000
Net inc
801,000
423,000
Share earns
.19
.10
9mo sales
25,978,000
20,279,000
Net inc
2,265,000
1,454,000
Share earns
.54
.35


Crews Work to Drain Tank That Leaked Chemical Cloud
LEAD: Refinery workers continued draining acid today from a ruptured storage tank that spewed a cloud of toxic gas, and a neighborhood evacuation remained in effect for a second day, officials said.


STANDEX INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDEX INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
102,775,000
97,313,000
Net inc
3,902,000
3,669,000
Share earns
.32
.30


ACME UNITED CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACME UNITED CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,566,316
9,026,633
Net inc
173,547
125,438
Share earns
.06
.04
9mo sales
27,728,079
27,172,155
Net inc
312,322
309,787
Share earns
.10
.10


GENERAL DATACOMM INDUSRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL DATACOMM INDUSRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
45,636,000
46,308,000
Net loss
3,118,000
cd913,000
Share earns
-
.06
Yr sales
200,641,000
178,024,000
Net inc
b783,000
d3,926,000
Share earns
.05
.26


VIE DE FRANCE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIE DE FRANCE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,811,361
10,587,771
Net inc
688,591
810,511
Share earns
.07
.08


BROWN &amp; SHARPE MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROWN &amp; SHARPE MANUFACTURING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
31,646,000
28,816,000
Net loss
1,795,000
1,709,000
9mo sales
105,882,000
95,044,000
Net loss
1,652,000
313,000


SURVIVAL TECHNOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SURVIVAL TECHNOLOGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Sales
9,279,400
5,115,800
Net inc
1,571,800
c1,801,500
Share earns
.59
-
Yr sales
27,789,200
30,780,500
Net inc
b316,500
c769,800
Share earns
.11
-


KEYSTONE INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEYSTONE INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
72,993,000
68,339,000
Net inc
6,154,000
4,541,000
Share earns
.23
.18
9mo sales
213,723,000
174,818,000
Net inc
15,947,000
b12,289,000
Share earns
.61
.49


VINTAGE ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VINTAGE ENTERPRISES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
7,857,000
10,408,000
Net loss
494,000
38,000
6mo rev
17,978,000
22,058,000
Net loss
654,000
b28,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


MIDWAY AIRLINES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDWAY AIRLINES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
93,803,000
64,234,000
Net inc
b4,537,000
c3,125,000
Share earns
.41
.29
9mo rev
249,557,000
189,957,000
Net inc
b13,759,000
c3,893,000
Share earns
1.19
.29


TV Coverage Misses Winner
LEAD: After ABC tracked the marathon for more than two hours and gave extensive coverage to the leader, Ibrahim Hussein, it seemed strange to some viewers of the telecast that the network did not show Hussein as he crossed the finish line.


Robert Ernest McGill 4th Weds Gabrielle Giordano
LEAD: At the Elberon (N.J.) Memorial Church, Gabrielle Christina Giordano, the daughter of Mrs.
Anthony Giordano Jr. of Colts Neck, N.J., and the late Mr.
Giordano, was married yesterday to Robert Ernest McGill 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McGill 3d of Simsbury, Conn.
The Rev.
James Pruner, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony.


After the Fall: Will the Yuppies Rise Again?
LEAD: In harsh denunciations and gleefully venomous jokes, one sentiment has surfaced with startling frequency in the wake of the stock market plunge: now the yuppies will get theirs.


SOUTHWESTERN ENERGY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWESTERN ENERGY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,724,000
12,060,000
Net inc
689,000
1,657,000
Share earns
.08
.20
9mo rev
50,889,000
54,416,000
Net inc
5,833,000
b10,731,000
Share earns
.70
1.28


PANCHO'S MEXICAN BUFFET reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PANCHO'S MEXICAN BUFFET (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
14,703,000
12,013,000
Net inc
b733,980
871,720
Share earns
.14
.20
Yr rev
50,037,000
43,104,000
Net inc
2,763,308
2,550,133
Share earns
.61
.60


YES, CHARLES HAS AN ITCH; IT'S TO SQUELCH THE PRESS
LEAD: So, after days of frenzied speculation in the tabloid press about the state of his marriage, what do you suppose is on the Prince of Wales's mind about newspapers these days?


CURRENT PRICES
LEAD: Margaret D. Tutwiler, Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d's principal public affairs aide, puts herself down about matters economic.
She is Mr.
Baker's public relations firefighter and a political operative, not a markets wizard.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Rene Levesque Dies  The former Premier of Quebec, a leader in the province's fight to secede from Canada, died of a heart attack last night in Montreal.
Page D 15.
The Rodent Has Its Day  Many residents say New York City seems more rat-ridden of late, and the reason may be the city's recent construction boom.


Devils' Success a True Team Effort
LEAD: THERE is fresh paint on the walls of the Devils' locker room and the lighting is brighter.
And the room has been filled with victory celebrations this season by a group of bigger and stronger players.


Israel Cabinet Defers Issue of Security Agency
LEAD: The Israeli Cabinet today postponed discussion of an official inquiry's report that concluded agents of the Shin Beth internal security service had routinely committed perjury to convict terrorist suspects.


Giants Find Dallas Unfriendly Territory
LEAD: Actually, Bill Parcells thinks Texas Stadium is ''a good place to play.''


KINDER-CARE LEARNING CENTERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KINDER-CARE LEARNING CENTERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
135,893,000
84,632,000
Net inc
11,813,000
7,704,000
Share earns
.25
.17
Shares outst
47,145,000
44,728,000
9mo rev
379,953,000
234,725,000
Net inc
34,160,000
28,036,000
Share earns
.75
.63


DUQUESNE SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DUQUESNE SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,178,000
7,431,000
Net inc
2,176,000
1,492,000
Share earns
.20
.14
Yr rev
37,656,000
24,236,000
Net inc
8,120,000
5,014,000
Share earns
.75
.53


VERSAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERSAR INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,927,000
9,965,000
Net inc
449,000
451,000
Share earns
.12
.17
Shares outst
3,745,000
2,722,000
All 1987 figures restated to include the results of Arix Corp., acquired July 1.


TRIDEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRIDEX CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
5,206,000
5,073,000
Net inc
b171,000
c668,000
Share earns
.09
.36
6mo rev
9,598,000
10,828,000
Net inc
b12,000
c853,000
Share earns
.01
.48
Shares outst
1,914,000
1,773,000


GENICOM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENICOM CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
72,882,000
39,320,000
Net inc
2,043,000
2,377,000
Share earns
.18
.21
9mo sales
214,423,000
114,329,000
Net inc
b9,252,000
6,104,000
Share earns
.80
.61
Shares outst
11,570,000
10,013,000


TANDY BRANDS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TANDY BRANDS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,523,000
15,084,000
Net inc
b535,000
c85,000
Share earns
.14
-
b-After a tax credit of $177,000.
c-Net loss


Woman Battles Koch's Program For Mentally Ill
LEAD: In a case that is likely to test the limits of Mayor Koch's campaign to hospitalize severely mentally ill homeless people, a woman forcibly removed from her encampment at the vent of an East Side restaurant will ask a state judge today to set her free.


Rangers' Problems Prolonged by Oilers
LEAD: The Rangers, who would like to ignore this weekend, fear it will return to haunt them if a teamwide metamorphosis is not accomplished.


Budget Conferees Discussing Limit on Social Security Rise
LEAD: Congressional and White House budget negotiators, who are to resume work Monday on a plan to reduce the deficit, are considering limiting cost-of-living increases in Social Security benefits as part of plan to save ''well over'' $23 billion in 1988, officials said tonight.


BOSTON EDISON CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOSTON EDISON CO (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,158,218,000
1,104,228,000
Net inc
108,495,000
102,407,000
Share earns
2.56
2.55
Shares outst
37,040,000
34,676,000


ADIA SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADIA SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
102,623,000
63,356,000
Net inc
3,374,000
1,762,000
Share earns
.30
.22
Shares outst
11,196,000
8,066,000
9mo rev
281,175,000
177,711,000
Net inc
8,370,000
4,687,000
Share earns
.84
.58
Shares outst
9,964,000
8,051,000


THOMAS NELSON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THOMAS NELSON INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,781,552
15,481,317
Net inc
652,819
c988,537
Share earns
.12
.18
6mo sales
22,224,819
24,924,760
Net inc
b1,186,772
d392,930
Share earns
.22
.07


Lawsuit to Determine Rights of Illegal Aliens
LEAD: Three years ago, Alicia Castrejon, a young, undocumented worker from the state of Michoacan, Mexico, had a job counting and packaging tortillas in Farmersville, a small town about 30 miles south of Fresno in California's central agricultural area.


A Brodsky Reading
LEAD: Joseph Brodsky, the winner of this year's Nobel Prize in Literature, will read from his works at 7:30 P.M.
Wednesday at the Altschul Auditorium of Columbia Unversity, Amsterdam Avenue and 116th Street.
The reading is the first in a series called ''Writers in Exile,'' which will run through Dec. 9.


Sports World Specials; Larger Than Life
LEAD: Though it has long been known as the home of one of the world's major sporting spectacles, Churchill Downs has never displayed any trappings re-lating to the Kentucky Derby.
At least when a larger-than-life-sized statue of the firdt Kentucky Derby winner.
Aristides, was unveiled by the Ken-tucky Lieutenant Governor, Steven


BEACHHEAD IN A WAR ON PORNOGRAPHY
LEAD: Few people in this live-and-let-live metropolis seemed to have noticed the moral peril, but there is no way to ignore it now.


RORER GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RORER GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
224,881,000
201,967,000
Net inc
13,571,000
b3,242,000
Share earns
.62
-
9mo sales
647,363,000
575,251,000
Net inc
31,884,000
c131,929,000
Share earns
1.46
6.07


Texas to Vote on Legalizing Betting on Horses
LEAD: Texas may be indelibly etched in the national imagination as horse country, but it has been 50 years since it was horse racing country.


SUPERIOR ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUPERIOR ELECTRIC CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,342,000
12,610,000
Net inc
488,000
b2,084,000
Share earns
.17
-
9mo sales
39,086,000
38,769,000
Net loss
666,000
3,058,000
b-Net loss  The latest quarter includes a pre- tax gain on the sale of land of $1,023,000; the latest 9 months includes a gain on sale of land of $3,671,000 and a charge from restructuring costs of $2,651,000.


Books of The Times
LEAD: TIMEBENDS: A Life. By Arthur Miller.


Bridge: Bid From Melbourne Event Had the Look of a Misprint
LEAD: Players of an earlier epoch would certainly be astonished by the diagramed auction and suspect a typographical error.


Emphasis Is Shifting On Dollar
LEAD: The United States and other leading countries are finding that the importance they have placed upon keeping the dollar stable this year has been excessive and probably a mistake, according to finance and foreign ministry officials.


Nationwide's Mortgage Bid
LEAD: First Nationwide Bank, in a move to increase its reach to 24 states and double its mortgage business, said it plans to buy the mortgage subsidiary of the Imperial Corporation of America.
Terms were not disclosed.
First Nationwide said its acquisition of the ICA Mortage Corporation of San Diego would not affect its continuing interest in acquiring the Financial Corporation of America, the parent of American Savings, the nation's largest savings and loan association.


Ballet: Joffrey Performs 'La Fille Mal Gardee'
LEAD: IF ever there was a happy ballet it was ''La Fille Mal Gardee,'' created in France in 1789 by Jean Dauberval and now presented by the Joffrey Ballet in Sir Frederick Ashton's sublime version of 1960.


Recital: The Kavafians
LEAD: IDA and Ani Kavafian have an aggressive, deep-in-the-strings, excited way of playing their violins that is intended to please a crowd, but what they provide is a shallow, unrewarding pleasure and it quickly wears thin.
The sisters' dual recital Saturday evening at the 92d Street Y - at which Ida played both violin and viola - included lots of energetic, virtuosic bowing and emotionalism of an easy, general sort.


Police Checkpoint Use Is Upheld in California
LEAD: The California State Supreme Court has upheld the authority of the police to use checkpoints to detect drunken drivers.


Business and the Law; Economics And Ginsburg
LEAD: If Douglas H. Ginsburg is confirmed to the Supreme Court, it will represent a watershed for the economics-based legal theories associated with the University of Chicago Law School.


VIRATEK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIRATEK INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
170,000
1,573,000
Net loss
3,226,000
b545,000
9mo rev
555,000
5,620,000
Net loss
7,798,000
c931,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-After an extraordinary charge of $230,000.


Koch Group Meets Contras
LEAD: Mayor Koch, who heads a nine-member delegation from New York City that will observe compliance with a Central American peace plan, met here tonight with leaders of the contra rebels fighting the Nicaraguan Government.
The Mayor said the leaders, including Adolfo Calero and Alfonso Robelo, suggested a number of issues the delegation would raise with President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua.


U.N. Criticized by Iranian Official Over Efforts to Settle War in Gulf
LEAD: A senior Iranian leader accused the United Nations of procrastination and deception in its Persian Gulf peace effort today, proclaiming that Iran will answer a cease-fire proposal with a new offensive.


SELECTERM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SELECTERM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,834,000
6,003,000
Net inc
215,000
290,000
Share earns
.08
.11
9mo rev
17,197,000
18,552,000
Net inc
369,000
1,002,000
Share earns
.14
.39


AIDS Education
LEAD: To the Editor:


Auto Unions Will Test Custodial-Care Benefit
LEAD: In their new contracts with the United Automobile Workers union, the Ford Motor Company and the General Motors Corporation have agreed to test a new type of benefit to cover the costs of non-medical custodial care that would enable employees or retirees whose health is severely impaired to live at home.


Holding On To Business; Balancing Tax Cuts And Revenues Is Key
LEAD: A spate of disparate events in recent days - including the stock market plunge, a shift on city tax policy and the breakdown of talks between NBC and the real-estate developer Donald J. Trump - has underscored a central tension that bedevils almost all local governments: how to balance economic development and the need to raise revenue.


Theodore R. Weiler
LEAD: Theodore R. Weiler, a founder and former president of the Boar's Head Provision Company of Brooklyn, a manufacturer of delicatessen products, died of coronary disease Thursday in White Plains Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y., Manhattan and Palm Beach, Fla.


TEXSTYRENE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXSTYRENE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
46,461,000
38,736,000
Net inc
2,000
139,000
9mo sales
131,462,000
102,444,000
Net loss
559,000
693,000
The share earnings are anti-dilutive after preferred dividends accrued.


CENTRAL PENNSYLVANIA FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL PENNSYLVANIA FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
816,425
743,000
Share earns
.54
.66
Shares outst
1,514,000
1,117,000
6mo net inc
1,699,000
1,614,000
Share earns
1.12
1.44


DYATRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYATRON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,721,000
8,041,000
Net inc
923,000
b344,000
Share earns
.28
.09
9mo rev
26,935,000
22,808,000
Net inc
2,066,000
b561,000
Share earns
.62
.11
b-Includes tax credits of $98,000 for the quarter and $162,000 for the 9 months.


Man Severely Burned In a Fire in Manhattan Man Is Burned After an Explosive Ignites a Fire
LEAD: A 26-year-old Manhattan man was critically burned yesterday when, during an apparent dispute, an acquaintance threw a Molotov cocktail at him and ignited a fire at an Upper West Side apartment building, fire officials said.


For One Day, Tiny Goblins Oust Dealers at Park
LEAD: For a few hours, the empty crack vials that normally litter the green benches and concrete walkways at Hell's Kitchen Park in Manhattan were replaced by dozens of orange and black balloons tied to seats, railings and wooden awnings for a Halloween party.


Syrian President Picks A New Prime Minister
LEAD: President Hafez al-Assad reorganized his Cabinet today, bringing in several technical experts and specialists in an effort to address the country's severe economic problems.


MISSION WEST PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MISSION WEST PROPERTIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
535,534
244,983
Net loss
95,812
c110,138
9mo rev
1,438,005
5,104,445
Net loss
187,739
bc516,146
Share earns
-
.33
b-Net income  c-Includes a charge of $48,000 from reversal of a tax credit for the quarter, and the 9-months includes a tax credit of $220,000.


Reform Jews Weigh Mideast Plan
LEAD: A leader of Reform Jews in America urged Israel yesterday to seek an international ''umbrella'' for direct negotiations with Jordan and other Arab governments to settle the dispute over the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


ADDING TO AN EMBASSY'S FLOURISH
LEAD: The State Department, feeling the pinch of budgetary cutbacks, could get a healthy infusion of cash if it decided to hold a garage sale.


CAPITOL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN OF DENER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPITOL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN OF DENER (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b1,630,000
c1,005,000
Share earns
-
.32
b-Includes an extraordinary loss of $1,468,000 from extinguishment of debt.
c-Net income


Question Is Raised on Ginsburg's Role in TV Case
LEAD: Douglas H. Ginsburg, President Reagan's choice for the Supreme Court, is facing questions because of reports that he owned stock in a cable television company when as a Justice Department official he participated in a lawsuit affecting the cable television industry.


Dance: Japanese Group at La Mama
LEAD: ''THE GARASHA'' possessed a theatrical split personality.
One sign of it could be found in the printed program for this dance-drama, which a cast of dancers and actors from Japan presented Saturday night at La Mama.


PAYCO AMERICAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAYCO AMERICAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,496,000
18,321,000
Net inc
668,000
761,000
Share earns
.13
.15
9mo rev
54,961,000
53,247,000
Net inc
1,399,000
2,056,000
Share earns
.28
.41


COPPERWELD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COPPERWELD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
58,346,000
48,027,000
Net inc
2,646,000
b1,359,000
Share earns
.23
-
9mo sales
164,719,000
151,796,000
Net inc
7,338,000
b2,901,000
Share earns
.64
-


MOORE MCCORMACK REOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOORE MCCORMACK REOURCES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
96,800,000
89,900,000
Net inc
8,800,000
6,900,000
Share earns
.83
.65
9mo sales
266,200,000
249,200,000
Net inc
16,140,000
b120,700,000
Share earns
1.35
-


GROSSMAN'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROSSMAN'S INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
316,795,000
293,984,000
Net inc
b13,032,000
c173,884,000
Share earns
.54
8.69
Shares outst
24,308,000
20,000,000
9mo sales
819,466,000
763,755,000
Net inc
b15,886,000
c151,785,000
Share earns
.74
7.59
Shares outst
21,539,000
20,000,000


PRIAM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIAM CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
31,140,000
27,265,000
Net loss
2,471,000
4,840,000


JACOR COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACOR COMMUNICATIONS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,986,000
6,552,000
Net loss
525,000
bc445,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
29,532,000
16,624,000
Net loss
2,702,000
c336,000
b-Net income  c-Includes an extraordinary gain of $184,000 for both the quarter and 9 months.


Turnout Seen as Key in Philadelphia Mayoral Vote
LEAD: Two days before the mayoral election here, the outcome of the voting appears to come down to this:


SPECIALTY COMPOSITES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPECIALTY COMPOSITES CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,306,697
2,066,636
Net inc
105,489
88,929
Share earns
.11
.09
9mo rev
6,714,468
6,026,343
Net inc
167,960
136,856
Share earns
.17
.14


Baldwin Case: Policies Freed
LEAD: About 165,000 policyholders whose investments were tied up by the Baldwin-United Corporation bankruptcy are about to regain control of their holdings for the first time since 1983.


Sandinista Turns His Efforts to Down's Syndrome
LEAD: The life of Omar Cabezas, a Sandinista leader and ex-guerrilla, has been full of political and military action.
But none of his exploits prepared him for the personal crisis he now confronts after discovering that his infant sons have Down's syndrome.


SUPER SKY INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUPER SKY INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,855,000
10,573,000
Net inc
457,000
677,000
Share earns
.10
.14
6mo rev
22,351,000
20,959,000
Net inc
1,055,000
1,258,000
Share earns
.23
.27


Anne Kupferberg Wed To Dr. Mark D. Pepper
LEAD: Anne Frances Kupferberg, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth M. Kupferberg of Flushing, Queens, was married there yesterday to Dr.
Mark David Pepper, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Pepper of Chester, Pa.
Rabbi Bruce Goldwasser officiated at Temple Beth Sholom.


Indian Festival of Lights Sparkles at South Street Seaport
LEAD: Dancers performing during the Deepavali Festival yesterday at the South Street Seaport.
The festival is a celebration of the triumph of good over evil.
The event, sponsored by the Association of Indians in America, featured music, dance, crafts, food and fireworks. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


Joseph Campbell, Writer Known For His Scholarship on Mythology
LEAD: Joseph Campbell, one of the most knowledgeable writers on mythology and folklore, died Saturday at his home in Hawaii after a brief illness.
He was 83 years old and had homes in Honolulu and Greenwich Village.


SEAMEN'S CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEAMEN'S CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,553,000
5,369,000
Per share
.27
.36
9mo net inc
14,853,000
22,663,000
Per share
.89
1.76
The per share earnings for the third quarter and the 9 months of 1986 are not comparable to 1987 figures, however, as the company was recapitalized and sold shares to the public of August 1986.


GOULDS PUMPS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOULDS PUMPS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
102,534,000
97,850,000
Net inc
5,799,000
4,996,000
Share earns
.32
.28
9mo sales
285,475,000
275,295,000
Net inc
14,699,000
13,981,000
Share earns
.82
.78


British Sporting Art Fails to Sell at Auction
LEAD: The auction of 25 British sporting paintings in Sotheby's sale of 19th-century art last Thursday fared poorly; 18 of the works did not find buyers.
However, the most important paintings in the collection, which art dealers have said was owned by Nelson Bunker Hunt, brought higher prices than Sotheby's had expected.


Anthony S. Accurso
LEAD: Anthony Salvatore Accurso, an artist and illustrator best known for his courtroom sketches on television, died of a heart attack at the Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn on Oct. 23 shortly after returning from a news assignment in Florida.
He was 47 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Olympic Notebook; Friends and Rivals at the Top
LEAD: With less than four months to go before the 1988 Calgary Olympics, it is fairly safe to assume that someone named Brian will win the gold medal in men's figure skating.
And probably the silver.


Remark on Military Role Stokes Bonn Debate
LEAD: A public assertion by Chancellor Helmut Kohl's top foreign affairs adviser that Bonn must shoulder a greater share of Western security has highlighted anew the predicament of a nation torn between the obligations of its economic might and memories of its role as an aggressor in World War II.


BI INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BI INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
872,000
200,000
Net inc
2,000
b306,000
b-Net loss


STEPAN COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STEPAN COMPANY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
72,741,000
64,584,000
Net inc
2,604,000
1,856,000
Share earns
.87
.62
9mo sales
215,724,000
192,950,000
Net inc
8,121,000
5,834,000
Share earns
2.71
1.97


BRITTON LEE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRITTON LEE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,696,000
7,815,000
Net inc
57,000
c132,000
Share earns
.01
.02
9mo sales
18,708,000
22,468,000
Net loss
6,163,000
bc58,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


No Offer for Calmat
LEAD: - A group of companies led by Industrial Equity Ltd. said it had decided not to make a takeover bid for the Calmat Company.
Industrial Equity of Hong Kong already owns 19.1 percent of the common stock of the Los Angeles cement maker.
Industrial Equity said its decision is a result of the stock market's volatility and litigation brought by Calmat against the group.


Gas Station Gimmicks Return
LEAD: Miniskirts are back in fashion.
Star Trek has returned to television.
And gasoline stations are giving customers a ''free'' glass with purchases.


Inspired Colts Down Jets, 19-14
LEAD: - The Indianapolis Colts arrived at their training facility Saturday morning to find Eric Dickerson, pro football's premier running back, walking around in a Colts sweatsuit and getting fitted for equipment.


Emily Gardner Is Wed To Lawrence D. Rand
LEAD: Emily Gardner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin J. Gardner of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Lawrence David Rand, the son of Mrs.
Nathaniel Maller of Cranbury, N.J.
Rabbi Hershel Portnoy performed the ceremony at Beth Emeth Synagogue.


Holiday Tomorrow
LEAD: Tomorrow is Election Day, but closings vary.
Following are holiday schedules:  NEW YORK  Parking: Alternate-side parking rules suspended.
Sanitation: No collection or street cleaning.
Governmental offices: Federal offices open; state and municipal offices closed.
Post offices: Regular deliveries.


COBE LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COBE LABORATORIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
46,775,000
42,273,000
Net inc
1,995,000
2,399,000
Share earns
.30
.36
9mo sales
139,225,000
127,570,000
Net inc
6,815,000
6,981,000
Share earns
1.01
1.05


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-15


Coming Home, With AIDS, to a Small Town
LEAD: The night before his high school class reunion, the telephone rang for Dean Lechner.


Facts About Fat
LEAD: Federal dietary guidelines recommend that Americans reduce cholesterol intake by avoiding highly saturated palm, palm kernel or coconut oil.
Yet, the Food and Drug Administration permits food producers to disguise them.


Careers; Wanted: College Presidents
LEAD: THE turnover in presidencies and other executive positions at the nation's colleges and universities has grown rapidly in recent years.


CENTEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTEX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
350,676,000
351,996,000
Net inc
7,676,000
14,080,000
Share earns
.46
.79
6mo rev
718,515,000
698,909,000
Net inc
12,965,000
27,582,000
Share earns
.77
1.54


NWA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NWA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,443,712,000
1,099,349,000
Net inc
87,336,000
59,729,000
Share earns
2.89
2.32
9mo rev
3,928,414,000
2,440,260,000
Net inc
102,990,000
67,179,000
Share earns
3.59
2.80


HAMPTON INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAMPTON INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
48,152,000
49,116,000
Net inc
1,542,000
2,098,000
Share earns
.41
.56
9mo sales
114,941,000
110,344,000
Net inc
2,866,000
3,344,000
Share earns
.76
.89


NAC RE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NAC RE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
43,598,000
24,311,000
Net inc
b2,667,000
c758,000
Share earns
.36
.14
Shares outst
7,247,654
5,244,564
9mo rev
121,188,000
53,902,000
Net inc
b7,660,000
c5,120,000
Share earns
1.05
.98
Shares outst
7,240,633
5,243,425


Webb Chairman Steps Down
LEAD: Robert K. Swanson has resigned as chairman, chief executive and a director of the Del E. Webb Corporation.
He mentioned health reasons.


Election Day: A Guide to the Races
LEAD:  Governors


Effervescent Betsey Johnson
LEAD: ''Pure terror!''


Yet Again, Subsidies For Water Become An Issue in Congress
LEAD: The seemingly endless battle in Congress over subsidized water for farms is flaring again on several fronts.


College Football; Holy Cross in a Scoring Mode
LEAD: Stopping their own offense has become a problem for Holy Cross.
After the Crusaders have a game locked up, they replace Jeff Wiley, their passing wizard, and the other regulars.
But the momentum is such that the score keeps mounting.


No Author Autographs
LEAD: The Soviet Embassy held a highly unorthodox book party yesterday: neither the book nor the author was available.
But then, it was an unusual literary occasion, the publication in the United States of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's new volume, ''Perestroika.'' The title is the Russian term for restructuring, which describes Mr.


Cowboys Look to the Past for Inspiration
LEAD: For any Dallas Cowboy fan who believes that history repeats itself, the best news about the team this season may be all the bad news.


Rene Levesque, Ex-Premier of Quebec, Dies at 65#
LEAD: Rene Levesque, who led an often bitter and ultimately unsuccessful struggle to separate Quebec from Canada and who served as the province's Premier from 1976 to 1985, died of a heart attack Sunday in Montreal.
He was 65 years old.


OGILVY GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OGILVY GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
171,430,000
132,756,000
Net inc
5,665,000
5,023,000
Share earns
.38
.35
9mo rev
516,648,000
391,625,000
Net inc
15,278,000
14,698,000
Share earns
1.04
1.03


Leo Goldberg, Astronomer, Dies
LEAD: Dr.
Leo Goldberg, a noted astronomer and the former director of the Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona, died of cancer Sunday at the Tucson Medical Center.
He was 74 years old and lived in Tucson.


Former Head of Peoples Will Lead Dart Drug
LEAD: Sheldon W. Fantle, who made his fortune by building up Peoples Drug Stores Inc. and selling it, is getting back in the drugstore business.


Writers to Discuss James
LEAD: William Gass, Elizabeth Hardwick and Susan Sontag are to speak about Henry James as part of the Great American Writers series sponsored by PEN.
The program begins at 7 P.M.
Sunday at PEN American Center headquarters, 568 Broadway, at Prince Street, fourth floor.
A reception follows the program.
The public is invited, with admission $4.


U.S.-Soviet Unsung Gains
LEAD: ARMS control negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union may make the headlines but, on a less dramatic level, negotiations over the exchange of students have a long and successful history.


A 'BREAKTHROUGH' SOUGHT IN SUMMIT
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that he would press at the summit meeting next month in Washington for ''a palpable breakthrough'' on a treaty reducing long-range nuclear weapons and banning weapons from space.


Maxwell to Buy Alco-Gravure
LEAD: The Maxwell Communication Corporation P.L.C. said it had agreed to acquire Alco-Gravure Industries, an American commercial printer, for an undisclosed amount of cash.
Maxwell Communication, which recently changed its name from the British Printing and Communication Corporation P.L.C., said the acquisition was being executed by its American subsidiary, the Maxwell Communication Corporation.


EX-CONTRA LEADER CALLS FOR A TRUCE
LEAD: Arturo Cruz, a former anti-Sandinista leader, said today that the United States-supported guerrillas in Nicaragua should ''put their activities on hold'' to enhance the prospects of the Central American peace plan.


VIATECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIATECH INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,544,941
13,660,103
Net inc
279,229
185,432
Share earns
.47
.32
9mo rev
47,178,653
35,795,397
Net inc
834,342
534,799
Share earns
1.42
.92


A Few Pluses Seen From Stock Crisis
LEAD: Wall Street investment strategists and portfolio managers say the stock market's trauma of late last month could set the stage for a healthier investment climate.
While no one welcomed the panic and is well aware there are many painful case histories, some professionals argue that ultimate benefits might include these:


Manhattan Couple8 Are Charged In Beating of 6-Year-Old Daughter
LEAD: A Manhattan lawyer and a former children's book editor were charged yesterday with the attempted murder of their 6-year-old daughter after the police answered a call for medical help at the couple's Greenwich Village apartment and found that the girl had been severely beaten.


MULTI-COLOR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MULTI-COLOR CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,976,000
12,036,000
Net inc
51,000
248,000
Share earns
.03
.17
6mo sales
25,489,000
23,822,000
Net inc
381,000
201,000
Share earns
.25
.15


Corrections
LEAD: A short profile in Business Day last Wednesday of Koji Yoneyama, the new president of Daiwa Securities America, reported his additional title incorrectly.
He will also serve as chief operating officer.


BROCK HOTEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROCK HOTEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
51,176,000
42,255,000
Net inc
b3,778,000
c474,000
Share earns
.42
.06
9mo rev
140,507,000
134,666,000
Net inc
b6,869,000
c37,235,000
Share earns
.84
5.13


The U.N. Today; Nov. 3, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


Greyhound Begins Rural Bus Service
LEAD: Greyhound Lines Inc. began a pilot program for rural bus service in Tennessee that is expected to spread nationwide and revive the flagging public transportation industry, its officials said.
The project links vans from eight rural transportation agencies statewide with Greyhound buses in larger cities, similar to the hub system used by airlines.


TRANSCAPITAL FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSCAPITAL FINANCIAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,019,000
5,615,000
Per share
.21
.96
9mo net inc
9,671,000
b15,336,000
Per share
.98
2.63
Shares outst
9,910,150
5,829,441
b-After an extraordinary charge of $922,000 from debt retirement.


19 Children of Muslim Leader Battle a Bank for $5.7 Million
LEAD: Nineteen children of Elijah Muhammad, the late Black Muslim leader, have squared off against the world's largest bank in a legal dispute with a $5.7 million bank account at stake.


Suspect Indicted in Slaying Of Woman With a Crossbow
LEAD: A Brooklyn grand jury yesterday indicted a 21-year-old Staten Island man in the crossbow slaying of a woman last month.


Philharmonic Ensemble At Merkin Concert Hall
LEAD: The most affecting piece on the program by the New York Philharmonic Ensembles on Sunday afternoon at Merkin Concert Hall came just before intermission with C. G. Rex's four unpublished songs for soprano, string quartet and piano.
Based on poems about love and death by A. E. Housman, they date from 1945 and reflect in their touching sentimentality the spirit of a society emerging from war.


Market Place; Trading Range Seen for Dow
LEAD: AS might be expected after the market's October massacre, estimates in the investment community vary widely as to where the Dow Jones industrial average might be headed.


Takeover Activity Resuming; SINGER GETS HOSTILE OFFER
LEAD: Paul A. Bilzerian, a Florida investor with a history of unsuccessful takeover bids, offered $50 a share yesterday for the Singer Company.
Analysts and some arbitragers said they believed that Mr.
Bilzerian's aim was to elicit a higher bid, enabling him to make a big profit on the 9.99 percent he already owns.


Jackson Is Pleased
LEAD: ''It's still there,'' Bo Jackson said of the speed, quickness and power that won him the Heisman Trophy as college football's best player in 1985.
His comment came after he had played his first football game since the 1985 season, for the Los Angeles Raiders in their loss on Sunday against the New England


People
LEAD: *
Peter Renfrew-Hill has joined FCB/ Leber Katz Partners as senior vice president, director of human resources.


ZYCAD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZYCAD CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,209,000
6,037,000
Net inc
b2,152,000
c253,000
Share earns
.14
-
9mo sales
23,772,000
17,246,000
Net inc
b4,289,000
c3,199,000
Share earns
.28
-
b-After tax credits of $837,000 for the quarter and $1,668,000 for the 9 months; the quarter also includes a pre-tax gain of $743,000, or 4 cents a share, from the sale of a facility.


Texas City Journal; Where a Chemical Leak Seems an Accepted Risk
LEAD: Morris Galloway came home today to find his beloved grapevines an eerie dead thicket, turned from green to brown by the hydrofluoric acid leak that caused the evacuation of 3,000 residents from their homes last weekend.


After Delays, Sessions Becomes Chief of F.B.I.
LEAD: After two postponements due to a stomach ulcer, William S. Sessions was sworn in today as the new Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
He succeeds William H. Webster, who left the post to become Director of Central Intelligence.


Accounts
LEAD: * Victory Optical, Newark, to Franznick &amp; Cusatis.


Abominable Snowman Wins Another Believer
LEAD: MOST of the unicorns, griffins, sea serpents and other fabulous creatures that once tinged the everyday world with romantic mystery have succumbed to the withering touch of rational inquiry.
But the Himalayan yeti (and his American cousins, sasquatch and bigfoot) die hard, and an English physicist is offering skeptics what he considers to be fresh evidence that abominable snowmen may, in fact, exist.


Driver Takes the Stand In Howard Beach Trial
LEAD: Dominic Blum, the driver of the car that struck and killed Michael Griffith last December in Howard Beach, Queens, testified yesterday that he heard a ''big bang'' and that his windshield shattered at the moment of impact.
But he said he left the scene because he did not know what he had hit.


G.M. Holding Engine Talks
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it was nearing a decision on whether to combine its diesel engine operations with another manufacturer. ''I would have hoped to have it done a month ago,'' said Ludvik F. Koci, the general manMger of G.M.'s Detroit Diesel Allison division.
Mr.
Koci said the company had been talking with parties, which he would not name, since a venture with Deere &amp; Company fell through in March.


Lotas Wins Account
LEAD: Lotas Minard Patton McIver has become agency for S.C.
Johnson &amp; Son's Halsa-line hair-care products.
Billings should be about $5 million.
The business had been with the J. Walter Thompson Company in Chicago, which as the incumbent was in a creative shootout with the winner.


Innovations of '87
LEAD: Each year at this time, tens of thousands of people who make, sell, buy or use personal computers descend into Las Vegas for the Fall Comdex trade show.
Comdex is a showcase for the new PC products that will be in the stores next year.


Ogilvy Profit Rises
LEAD: The Ogilvy Group, whose subsidiaries include Ogilvy &amp; Mather and Scali, McCabe, Sloves, said yesterday that third-quarter net income rose 12.8 percent, to $5.7 million, or 38 cents a share, from $5 million, or 35 cents a share, a year earlier, while revenues rose 29.1 percent, to $171.4 million, from $132.8 million.


MARATHON MYSTERY UNSEEN WINNER
LEAD: AT least nobody can accuse ABC of being a front runner.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.67
6.62
6.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.66
5.26
5.21
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.30
6.92
5.30
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.78
8.65
7.04
30-YR.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Agree to Hear Virginia Lawyers Case
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to hear arguments on the extent to which a state may discriminate in admissions to the bar against nonresident lawyers who wish to practice there.


'84 JACKSON UNIT WILL PAY PENALTY
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson's 1984 Presidential campaign has agreed to pay the Federal Election Commission a civil penalty of $13,000 for election law violations.


Classmates Mourn Teen-Agers Killed in Upstate Accident
LEAD: High school students in Dunkirk, N.Y., near Buffalo, sitting on a bridge as they took a day off from school after the deaths of six classmates early Sunday.
The six, returning from a Halloween party, were killed when a train slammed into their car.
The authorities said the driver apparently tried to beat the train to a crossing.


SELECTIVE INSURANCE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SELECTIVE INSURANCE GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b8,045,000
c6,901,000
Share earns
.89
.76
9mo net inc
b35,945,000
c21,125,000
Share earns
3.96
2.34
b-After capital losses of $604,000 and an extraordinary charge of $1,486,000 for the quarter and capital gains of $7,531,000 and a tax credit of $1,486,000 for the 9 months.


Bridge: At Tournament on Riviera, The Beach Is a Distraction
LEAD: Many of the tournaments around the world that are organized by local, national and international organizations have very long histories.


Qaddafi Will Boycott Arab Summit
LEAD: Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, said today that he would boycott an Arab summit meeting next week, calling it an event ''dictated by America and held specifically to combat Iran.''


Two Firefighters Hurt In Incident With Police
LEAD: Two firefighters were slightly injured last night in an incident involving firefighters and police officers who were responding to separate false alarms in the South Bronx, officials said.


GERBER PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GERBER PRODUCTS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
283,900,000
241,977,000
Net inc
b6,744,000
c13,030,000
Share earns
.34
.63
6mo sales
516,535,000
437,141,000
Net inc
b14,797,000
c19,599,000
Share earns
.75
.95


PARK-OHIO INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARK-OHIO INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
31,241,000
30,069,000
Net loss
1,045,000
2,449,000
9mo sales
99,695,000
104,485,000
Net loss
2,631,000
4,831,000


Cigna Reports Better Results
LEAD: The Cigna Corporation, a Philadelphia-based insurance company, said yesterday that its third-quarter operating income from continuing operations rose 23 percent, to $163.3 million, or $1.94 a share, from $132.3 million, or $1.52 a share, a year ago.


The Stage: 'Conversations in Exile'
LEAD: ''I AM sick of all the virtues,''


Nation Steps Up Productivity
LEAD: The nation increased its efficiency in producing goods and services at an annual rate of 2.6 percent in the third quarter - more than double the productivity improvement of the last year, the Government said today.


Price of Gas Stirs Concern
LEAD: Natural gas can remain an abundant, cheap and environmentally attractive fuel, but its low price has ended the incentive to explore for new gas, an Arthur Andersen &amp; Company study released today says.


Big Stock Loss For Briton, 23
LEAD: A leading British investment firm said today that it was holding an inquiry into how a trainee accountant was allowed to run up debts of more than $1.2 million in last month's stock market plunge.
A spokeswoman for County


Girl Given 5 Organs Wakes
LEAD: A 3-year-old girl wakened today after she became only the third person in the nation to receive a five-organ transplant.


REYNOLDS &amp; REYNOLDS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REYNOLDS &amp; REYNOLDS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
151,694,000
133,649,000
Net inc
5,874,000
7,024,000
Share earns
.53
.66
Shares outst
11,134,000
10,607,000
Yr sales
562,700,000
404,011,000
Net inc
21,221,000
23,856,000
Share earns
1.91
2.44
Shares outst
11,117,000
9,777,000


GORBACHEV ASSAILS CRIMES OF STALIN, LAUDS KHRUSHCHEV
LEAD: Resuming a painful examination of Soviet history that was all but suspended for the last 25 years, Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that Stalin was guilty of ''enormous and unforgivable'' crimes and praised two Soviet figures who had been officially repudiated.


Sports of The Times; Bernard King Of the Bullets
LEAD: BERNARD KING and his magical shooting touch and stiff cigar-store Indian game face and his rebuilt Model-T knee have gone south.


US TRUCK LINES INC OF DELAWARE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*US TRUCK LINES INC OF DELAWARE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
28,517,928
29,271,892
Net loss
1,353,680
220,902
9mo rev
88,374,624
89,243,904
Net loss
2,882,436
511,011


Stocks Advance on a Wide Front As Volume Continues to Moderate
LEAD: The stock market, which began the last two weeks with declines that rocked investors around the world, sounded a different note yesterday, moving broadly higher in a much quieter session.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Washington Talk page on Oct. 22 about the opening of the Bahai lobby misstated the office's plans and the status of Bahais in Morocco.
The office has no plans for public demonstrations.
There have been no arrests of Bahais in Morocco since 1983.


Michael Parloff, Flutist, Solos at Alice Tully Hall
LEAD: Michael Parloff has been principal flutist at the Metropolitan Opera for 10 years but has also established a workable career outside the house.
As a soloist, Mr.
Parloff had a busy evening Sunday with the Solisti New York chamber orchestra at Alice Tully Hall.


UNIVERSAL HEALTH SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSAL HEALTH SERVICES INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
182,421,000
158,234,000
Net loss
b1,675,000
cd2,989,000
Share earns
-
.18
Shares outst
16,136,000
22,555,000
9mo rev
578,094,000
491,201,000
Net inc
b14,771,000
d16,802,000
Share earns
.97
.89
Shares outst
16,200,000
22,550,000


Rise in Tobacco Buyer Age Proposed in Jersey
LEAD: A study commission on smoking today recommended increasing New Jersey's tax on cigarettes by 5 cents a pack and raising the legal age for buying tobacco products to 18 years, from 16, as part of a strategy to discourage smoking among children.


Should the Board of Education Be Abolished?
LEAD: As the seven members of the New York City Board of Education scour the country for a new Schools Chancellor, questions are being raised about the board itself.
To whom is it responsible?
Should it be abolished?
Should it be expanded?
What should be its relationship to the Chancellor?


Sports People; Abdul-Jabbar Ailing
LEAD: Kareem Abdul-Jabbar was suffering from a sinus infection and did not travel to Springfield, Mass., with the Los Angeles Lakers for tonight's Hall of Fame exhibition game against the Chicago Bulls, the Lakers announced yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: A Denver dispatch on Saturday about the trial of four members of a white supremacist organization in connection with the killing of the host of a radio talk show, incorrectly described a contention in the case.
It is lawyers for the defense, not the prosecution, who say the victim, Alan Berg, was murdered by another white supremacist, who died in a shootout in 1984.


Thomas G. Bergin, 82, An Authority on Dante
LEAD: Thomas G. Bergin, a professor emeritus of Yale University who was an authority on Petrarch, Dante and the medieval Provencal poets, died Friday at his home in Madison, Conn.
He was 82 years old.


Seymour Vall Is Dead; A Theatrical Producer
LEAD: Seymour Vall, a theatrical producer and playwright, died of cancer Friday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old.


Deng's Dapper Heir&gt; Zhao Ziyang
LEAD: Twice in recent months, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang said he did not want the job. ''I'm not that fit to be the General Secretary,'' he told an American television interviewer just one month ago. ''I'm more fit to look after economic affairs.''


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the first New York public performance on a Fazioli F 308 concert grand piano misidentified the orchestra and the place of the concert.
The concert was given by the Leningrad State Symphony of the U.S.S.R., at Avery Fisher Hall.


Advertising; Goodyear To Leave Thompson
LEAD: GOOD to its word, the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company will withdraw most of its advertising from the J. Walter Thompson Company, now British-owned, on Feb. 1.
This year's billings could be around $40 million.


JMB Completes Cadillac Bid
LEAD: In one of the largest commercial real estate deals ever, a unit of the JMB Institutional Realty Corporation said that it had completed its previously announced acquisition of the Cadillac Fairview Corporation, a Toronto-based real estate developer, for $2 billion.


INDIANA ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDIANA ENERGY (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,320,000
36,045,000
Net loss
2,853,000
3,120,000
Yr rev
303,364,000
370,737,000
Net inc
b16,889,000
16,150,000
Share earns
3.03
2.77
b-Includes a gain of $2,479,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Book Award Nominees To Read at City Center
LEAD: Four writers who have been nominated for the National Book Award in Fiction - Toni Morrison, Larry Heinemann, Alice McDermott and Howard Norman - will read from their works next Monday at 5:30 P.M. at City Center, 131 West 55th Street.
The winner of the award will be announced at a ceremony at the Pierre hotel later that evening.


American Let Go by Contras Says He Was Not Mistreated
LEAD: An American who was released Friday after being held by Nicaraguan guerrillas for two weeks said today that he had not been mistreated.


Texas Air Has Deficit; NWA Up
LEAD: The Texas Air Corporation, the nation's largest airline company, reported yesterday that it lost $72.8 million in the third quarter, while NWA Inc., parent company of Northwest Airlines, said its earnings rose 46.2 percent.


PAM TRANSPORTATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAM TRANSPORTATION
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,478,634
11,678,855
Net inc
473,382
1,071,614
Share earns
.10
.28
Shares outst
4,867,857
3,784,161
9mo rev
48,807,410
29,954,126
Net inc
2,244,240
2,087,354
Share earns
.46
.60
Shares outst
4,899,956
3,507,324


Bid to Lift OPEC Output
LEAD: Four Gulf Cooperation Council nations that double as OPEC members will seek an increase of at least 900,000 barrels a day in the group's production ceiling, the Kuwait News Agency said today.


Slump Baffles Walton and Jets
LEAD: Everyone is talking, but no one seems to know what is causing a tailspin that threatens to make a shambles of the Jets' season.


Building Outlays Rise 1.5%
LEAD: Construction spending increased 1.5 percent in September, the biggest advance since April, the Commerce Department said today.


REPUTED MOB FIGURE IS FOUND SLAIN IN BROOKLYN
LEAD: A man whom law-enforcement authorities called an associate of the Gambino organized-crime family was found shot to death yesterday morning behind the bar of the Brooklyn tavern he owned.
The police said they knew of no motive for the slaying.


Broker Group Leader to Stay
LEAD: The Securities Industry Association said yesterday that John W. Bachmann, the managing partner of Edward D. Jones &amp; Company of St.
Louis, had been nominated for a second term as chairman of the association - the first to serve consecutive terms.


Stage: 'Riverside Drive,' In Yiddish and English
LEAD: THE setting is 50 years ago and the question at hand deals with assimilation, with conflict between old-country Orthodox Jews and their Americanized, less rigid compatriots.
The show, in Yiddish, with lots of English necessarily involved, is Leon Kobrin's ''Riverside Drive,'' and it is, despite the weighty issues it tackles, done with charm and humor as this season's production by the Folksbiene


A VIEW THAT'S AS ROSY AS RED INK&gt; STEPHEN MARRIS
LEAD: He walks with shoulders stooped, head tilted forward, gray locks slightly disheveled as if he were bearing the woes of the world.
In a sense he is, as the Cassandra of Dupont Circle.


Chess Game Is Adjourned
LEAD: The eighth game of the world chess championship was adjourned tonight with the challenger, Anatoly Karpov, sealing his 42d move.


Panel Says Caesareans Are Used Too Often
LEAD: About half of all women who gave birth by Caesarean section last year did so unnecessarily and perhaps dangerously, according to a report issued today by a non-profit organization founded by Ralph Nader.


ODETICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ODETICS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,161,000
9,572,000
Net inc
218,000
41,000
Share earns
.05
.01
6mo rev
24,878,000
18,576,000
Net inc
501,000
73,000
Share earns
.12
.02


Share Prices Mixed Overseas
LEAD: Stock prices finished mixed in thin, cautious overseas trading yesterday as investors pondered the effects of a weaker dollar on exports to the United States.


Cattle and Pork Show Sharp Price Declines
LEAD: Cattle and pork futures prices plummeted yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange as abundant supplies and slackening demand helped push the market's decline into a third week.


City Opera: 'Zauberflote'
LEAD: THE New York City Opera's current production of ''Die Zauberflote'' remained a pleasure from beginning to end despite the uneven cast that occupied the stage at the New York State Theater Sunday evening.
Here was a case of the total being greater than the sum of its parts: most of the singers were replacements for last summer's opening night ensemble and though a couple of principal roles fell to unsteady voices, the cheerful good spirits of the entire affair managed to carry the day.


Volcanoes and Ships
LEAD: ON Oct. 11, an undersea volcano erupted directly under the research ship Melville, making the ship tremble and resound as giant bubbles of volcanic gas burst against its hull.
Oceanographers, including those at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in San Diego, which operates the ship, were unable to recall any other such occurrence.


WEINBERGER PLANS TO LEAVE CABINET, REAGAN AIDES SAY
LEAD: Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has decided to resign for personal reasons, Administration and Congressional officials said tonight.


RALSTON PURINA CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RALSTON PURINA CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,508,400,000
1,604,200,000
Net inc
97,000,000
c90,600,000
Share earns
1.38
1.18
Yr sales
5,868,000,000
5,514,600,000
Net inc
b523,100,000
c388,700,000
Share earns
7.23
5.06


Homer M. Byington Jr.
LEAD: Homer M. Byington Jr., the first American Ambassador to newly independent Malaya, now Malaysia, from 1957 to 1961, died of a heart attack Sunday aboard the Vista Fjord, a Norwegian cruise ship, in the Atlantic Ocean.
He was 79 years old and lived in Soto Grande, Spain.


PUBLIC SERVICE CO OF NEW HAMPSHIRE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUBLIC SERVICE CO OF NEW HAMPSHIRE (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
135,442,000
111,723,000
Net inc
30,965,000
32,687,000
Share earns
.47
.48
9mo rev
402,761,000
385,553,000
Net inc
100,662,000
b242,090
Share earns
1.55
-


For Journalism Dean, Questions About Objectivity#
LEAD: H. Joachim Maitre, the newly appointed dean of the Boston University College of Communication, is not the sort of person to allow the academic life to tie him to a desk or imprison him in detached scholarship.


Recital: Pavarotti
LEAD: HOW easy it would be to admire Luciano Pavarotti if he could keep the tasteless image-mongering from interfering with his performances!
The famous Italian tenor sang his very best Sunday evening at Carnegie Hall: the voice untiring and in magnificent condition, the inclination to suavity stronger than it has often been, the concentration of expression often unmarred.


A Set of Rules For Conflicts
LEAD: The Justice Department has established these guidelines for dealing with possible conflicts arising from private financial interests:


Foes Report Over 380,000 Names In Drive to Oust Arizona Governor
LEAD: Opponents of Gov.
Evan Mecham today concluded a four-month drive to oust him from office by filing petitions that they said had 388,988 signatures, nearly twice as many as needed to force an election.


Talking Business with Palmer of the Wharton School; Drop Expected In Job Offers
LEAD: The Wharton School of Management in Philadelphia is one of the nation's premier business schools, where 6,000 appplicants compete annually for some 700 places.
Its graduates include such financial pioneers as Michael Milken, the creator of junk bonds, and Saul P. Steinberg, who gained fame for his takeovers.


Takeover Activity Resuming; SANTA FE AND HENLEY TALK
LEAD: The Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation said today that it was negotiating to be acquired by the Henley Group in a deal valued at $63 a share, or $8.4 billion for the portion of Santa Fe that Henley does not already own.


ECONOMY FRAMES DEMOCRATS' FORUM
LEAD: The six Democratic Presidential contenders debated social welfare policy here tonight, trying to restate their party's traditional commitment to expanded antipoverty and health care programs while demonstrating their fiscal responsibility.


SCIENTIFIC-ATLANTA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCIENTIFIC-ATLANTA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 2
1987
1986
Sales
128,275,000
107,574,000
Net inc
5,885,000
3,806,000
Share earns
.25
.16


JEFFERSON-PILOT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERSON-PILOT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b66,155,000
c29,823,000
Share earns
1.68
.73
9mo net inc
b129,930,000
c93,364,000
Share earns
3.26
2.28
b-Includes captial gains of $44,895,000 for the quarter and $58,817,000 for the 9 months.


ECHO BAY MINES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ECHO BAY MINES LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
56,700,000
30,400,000
Net inc
13,600,000
6,300,000
Share earns
.14
.07
9mo rev
155,900,000
79,600,000
Net inc
33,600,000
16,900,000
Share earns
.36
.20


FROM THE BUREAUCRATIC BUZZING, A REPORT WITH STING
LEAD: In assessing the leadership and management of the Defense Department, the Secretaries of the Army, Navy and Air Force have produced an analysis with an unusual sting, given the pablum that often comes from the Government's bureaucratic blender.


JOSEPHSON INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOSEPHSON INTERNATIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
60,119,000
59,168,000
Net inc
b5,326,000
c21,948,000
Share earns
1.15
4.45
b-Includes a loss of $146,000 from repurchase of debentures and a tax credit of $924,000.


DELMARVA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELMARVA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
681,090,000
747,727,000
Net inc
89,083,000
96,451,000
Share earns
1.80
1.92


Goldome to Add Parts of Rainier
LEAD: The Goldome Realty Credit Corporation said that it had agreed to acquire parts of the Rainier Mortgage Company.
Goldome, with headquarters in Buffalo, said it would buy 22 of the Seattle-based Rainier's mortgage origination offices in Washington, Oregon, California, Arizona, Idaho, Hawaii and Alaska.


Addendum
LEAD: U.S.
News &amp; World Report will raise its rates but not its circulation 5.8 percent with the Jan. 11 issue.


High Capital Gains Tax And a Volatile Market
LEAD: To the Editor:


FOXBORO CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOXBORO CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
141,529,000
136,598,000
Net loss
7,687,000
b1,718,000
Share earns
-
.14
9mo rev
378,704,000
401,712,000
Net loss
23,942,000
b7,223,000
Share earns
-
.59


CABOT CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CABOT CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
344,016,000
338,156,000
Net loss
b15,389,000
cd10,939,000
Share earns
-
.39
Yr rev
1,424,041,000
1,489,121,000
Net inc
b28,694,000
d71,051,000
Share earns
1.04
2.49


Ad Pages Increase
LEAD: The Publishers Information Bureau said advertising pages for its magazine members had risen 2 percent, to 14,756, in September from a year earlier, while revenues had increased 2.3 percent, to $485.8 million.


U.S. and Soviet Scientists Plan Joint Studies on Ozone
LEAD: Scientists from the United States and the Soviet Union will conduct more than 30 joint climate research projects next year, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced today.


573 New Units to Replace A Newark Housing Project
LEAD: Columbus Homes, the Central Ward housing project that has been synonymous with crime and urban decay for the last decade, is to be demolished and replaced with mixed housing, including condominiums selling for up to $100,000, city officials said today.


LOTUS INTRODUCES AGENDA PROGRAM
LEAD: The Lotus Development Corporation today introduced Agenda, the much-talked-about software program that it calls a personal information manager and that others have described as a ''spreadsheet for ideas.''


Interpublic To Buy Gross
LEAD: The Interpublic Group of Companies announced yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the United States operation of Britain's Geers, Gross P.L.C., which it plans to merge into McCann-Erickson, its largest network.
None of the financial details were disclosed.


WOLOHAN LUMBER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WOLOHAN LUMBER CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
66,215,000
58,753,000
Net inc
2,731,000
1,928,000
Share earns
.46
.33
9mo sales
171,804,000
141,904,000
Net inc
6,310,000
3,579,000
Share earns
1.07
.61


Banks Learning a Hard Lesson
LEAD: The stock market collapse is raising fundamental questions about the pace of banking industry deregulation, especially the move into investment banking.


Election Day
LEAD:  NEW YORK  Polls: Open 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Parking: Alternate-side parking rules suspended.
Sanitation: No collection or street cleaning.
Governmental offices: Federal offices open; state and municipal offices closed.
Post offices: Regular deliveries.
Banks: Option to close.
Financial markets: Open.


PUBLIC SERVICE CO OF NEW MEXICO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUBLIC SERVICE CO OF NEW MEXICO (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
711,050,000
694,157,000
Net inc
122,355,000
151,696,000
Share earns
2.66
3.30


Pace Halts Trading
LEAD: Pace Securities Inc., a small brokerage, has temporarily ceased doing business because of financial difficulties, but the firm said that it expected to be back in operation soon.
The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday morning that Pace had shut down, but Pace officials said later that they had brought in more capital to meet the Big Board's net capital requirements.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE SECRETS OF THE SERVICE.
A story of Soviet Subversion of Western Intelligence.
By Anthony Glees.
Illustrated. 447 pages.
Carroll &amp; Graf. $22.95.


Former Nurse's Aide Admits 9 Killings in Hospital
LEAD: Donald Harvey, a former nurse's aide who has confessed killing dozens of patients at hospitals in Ohio and Kentucky, pleaded guilty today to charges of killing nine patients at a hospital here and was sentenced to life in prison plus 20 years.


Through Missouri Eyes
LEAD: Naturally, there was a lot of talk about the role of the press and its responsibilities during the annual Journalism Week at the University of Missouri's School of Journalism.
It is the oldest school of its kind, founded in 1908, and proud of its contribution to professionalism.


Theater: A Revival of 'Company'
LEAD: SO it's side by side with Sondheim, sort of, once again.
As Stephen Sondheim's newest work, ''Into the Woods,'' prepares for its Broadway opening Thursday night, his 1970 ''Company'' has settled into the York Theater a couple of miles uptown.
Settling down is what Robert, the 35-year-old hero of the sourly sentimental book by George


Flyers' Brown Suspended for 15 Games
LEAD: Dave Brown of the Philadelphia Flyers was suspended for 15 games by the National Hockey League yesterday for cross-checking Tomas Sandstrom of the Rangers in the face.


Polling Hours
LEAD:


QUESTECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUESTECH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,080,900
11,478,000
Net inc
341,800
267,400
Share earns
.22
.18
9mo rev
46,390,600
33,875,400
Net inc
1,084,300
664,800
Share earns
.70
.44


New Commerce Post Stirs Up Storm
LEAD: A power struggle has broken out in the Commerce Department under its new Secretary, C. William Verity Jr., over his choice to fill the new job of Under Secretary for Export Administration, Commerce officials said today.


NASA Delays 4 Contracts
LEAD: NASA said today that it was delaying for several weeks selection of companies for billions of dollars worth of space station contracts.


DART DRUG STORES reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DART DRUG STORES
Year to July 31
1987
1986
Sales
265,600,000
262,400,000
Net loss
b1,800,000
c18,000,000
b-After an extraordinary gain of $22,700,000 from debt restructuring.
c-Includes a charge of $5,900,000 from pre-payment of long-term debt.


Islanders Showing Respect for Devils
LEAD: The story of the Devils is slowly spreading to hockey's heartland like a titillating political rumor.
People smile, shake their heads and laugh, at once convinced it can't be true while savoring every outlandish detail.


Dollar Low Vs. the Yen And Mark
LEAD: The dollar fell to a 40-year low against the Japanese yen and moved close to a postwar record low against the West German mark yesterday in the wake of indications from European central bankers that they would allow the dollar to continue to fall.


New York City Plans First Sale Since Plunge
LEAD: New York City plans to test the waters in the financial community this week with its first bond sale since Wall Street was hit by a sharp drop in stock prices during October.


MEM CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEM CO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
28,651,800
26,873,500
Net inc
2,156,400
b1,802,000
Share earns
.81
.68
9mo sales
42,925,600
40,639,200
Net inc
381,900
b560,000
Share earns
.14
.21


U.N. Idea Could Be Reborn in the Persian Gulf
LEAD: To the Editor:


Election Day Choices
LEAD:  Here is a summary of our recommendations in selected races.
Polls in New York are open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.; in New Jersey from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Manhattan  CIVIL COURT


Boxer's Widow Wins 7-Year-Old Legal Fight
LEAD: A lawsuit filed by the widow of Willie Classen - a boxer who died of head injuries after a fight at Madison Square Garden in November 1979 - was settled out of court yesterday for a ''substantial six-figure'' sum, according to attorneys and court officials involved in the case.


Revolutionary Restraint
LEAD: In Beijing, Deng Xiaoping quietly passes power to the next generation to continue a new and pragmatic economic course.
He won the battles to do so over the last decade.
In Moscow, Mikhail Gorbachev struggles to follow a similar path.
His speech to commemorate the Bolshevik Revolution was littered with the historical warfare of 70 years that still resonates in the


Gorbachev on History; Revolution's Road From 1917 to Now: The Leader Takes Stock
LEAD:  Following are key sections of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speech in Moscow yesterday, as distributed in translation by the Soviet press agency Tass:  It is 70 years since the unforgettable days of October 1917, those legendary days that started the count of the new epoch of social progress, of the real history of humankind.


Savannah Electric
LEAD: The Southern Company said that its board had agreed to buy the Savannah Electric and Power Company for stock in a deal valued at more than $230 million.
Southern said that 1.05 shares of Southern common would be exchanged for each of Savannah Electric's 10.6 million shares.
The deal must be approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the shareholders of Savannah Electric.


GENENTECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENENTECH INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
47,956,000
35,549,000
Net inc
b5,242,000
3,662,000
Share earns
.06
.05
Shares outst
85,082,000
70,818,000
9mo rev
134,066,000
97,240,000
Net inc
b15,057,000
8,238,000
Share earns
.18
.12
Shares outst
84,290,000
70,338,000


Art Sales Outlook: Up in the Air
LEAD: Two weeks after Black Monday, the New York art world this week begins what is traditionally one of its biggest business seasons - the month of November - with hope and trembling.


Alaska Air and Pepsi Are Winners at Festival
LEAD: When the names of the winners of the best TV campaign and best TV commercial were read at the International Film and TV Festival of New York on Friday, it was just like old times.


Our Towns; A Proper Fadeout For a Remnant Of Another Time
LEAD: The Clinton Grange has given away its money and is closing.
About $7,000 was in the treasury from the last few harvest suppers and card parties, but not enough members were making it to the meetings for a quorum.


Ginsburg&gt; A Quiet Life Turns Public
LEAD: Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg and his wife, Dr.
Hallee Morgan, were living quietly in northwest Washington, enjoying classical music, good books, daily swims in their backyard pool and occasional forays into the kitchen to concoct what their friends describe as gourmet dinners.


WINDMERE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WINDMERE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
39,824,900
23,884,000
Net inc
4,018,900
b1,949,600
Share earns
.43
.21
9mo sales
94,194,000
70,529,100
Net inc
7,580,200
b4,145,600
Share earns
.81
.44


MDT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MDT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
21,440,000
2,903,000
Net inc
b1,315,000
c215,000
Share earns
.27
.12
Shares outst
4,950,000
1,804,000
6mo sales
24,658,000
5,747,000
Net inc
b1,613,000
c428,000
Share earns
.43
.24
Shares outst
3,792,000
1,804,000


Political Marketing; FRANCHISES GIVE ADVICE TO HOPEFULS ON A BUDGET
LEAD: This offer is not available in any store, but if you order now, you too can use the latest in space-age campaign technology in your race for State Legislature, City Council or even School Board.


Slow Recovery on Washington Avenue
LEAD: Like many of the merchants and residents along Washington Avenue's commercial corridor in Brooklyn, Gus Vlahavas waits eagerly for the economic revitalization that has already come to the surrounding communities.


Why NASA Left the Launch Business
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Guide to the National Horse Show
LEAD:  The 104th National Horse Show runs today through Sunday at Madison Square Garden, with competition in several categories and three types of exhibition performances.
There are sessions at 9 A.M. (except Friday), 1:30 P.M. (1 P.M. Thursday) and 7:30 P.M. daily, but the most interesting events for the non-specialist are in the afternoon and evening sessions.


Ethics Agency Sets Ginsburg Inquiry
LEAD: The Office of Government Ethics said today that it would open an inquiry into the conduct of Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, President Reagan's nominee for the Supreme Court, in handling a major case for the Justice Department bearing on the cable-television industry while he held stock in a cable company.


WAVERLY PRESS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WAVERLY PRESS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
19,443,000
18,123,000
Net inc
1,152,000
1,183,000
Share earns
.31
.33
9mo sales
56,393,000
51,223,000
Net inc
2,736,000
2,606,000
Share earns
.75
.72


Sports People; Price Files
LEAD: San Francisco's Joe Price, the winning pitcher in Game 5 of the National League playoff, and three other players filed for free agency yesterday.
Two members of the Montreal Expos, Vance Law and Reid Nichols, and Phil Garner of the Los Angeles Dodgers also filed.


Japanese Chip Dumping Has Ended, U.S. Finds
LEAD: The Commerce Department said yesterday that Japan had ceased dumping computer chips, a finding that Administration officials predicted would allow President Reagan to lift by the end of the week many of the sanctions that he imposed on Japanese electronic goods in April.


NOTES ON FASHION
LEAD: ''WHAT do we all have in common?'' Karl Lagerfeld wanted to know.


Stage: Kafka's 'Trial,' By Cocteau Repertory
LEAD: JOSEPH K. sleeps on a narrow plank, the size of a coffin, between two high walls; he works in an equally confined space.
Even before a couple of pseudosinister types come to arrest him, he is a prisoner in a deeply shadowed world.
That is basic to the Jean Cocteau Repertory's intelligent new production of ''The Trial,'' Franz Kafka's novel, dramatized by Andre Gide and Jean-Louis Barrault.


Texaco Loses in Texas High Court
LEAD: The Texas Supreme Court today rejected a request by Texaco Inc. for a hearing to overturn the Pennzoil Company's landmark $10.3 billion award against Texaco.


SOUTHWEST AIRLINES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWEST AIRLINES CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
200,743,000
207,628,000
Net inc
b20,432,000
21,181,000
Share earns
.63
.66
9mo rev
584,428,000
574,800,000
Net inc
b11,233,000
41,008,000
Share earns
.35
1.27


Margaret Price Sings At Avery Fisher Hall
LEAD: Margaret Price is a spirited and honest song recitalist at her best, and those who remember her disappointingly muted concert at Avery Fisher Hall two seasons back will be glad to hear that she was much nearer that best on Sunday afternoon at the Metropolitan Opera.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Progress in Chips Dispute  Washington said that Japan has stopped dumping computer chips.
As a result, trade sanctions may end as soon as this week.
Page D1.
A foundation started by the founder of the United Parcel Service is providing $100 million to help children in need.


U.S. Frigate Fires on Boat Moving Near Gulf Tanker
LEAD: A United States Navy frigate opened fire Sunday night on a suspected Iranian patrol boat that was speeding toward an American tanker, American military officials announced today.


Duro-Test Offer
LEAD: The Duro-Test Corporation said its board rejected as inadequate a $13 a share offer from William P. Lyons, a Yale University professor, and the TCA-IV Limited Partnership.
The company also said it had filed suit in Federal District Court in Newark against Professor Lyons and TCA-IV, seeking the enforcement of Securities and Exchange Commission disclosure requirements and of Federal Reserve Board margin requirements regarding the investors' purchase of Duro-Test shares.





Aide to Nicaragua Defense Chief Is Reported to Defect to the U.S.
LEAD: A senior Sandinista military officer apparently defected to the United States last week, diplomats and politicians said today.


Rise in U.S. Drilling Rigs
LEAD: The number of oil and gas drilling rigs working in the United States last week rose by one, to a total of 1,131, Baker Hughes, the Houston-based oil tool maker, said today.
The rig count was down by four the previous week, the company added.
A year ago, the count totaled 860.
The count reflects the number of rigs working as of last Friday.


WESTERN AUTO SUPPLY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN AUTO SUPPLY (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
230,600,000
196,500,000
Net inc
2,300,000
1,700,000
Share earns
.18
.13
9mo sales
680,600,000
626,000,000
Net inc
b5,700,000
6,200,000
Share earns
.45
.47


Sports People; Peters to Cleveland
LEAD: Hank Peters, who was dismissed as general manager of the downtrodden Baltimore Orioles on Oct. 5, after helping the team to a pair of pennants and one World Series victory in his 12 years on the job, was named president of the Cleveland Indians yesterday.


Creativity and Mental Illness
LEAD: There is a strong link between mental illness and outstanding creativity in writing, a new study shows.
But the mental illness is manic-depression, not schizophrenia, as some theories have held.


The Four Rising Stars In China's Inner Circle
LEAD:  Hu Qili#


Bell &amp; Howell Up on Rumors
LEAD: The Bell &amp; Howell Company's stock has jumped after reports that two large shareholders were increasing their holdings fueled speculation that it may be a takeover target, Wall Street analysts said.
Bell &amp; Howell, an information services company based in Skokie, Ill., rose $3.50 to close at $55 on the New York Stock


Reagan to Nominate Former Interior Aide As Labor Secretary
LEAD: Ann Dore McLaughlin, a former Under Secretary of the Department of Interior, is expected to be nominated by President Reagan to become the next Secretary of Labor, White House officials said tonight.


Miami's Mayor Favored In Election Race Today
LEAD: By his own estimate, Mayor Xavier Suarez of Miami receives remuneration for his City Hall hot seat at the rate of $2.40 an hour, far below the Federal minimum wage, for a 40-hour week.


IDAHO POWER CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IDAHO POWER CO (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
393,656,023
424,801,315
Net inc
59,823,294
79,258,182
Share earns
1.61
1.99


CONTINENTAL MATERIALS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINENTAL MATERIALS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
15,361,000
18,636,000
Net loss
276,000
b953,000
Share earns
-
.72
9mo sales
46,964,000
54,564,000
Net loss
701,000
b1,665,000
Share earns
-
1.26


ATLANTIC CITY ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTIC CITY ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
636,200,000
574,900,000
Net inc
67,600,000
63,200,000
Share earns
3.42
3.14


U.S. Designs Spy Satellites To Be More Secret Than Ever
LEAD: A BATTERY of new technologies, some mature, others on the drawing board, will help the United States overcome Soviet efforts to deceive Western spy satellites, according to former Government officials, space experts and private scientists.


Giants' Woes Continue: Lose Game and Simms
LEAD: When it seemed that the Giants' long years of frustration here finally had ended, and even this season suddenly started looking brighter, the Cowboys produced a record-tying four field goals in the fourth quarter, along with an interception return for a touchdown, to produce a 33-24 victory.


ATARI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATARI CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
80,398,000
59,878,000
Net inc
b9,933,000
c9,119,000
Share earns
.17
.21
Shares outst
57,957,000
47,524,000
9mo sales
216,216,000
165,464,000
Net inc
b38,728,000
c21,519,000
Share earns
.67
.48
Shares outst
58,040,000
47,524,000


Party Leader Favors a Black Successor to Merola
LEAD: Assemblyman George Friedman, the Bronx Democratic leader, said yesterday that he would prefer that a black Democrat succeed the late Mario Merola as the Bronx District Attorney.


U.N. Idea Could Be Reborn in the Persian Gulf; Not Easy to Carry Out
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fog Dampens an Escape
LEAD: Fog and a locked door have put eight fleeing prisoners back behind bars in Ionia, Mich., and Nashville, Tenn.


As the Dow Hops
LEAD: From the woman who gave us the term, ''Teflon President,'' for Ronald Reagan, comes a new definitional foray.
Representative Patricia Schroeder, the Colorado Democrat, told her House colleagues last week:


Dean Witter Hires 27 From Salomon
LEAD: Rebuilding its municipal-bond operation, Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. said yesterday that it had hired 27 municipal-bond specialists, including two managing directors, from Salomon Brothers Inc.
Salomon recently announced it was abandoning the municipal-bond business because of low profits.


Chelsea Discount Shopping Gets Local Board Backing
LEAD: A proposal to convert a refrigerated warehouse on the Chelsea waterfront into an enormous factory-outlet shopping center has returned to the New York City Planning Commission with a nearly unanimous endorsement of the local community board.


AMERICAN FAMILY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FAMILY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
461,407,000
360,182,000
Net inc
b25,090,000
c24,925,000
Share earns
.31
.31
9mo rev
1,354,401,000
984,177,000
Net inc
b76,318,000
c63,817,000
Share earns
.95
.80


New Computer Company Set
LEAD: Steve S. Chen, the supercomputer designer who left Cray Research in September after his project was canceled, announced the formation of his new company today.


Small Imps, and Tall Ones
LEAD: Remember Tootie Smith?
The Tootie Smith of the marvelous old movie musical ''Meet Me in St.
Louis,'' who set out one Halloween to show her mettle.
Dressed to scare and scared to death, she ''got'' an old man with a fistful of flour and strutted home the self-styled ''wickedest of them all.''


QUAKER CHEMICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUAKER CHEMICAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
35,960,000
31,511,000
Net inc
2,549,000
2,115,000
Share earns
.38
.31
9mo sales
107,722,000
95,858,000
Net inc
7,903,000
6,375,000
Share earns
1.19
.93


Glasnost on Film
LEAD: Meanwhile, a bit of Mr.
Gorbachev's other campaign theme, glasnost, or openness, preceded him to Washington when Mortimer B. Zuckerman, chairman of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, invited a small group to the magazine's offices last week for a screening of the Soviet Georgian film ''Repentance,'' which has sent political shockwaves throughout the Soviet


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Alco Health Services Corp., Valley Forge, Pa., appointed John A. Kurcik Jr. controller.


Military People Favor States Without Tax as Legal Home
LEAD: A disproportionate number of the nation's military people are claiming legal residence in states that do not tax their income, the General Accounting Office reported today.


7th Avenue Forecast: Shorter and Shorts
LEAD: Bill Blass showed brilliantly beaded, Matisse-inspired short dresses in patterns as intricate as a Persian carpet.
Carolyne Roehm's ribbons of fringe swirled around the body with all the abandon of a flapper's dress of the 1920's.
Carolina Herrera's glittering shorts were glimpsed under billowing silk damask evening dresses; some crepe shorts were accompanied by matching black and white jackets.


Robert Phillips, Guitar
LEAD: Robert Phillips, who is active in the guitar world not only as a player but also as a composer, journalist and broadcaster, gave an interestingly varied program Saturday night at Weill Recital Hall.
He concentrated on 20th-century music and might have made a stronger impression if the concentration had been exclusive, since the opening works by Napoleon Coste and J.


Hospitalization of Homeless Challenged
LEAD: Lawyers and psychiatrists clashed in a courtroom at the Bellevue Hospital Center yesterday over whether New York City had the right to take a homeless woman from the streets and treat her against her will in a psychiatric ward.


TV Review; Story of Panama Canal
LEAD: THE title, ''A Man, A Plan, A Canal, Panama,'' is a famous palindrome, reading the same way front and back.
That's clever, and the documentary itself is even better.
The ''Nova'' presentation, on Channel 13 at 9 o'clock tonight, uses scope and imagination to tell a compelling story: the Panama Canal is infinitely more than a ditch.


MOLSON COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOLSON COMPANIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
647,500,000
600,200,000
Net inc
24,700,000
18,700,000
Share earns
.75
.59
6mo rev
1,304,333,000
1,198,089,000
Net inc
56,194,000
37,514,000
Share earns
1.71
1.19


WACKENHUT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WACKENHUT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
96,224,000
81,395,000
Net inc
1,459,000
1,203,000
Share earns
.38
.31
9mo rev
269,007,000
237,685,000
Net inc
3,939,000
2,849,000
Share earns
1.02
.74


Sports People; New Investigation
LEAD: Nevada-Las Vegas has been formally notified that the National Collegiate Athletic Association is investigating its recruitment of Lloyd Daniels.


Hong Kong Client in Schwab Case
LEAD: A Hong Kong investor was identified today as the customer who was largely responsible for a $22 million loss announced last week by Charles Schwab &amp; Company, the nation's largest discount stockbroker.


German Currency Intervention Unlikely
LEAD: Karl Otto Pohl, the president of West Germany's central bank, indicated in New York last night that Germany did not intend to act decisively to keep the dollar from falling further in currency markets.


Last Samples Of Smallpox Pose a Quandary
LEAD: TEN years after smallpox ceased to exist as a human disease, virus experts and public health officials are in a strange and unprecedented quandary: what to do with the last surviving smallpox viruses.


H.R.A. Office to Coordinate Soup Kitchens and Pantries
LEAD: As director of an organization that distributes food to soup kitchens and food pantries, Pamela E. Green has done a great deal to feed hungry New Yorkers.


New York City Hospitals Fail To Get Heart Transplant Unit
LEAD: The New York State Department of Health has rejected competing applications by the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan and the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx to become the state's second heart transplant center.


Upsets in '87 Primaries Hint At Further Surprises Today
LEAD: Off-off-year elections are poor guides to the future of national politics.
But this year's contests have offered some striking evidence of an electorate given to sudden shifts in allegiance and of local political establishments in deep disarray.


Quarterbacking the Market
LEAD: Amid the gyrations of the world's stock markets, so bewildering and frightening to all concerned, there is available one statistical barometer that can be watched with comparative calm for the next few weeks.
It is the Super Bowl stock theory, first outlined in the sports pages of The New York Times (by me) in 1978.


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1987
LEAD:  The  Markets


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD: 24 Big Years


Gorbachev on History; A Signal to Keep Exploring Dark Episodes and Banned Ideas
LEAD: A few days ago, Fyodor M. Burlatsky was uncertain whether the censors would approve the broadcast of his latest television drama, a politically daring play sympathetic to the views of the Bolshevik theorist Nikolai I. Bukharin.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''To remain faithful to historical truth we have to see both Stalin's incontestable contribution to the struggle for socialism, the gross political errors and the abuses committed by him and those around him.''  - Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  [ A10:2. ]


Battling AIDS From the Stage
LEAD: In a field that knows more than its share of rivalry and spite, next Sunday evening's ''Music for Life'' concert at Carnegie Hall will represent an uncharacteristic - indeed startling - spirit of cooperation among classical musicians.


KENTUCKY CENTRAL LIFE INSURANCE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENTUCKY CENTRAL LIFE INSURANCE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b12,777,177
c6,375,314
Share earns
.95
.52
9mo net inc
b31,078,680
c17,261,944
Share earns
2.41
-
b-Includes capital gains of $7,321,384 and $10,167,460 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively; and tax credits of $100,000 for the quarter and $2,600,000 for the 9 months.


Kuwait's Loss Put at $5 Billion
LEAD: Kuwait may have lost $5 billion when global stocks plunged, a leading Kuwaiti economist said today.


Don't Let the Amnesty Door Slam
LEAD: Congress passed the Immigration Reform and Control Act last year to make it harder for new illegal aliens to stay in this country - and easier for old ones.
The act provided amnesty for aliens who had been here since at least 1982.
But they were given only 12 months to apply, and even that time has been constricted.


Sewage Project Could Turn Waste Into Profit
LEAD: AGRICULTURAL engineers at Cornell University have devised a new system for treating sewage that can produce reservoir-quality water at little or no cost, according to researchers here.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. What happens to the bullet when a warning gunshot is fired in the air?
Could the bullet kill or injure someone on its way back to earth?
A.
Theoretically, if you fired a shot straight up, the bullet would fall right back down on you, according to Officer Frank S. DiMario, master firearms instructor at the New York City Police Academy.


Yankees Acquire Rangers' Slaught
LEAD: Last winter, the Yankees passed up a chance to sign Rich Gedman as a free agent, explaining that Joel Skinner was their catcher of the future.
Skinner proceeded to hit an anemic .137 and needed a refresher course in the minors during the season.


HUNTS AND I.R.S. BEGIN $385 MILLION TAX TRIAL
LEAD: Nelson Bunker Hunt and Caroline Hunt went to Tax Court today in a dispute with the Internal Revenue Service, which is seeking $358 million in back taxes and penalties related to the crash of the silver market in 1980.


Dyncorp Buyout
LEAD: Dyncorp said its board had accepted a management-led leveraged buyout proposal calling for each of its 10.8 million common shares outstanding to be exchanged for $19.50 in cash and for $3.50 principal amount of a new junior-subordinated, pay-in-kind debenture due in 2007.
After the withdrawal of a buyout offer from its chairman, the company announced Oct.


Has Marathon Reached Peak?
LEAD: From his vantage point in a fire-engine-red convertible, Fred Lebow could see nothing but success.
For those who subscribe to his theory that more is better in the New York City Marathon, Sunday's race was indeed the most successful of the 12 that have been run through the five boroughs.


TV Screen as a Teacher
LEAD: ''PROFESSOR, that's amazing!''


Days Inn Sale
LEAD: The Days Inn Corporation said that its principal stockholder, the Reliance Capital Group L.P., might periodically buy up to one million Days Inn common shares in the open market or in privately negotiated purchases.
The company also said it had agreements to sell 10 hotel and motel properties to two investor groups for about $97 million.


Average Raise Under 5%
LEAD: The average salaried worker received a raise of 4.8 percent this year and can expect an increase of 4.9 percent in 1988, according to a survey of more than 1,200 American companies released today.
This is the first year since the early 1970's that salary increases have been below 5 percent, said Bill James, chief compensation consultant for Hewitt Associates of suburban Lincolnshire, which issued the report.


Worries About Intimacy Are Rising, Therapists Find
LEAD: INTIMACY, that combination of self-disclosure and emotional closeness, is carrying more of a premium than ever.
Since the 1950's, surveys show, more and more people have come to see intimacy - in friendship, at work and at home - as increasingly important to their sense of satisfaction with life.


BASIX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BASIX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
30,129,000
39,657,000
Net loss
b2,171,000
cd1,485,000
Share earns
-
.15
9mo rev
97,806,000
103,752,000
Net loss
b10,756,000
d12,791,000
b-After net of $846,000 and a loss of $5,432,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, both from discontinued operations.


High Finance
LEAD: Following are 1987 baseball incomes for players who were on major league rosters or on the disabled list Aug. 31.
Figures, obtained from management and player sources, include base salary, pro-rated share of signing bonus, other guaranteed money and bonuses earned during the season but not bonuses for post-season awards still to be announced.


Bill Rates Advance Sharply
LEAD: Treasury bill rates rose sharply yesterday as fears of a financial crisis diminished enough for some investors to sacrifice the safety of Treasury bills for the higher yields available on other securities.


Seoul Journal; A Whiff of Fall, Not Tear Gas, in the Campus Air
LEAD: It is quiet for a change at Yonsei University.


Pro Basketball Notebook; Richardson Question Looms
LEAD: In less than four months, the National Basketball Association and its players' union will be confronted with a problem they would rather avoid.
And that problem will have nothing to do with discussions on a new collective-bargaining agreement.


Illinois Agency Offering Bonds
LEAD: The Du Page County Forest Preserve District of Illinois is tentatively offering $126 million of general obligation bonds with yields ranging from 6.40 percent in 1992 to 7.30 percent in 1997 and 8.23 percent in 2007.
The underwriters, led by the


Grady B. Wilson
LEAD: The Rev.
Grady B. Wilson, an evangelist and close associate of the Rev.
Billy Graham, died of heart failure Friday at a hospital in Charlotte, N.C.
He was 68 years old and lived in Charlotte.


Negotiators Are Frustrated by Pace of Deficit Talks
LEAD: Negotiations between Congress and the Reagan Administration to reduce the deficit ran into problems today as Democrats charged that the White House was being inflexible and Republicans worried about achieving significant spending reductions.


FOR BETTER LIVING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOR BETTER LIVING INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
22,527,000
17,959,000
Net inc
795,000
720,000
Share earns
.91
.83
9mo sales
58,494,000
50,044,000
Net inc
1,697,000
1,486,000
Share earns
1.95
1.72


CHINESE PREMIER WINS APPOINTMENT TO TOP PARTY POST
LEAD: Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang formally became General Secretary of the Communist Party today, establishing himself as the man to lead China toward the next century.


Bonuses Bolster Baseball Salaries
LEAD: By staying healthy all season, Steve Balboni of the Kansas City Royals earned more money in bonuses, $525,000, than the baseball income earned in all ways by 473 major league players this year.


CIGNA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CIGNA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b191,300,000
c212,500,000
Share earns
2.30
2.51
9mo net inc
b595,600,000
c500,200,000
Share earns
7.03
6.06
b-Includes capital gains of $400,000 and $66,000,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively; net from discontinued operations of $19,900,000 for the quarter and $52,100,000 for the 9 months, and tax credits of $7,700,000 and $33,900,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


WELBILT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WELBILT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
62,418,000
54,962,000
Net inc
3,209,000
2,658,000
Share earns
.39
.33
9mo rev
169,947,000
146,408,000
Net inc
9,092,000
7,318,000
Share earns
1.12
.96


Sports People; Suicide Suspected
LEAD: A preliminary autopsy report on the body of the estranged wife of Darryl Dawkins of the Utah Jazz yesterday listed the cause of her death as possible suicide.


Selection of Jurors In Smuggling Case Is Closed by Judge
LEAD: - A Federal district judge closed the jury-selection process today in the cocaine-smuggling trial of Carlos Lehder Rivas at the request of defense and prosecution attorneys.


TEXAS AIR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS AIR CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,192,831,000
1,729,448,000
Net loss
72,820,000
b128,357,000
Share earns
-
3.90
9mo rev
6,396,413,000
2,780,467,000
Net loss
200,498,000
b50,968,000
Share earns
-
1.54


Action Must Be Taken in the Nursing Shortage
LEAD: To the Editor:


WESTMORELAND COAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTMORELAND COAL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
143,064,000
152,062,000
Net loss
b3,913,000
c4,045,000
Share earns
-
.49
9mo rev
409,266,000
418,198,000
Net inc
b10,459,000
14,489,000
Share earns
1.27
1.77


Lawyer for Whitehead Defends Custody Fight
LEAD: Mary Beth Whitehead's chief lawyer said today that the recent disclosure that Mrs.
Whitehead had become pregnant out of wedlock does not change her effort to regain custody of the 19-month-old girl she bore as a surrogate mother.


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-13  Stalin committed 'enormous' crimes, Mikhail S. Gorbachev said in a speech that resumed a painful, long-suspended examination of Soviet history.
Mr.
Gorbachev also praised two Soviet figures who had been repudiated by the party.
Page A1


Elders Calls Off Stock Offering
LEAD: Elders I.X.L.


PUERTO RICAN CEMENT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUERTO RICAN CEMENT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
19,012,913
17,257,067
Net inc
3,407,228
1,973,997
Share earns
1.72
1.00
9mo sales
55,337,670
47,387,862
Net inc
7,894,919
4,182,211
Share earns
3.98
2.11


Paine Webber Gives Up Unit
LEAD: Paine Webber Inc. is handing over its profit-starved commercial paper business to Citicorp, the two financial service companies announced yesterday.


Factory Orders Posted 1.1% Gain for September
LEAD: Orders to factories for manufactured goods jumped 1.1 percent in September, rebounding after an August setback, the Government said today.


Arbitrager Had Loss of $100 Million
LEAD: Comdisco Equities is one of the biggest arbitrage houses in the country, and Martin A. Weinstein, its head, is truly a big spender, quick to buy 300,000 shares or more of a takeover stock at a clip.
In the volatile market days of the last two weeks, Mr.
Weinstein and Comdisco lost $100 million, or half the firm's capital, then quickly made back $20 million.


Gary Cummings Dead; Former CBS Executive
LEAD: Gary Cummings, a former vice president and general manager of CBS's Chicago television affiliate WBBM and an Emmy award-winning broadcaster, died of complications resulting from melanoma, a type of skin cancer, on Saturday at the University of Illinois Hospital in Chicago.
He was 46 years old.


New Ads From Nynex
LEAD: In a couple of weeks Nynex, the telecommunications and information systems company, will start running a fanciful set of three 30-second commercials from Young &amp; Rubicam that should leave a residue of awe in the viewer's mind.
That's a handy ploy when a company is out to impress senior and middle managers at potential corporate customers coast to coast.


Quest for Slice of Comet
LEAD: IN an important engineering milestone toward sending an unmanned spacecraft to explore a comet, a prototype of an instrument-bearing projectile designed to take a bite out of an icy comet nucleus has been tested successfully at the Sandia National Laboratory in New Mexico.


No Headline
LEAD:
Cincinnati Reds
Soto
1,200,000
Parker
1,141,667
Diaz
825,000
Bell
750,000
Oester
750,000
Power
500,000
Davis
330,000
Concepcion
320,000
Esasky
305,000
Franco
300,000
Williams
300,000
Browning
287,500
Francona
225,000
Robinson
185,000
Rasmussen
175,000
Collins
100,000
Murphy
95,000
Daniels
86,500
Jones
80,000
Perry
80,000
Stillwell
80,000
Larkin
77,500
Hoffman
75,000
O'Neill
65,000
Hume
62,500
McGriff
62,500
Cleveland Indians
Thornton
1,100,000
Franco
775,000
Butler
765,000
Jacoby


Erotic Films in AIDS Study Cut Risky Behavior
LEAD: SHOWING explicit, erotic, films of safer sex practices is more effective than other techniques of encouraging gay men to avoid sexual behavior that places them at high risk for infection with the AIDS virus, according to a new study.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Hockey


St. Martin's Summer
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOUSEHOLD INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOUSEHOLD INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
863,500,000
698,500,000
Net inc
61,800,000
b59,600,000
Share earns
1.56
1.32
9mo rev
2,419,900,000
2,042,400,000
Net inc
164,800,000
b156,900,000
Share earns
4.06
3.30


Videotape Shows Officer Accepting $500 Payoff
LEAD: A suspended Brooklyn police officer was seen, in a videotape played at her corruption trial yesterday, accepting $500 from an undercover investigator she thought was a drug dealer.
She was then heard to say ''beautiful'' and ''thank you.''


Stock Index Contracts Take Toll on Traders
LEAD: In another wild day in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index futures pit, price swings bloodied some local traders.


7 Artists and Art Groups Hailed for Cultural Role
LEAD: Seven Manhattan artists or arts organizations were honored Monday for their contributions to the cultural world of the borough at an awards ceremony sponsored by Borough President David Dinkins of Manhattan, at Davis Hall at the City College of the City University of New York.


Sports People; Lopes's Options
LEAD: Because the Houston Astros have decided against renewing the option year on his contract, Davey Lopes says he is considering coaching a farm team in the Astros' minor-League system.


Virginia Electric Offers 7-Year Bond
LEAD: The Virginia Electric and Power Company, a subsidiary of Dominion Resources Inc., is offering $100 million of 9 3/8 percent first and refunding mortgage bonds, due in 1994, at a price of 99.125 to yield 9.55 percent through underwriters led by Prudential-Bache Capital Funding.


Corections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about Dean Witter Reynolds's expansion in the municipal-bond business misstated the role of another Wall Street firm, Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, in that area.


WHY IT'S SO HARD TO SAY GOODBYE
LEAD: The rapid pace of turnover in the Cabinet-level ranks of the Reagan Administration in recent days comes as a bracing counterpoint to another less visible phenomenon, the officials who cannot say goodbye.


Elbow to Elbow at a Wine Experience
LEAD: There were booths with bottles, glasses, ice buckets and corkscrews in all directions.


Reaction Is Low-Key to Ban on Flyer
LEAD: Coaches and other team officials have been choosing their words carefully when asked to comment on the National Hockey League's 15-game suspension of Dave Brown for cross-checking Tomas Sandstrom of the Rangers in the neck and jaw.


BRANSCAN LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRANSCAN LTD
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
47,200,000
42,100,000
Share earns
.55
.50
9mo net inc
122,000,000
93,800,000
Share earns
1.35
1.05
Results are in Canadian dollars.
The company is listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange.


Sympathy, 42 Years Later
LEAD: More than 42 years after a Japanese balloon bomb killed five children and a pregnant woman on a picnic in southern Oregon, seven of the Japanese women who made the balloon have sent letters of condolence to the victims' families.


Insurer's Ads Are Said To Lead to Trial Loss
LEAD: Maybe there is a time when advertising can be too good.


Calvin Klein: Chic For the Shapely
LEAD: Calvin Klein has inherited the position Yves Saint Laurent occupied some 20 years ago when he made pants suits fashionable and transported lowly styles like the pea jacket to the upper echelons of chic.


Sports People; Signs of Improving
LEAD: Kelley Lyons, the wife of Marty Lyons, the Jets' defensive lineman, has shown signs of improvement since she was seriously injured in an automobile accident last week and is listed in stable condition in the intensive care unit of Bryan Whitfield Memorial Hospital in Demopolis, Ala.


Sports of The Times; Has Parcells Surrendered?
LEAD: FOR the Giants it has come to this: if they are to qualify for the Super Bowl XXII playoffs, they must do it without Phil Simms for at least the game Sunday night against the New England Patriots and possibly for two or three more games.
As if that were not difficult enough, they must overtake both the Tampa Bay Bucs and the New Orleans Saints, each with a 4-3 record now, for the National


CILCORP INC reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CILCORP INC (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
472,191,000
494,268,000
Net inc
47,091,000
b51,996,000
Share earns
3.47
3.83
b-Includes a gain from an accounting change of $7,500,000, or 55 cents a share.


Saudi King Won't Attend Parley
LEAD: Saudi Arabia announced today that King Fahd would not attend an Arab League summit meeting opening Sunday in Amman, Jordan.


EMC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
34,218,000
17,195,000
Net inc
7,886,000
4,592,000
Share earns
.34
.19
9mo rev
87,142,000
48,191,000
Net inc
20,411,000
14,003,000
Share earns
.87
.62


In Search of a Meal Near Javits Center? Good. Read This.
LEAD: More than 2 million conventioneers pass through the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center each year (85 percent of them from out of town), and they need the doggedness of an archeologist to uncover interesting dining spots amid the industrial tundra surrounding the center.
The year-and-a-half-old structure at 11th Avenue and 34th Street is hardly at the epicenter of


FIRSTCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRSTCORP INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,292,000
1,907,000
Share earns
.42
.58
6mo net inc
3,737,000
3,503,000
Share earns
1.21
1.06


Kodak's Profit Jumps 50.6%
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company reported today that its third-quarter profit had risen 50.6 percent as it continued to rebound from last year's belt tightening and restructuring.


Politics, Labels and Judge
LEAD: Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, who was nominated last week to fill the vacancy on the Supreme Court, has been described variously as a conventional conservative and as a libertarian.


Democrats Capture Top Posts In Suffolk, Erie and Monroe; SWEEP ALL 44 RACES IN NEW YORK CITY, BUT LOSE IN NASSAU
LEAD: Democrats scored major victories across New York State yesterday, ousting Republican county executives in Suffolk, Erie and Monroe Counties and the longtime Republican Mayor of Yonkers.


HARLEY-DAVIDSON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARLEY-DAVIDSON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Sales
170,473,000
68,001,000
Net inc
b4,112,000
cd1,188,000
Share earns
.60
-
Shares outst
6,910,000
5,795,000
9mo sales
518,331,000
223,114,000
Net inc
b16,334,000
d3,600,000
Share earns
2.57
.72
Shares outst
6,349,000
5,001,000


Goode Claims Victory Over Rizzo In the Philadelphia Mayoral
LEAD: With nearly all of the vote tallied unofficially, Mayor W. Wilson Goode claimed victory Tuesday night in his effort for re-election.


Books; Risible Reading
LEAD:  LAUGHING MATTERS: A CELEBRATION OF AMERICAN HUMOR.
Selected and edited by Gene Shalit. 622 pages.
Doubleday &amp; Company. $24.95.
THE PORTABLE CURMUDGEON.
Compiled and edited by Jon Winokur. 299 pages.
New American Library. $15.95.


Gorbachev Presses as Far as He Can
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev's stated vision of a more open and democratic Soviet Union has emerged from two tests in recent days somewhat battered by the realities of the Communist system.
The two tests - Mr.
Gorbachev's review of Soviet history Monday and the handling earlier of Boris N. Yeltsin's threat to resign as head of the Moscow party organization - have demonstrated the limits of openness and served as a reminder of how different Mr.


The Stage: 'Sing Hallelujah!,' a Gospel Musical
LEAD: GOSPEL, like every other popular style of vernacular music, reflects the whims of pop style and the evolution of pop technology.
What gives the music its special classic quality is its unchanging subject matter: praising the Lord.
While today's evangelical Christian music movement has begun to produce gospel songs that address contemporary social problems, the essence of the gospel message - jubilant spiritual and physical exaltation - hasn't changed over half a century.


MARSH SUPERMARKETS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARSH SUPERMARKETS (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 10
1987
1986
Sales
255,691,000
235,806,000
Net inc
2,561,000
1,751,000
Share earns
.50
.34
6mo sales
445,602,000
411,547,000
Net inc
4,698,000
3,884,000
Share earns
.92
.77


Advertising; People Magazine Campaign
LEAD: PEOPLE magazine, which averaged 3.3 million in weekly sales in the third quarter, will begin a trade campaign on Monday with the theme ''Nothing grabs people like People.''


HEIRESS SEEKS HOLDINGS OF CHURCH SHE SUED
LEAD: A chain store heiress who is trying to get $6.6 million back from a fundamentalist church offered $1.8 million today for the church headquarters.
The property, appraised at $6 million, was abandoned after a Federal Bankruptcy Court held that undue influence had been exerted to get her to donate the money to the church.


Art Bidders at Christie's Wary, but Not Scared
LEAD: Two Francis Bacon paintings brought the highest prices in Christie's contemporary art auction last night.
Overall, the auction showed the market for postwar art was reacting with tremors - not shock waves - to the turbulence that has characterized the stock market since the collapse on Oct. 19.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASKETBALL  CHICAGO (NBA) - Waived Doug Altenberger, guard-forward, and Pete Myers, guard.
CLEVELAND (NBA) - Placed Kent Benson, center, on injured list.
HOUSTON (NBA) - Waived Michael Kennedy, forward.
Placed Robert Reid, forward, on injured list.
KNICKS (NBA) - Waived Geoff Huston, guard, and Leo Rautins, forward.


Bomb Explodes Near Government Offices in Kuwait
LEAD: Police officers examining the site where a bomb exploded next to a police van about 50 feet from the Interior Ministry complex.
Officials said no one was hurt. (AP)


PESSIMISM GROWS ON DEFICIT TALKS
LEAD: Democratic negotiators from the House and the Senate today proposed a deficit-reducing package intended to save about $31 billion in the current fiscal year.
But it was quickly rejected by both the White House and Senate Republicans, increasing concern among Democrats that the top-level budget talks involving the Reagan Administration and Congressional negotiators of both parties were in trouble.


WHEN THE MUSIC STOPS, 7 CHAIRS ARE MISSING
LEAD: Job security for civil servants isn't what it used to be.


LAWTER INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAWTER INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,450,000
25,022,000
Net inc
4,398,000
3,325,000
Share earns
.25
.19
9mo sales
80,959,000
75,675,000
Net inc
12,128,000
9,435,000
Share earns
.69
.54


A Foundation Led by Carter Honors a Chile Rights Group
LEAD: A foundation headed by former President Jimmy Carter and the Houston philanthropist Dominique de Menil announced today that the annual $100,000 Carter-Menil human-rights prize would go to La Vicaria, a Roman Catholic group that aids political prisoners, torture victims and their families in Chile.


ABORTION RIGHTS OF MINORS WEIGHED
LEAD: The Supreme Court heard arguments today on the emotionally charged issue of how far states may restrict minors' access to abortions so as to promote consultation with their parents.


Officials Said to Ignore Pleas for Abused Girl
LEAD: Neighbors and co-workers of a Manhattan couple charged with attempted murder in the beating of their 6-year-old daughter say that repeated calls were made to the police and a child-abuse hot line over many years.
But to their knowledge, they said, nothing was done to separate the couple or to protect the children.


Tokyo Stocks Fall 1.3%
LEAD: Tokyo stock prices dropped 1.3 percent today after the sharp decline on Wall Street on Tuesday.
Dealers said large securities firms had stepped in with buy orders to stabilize the market.


KANSAS CITY LIFE INSURANCE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KANSAS CITY LIFE INSURANCE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b6,560,000
c5,711,000
Share earns
.86
.74
9mo net inc
b16,878,000
c17,272,000
Share earns
2.21
2.24
b-Includes capital gains of $775,000 and $1,622,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Curb on Program Trading Is Eased
LEAD: Relaxing one of its key bans on program trading since the stock market plunge two and a half weeks ago, the New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that it would now allow major brokerage houses to execute program trades for their own accounts.


China Says It Will Stop Arms for Iran
LEAD: China has again told the United States that Beijing will try to stop its weapons from reaching Iran, a senior American official said here today.


LIBERTY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIBERTY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,292,000
c9,632,000
Share earns
.76
.97
9mo net inc
b22,730,000
c27,528,000
Share earns
2.35
2.77
b-Includes net realized investment gains of $2,607,000 for the quarter and $6,882,000 for the 9 months, respectively, and the 9-month also includes a loss of $1,031,000 from discontinued operations.


Change in Name Is Rejected By Voters in Dover Township
LEAD: Voters in this Ocean County community balked today at changing the name of their municipality to Toms River, a move opponents said would be too costly.
The vote was 8,969 to 7,748.


Plan to Quit Confirmed By Weinberger's Wife
LEAD: Jane Weinberger today confirmed reports that her husband, Caspar W. Weinberger would resign as Secretary of Defense later this week, but she said that her health was not the reason.


Sports News Briefs; Clark Declares As Free Agent
LEAD: Jack Clark, who missed the World Series and perhaps a chance for the National League most valuable player award because of an ankle injury, was one of eight players who filed for free agency today.


JOSLYN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOSLYN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
40,459,000
39,122,000
Net loss
14,474,000
b2,662,000
Share earns
-
.55
9mo sales
118,374,000
114,629,000
Net loss
8,166,000
b8,876,000
Share earns
-
1.85


Swiss Bank Records In Iran-Contra Case Are Released to U.S.
LEAD: Switzerland turned over thousands of pages of secret bank documents today to the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair, removing a final obstacle to the anticipated indictment of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and others.
According to investigators, the documents, which have been the subject of nearly a year of litigation here and in Switzerland, detail an elaborate scheme to funnel money to Nicaraguan rebel groups out of the profits from American weapons sales to


INDEPENDENT INSURANCE GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDEPENDENT INSURANCE GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b10,411,000
c9,064,000
Share earns
1.44
1.24
9mo net inc
b24,561,000
c27,620,000
Share earns
3.38
3.76
b-Includes capital gains of $2,096,000 and $3,281,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Adopt-a-Monument Program: 13 Statues Taken, 6 Remain
LEAD: The James Gordon Bennett Memorial on Herald Square is among six monuments that New York City put up for private adoption last spring that have remained orphans.
Thirteen monuments, however, have found benefactors.
Page B3. (NYT/Keith Meyers)


NO OCTOBER SURPRISES
LEAD: The Presidential campaign of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, responding to inquiries about the campaign's financial health, announced yesterday that it raised more than $1.05 million in October, bringing total receipts to $9.3 million.


Market Place; Plunge Derails New Offerings
LEAD: THE October plunge in stock prices has brought the new-issue market to a virtual standstill.
Few deals have reached the public.
And prices are off sharply for corporations that had made initial offerings just before the market collapse.


Sports News Briefs; Division III Bowl Set by E.C.A.C.
LEAD: The Eastern College Athletic Conference said today that the inaugural E.C.A.C.
Division III Football Championship Bowl will be played on Nov. 28 between the winners of the North and South championship games of Nov. 21.


Cambridge Journal; After the Vote is Cast, Where Does It Land?
LEAD: By the time the votes from Tuesday's City Council and School Committee elections are counted, many voters may have long since lost track of which candidates they voted for.
For Cambridge, a city known for the intellectual giants of Harvard University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, uses a controversial voting system that challenges even the strongest intellect.


Sports People; Chin Quits Amateurs
LEAD: Tiffany Chin, who in 1985 won the United States women's figure skating championship and finished third in the world competition, has retired from amateur competition and signed a two-year contract worth more than $1 million with Holiday on Ice, according to a report yesterday in The Los Angeles Times.


Opposition Politician Seized by Malaysians
LEAD: The Government announced today the detention without trial of another member of the opposition Democratic Action Party.


NEW MAXWELL DEAL
LEAD: The Maxwell Communication Corporation said it had agreed to buy a 70 percent stake in Nimbus Records Ltd., a privately owned company, for $:24 million, or about $42 million.
The deal marks the British printing and publishing group's third acquisition this week.
Maxwell on Monday announced the purchase of United Trade Press Holdings Ltd.


Film: 'Broken Noses,' From Bruce Weber
LEAD: BRUCE WEBER, known for his photographs of athletic looking fellows posed sexily in underwear advertisements, demonstrates in ''Broken Noses'' that shorts do not make the man.


Brazil and Banks Near Agreement on Interest
LEAD: Brazil and its creditors appeared close to agreement last night on a plan for the country to resume interest payments on its $100 billion foreign debt nearly nine months after the Government suspended them.


How We Got Into This Economic Gridlock; In Defense of Keynes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Donna Rice Ends Talks On a Film for ABC
LEAD: Donna Rice, the actress-model whose relationship with Gary Hart ended the former Colorado Senator's 1988 Democratic Presidential campaign, has broken off negotiations with ABC to make a film about Mr.
Hart and herself.


America Whets Its Appetite For Hearth-Baked Breads; Sources for Good Loaves
LEAD: THE following hearth bakers supply shops and restaurants in the New York City area.
Most also sell breads on their premises.
Baldwin Hill Bakery, Baldwin Hill Road, Phillipston, Mass. 01131; 617-249-4691.


Sippican to Be Sold
LEAD: The Plessey Company said it planned to acquire Sippican Inc., a maker of oceanographic products based in Marion, Mass., for about $80 million.
Plessey, an electronics company based in Ilford, near London, described Sippican as a leader in the construction of antisubmarine equipment.
It said it had agreed to pay $18.50 for each Sippican share.


The Sweet Smell of Progress
LEAD: How do you demonstrate to investment bankers a new drug delivery system that uses a patch on the skin to slowly release nitroglycerine to patients with heart disease or antibiotics to a wound?


INSIDE
LEAD:  Shakespeare, All of It  Plans for a six-year, $33 million series of all 36 of Shakespeare's plays were announced by Joseph Papp, the producer of the New York Shakespeare Festival.
Page C21.
Ginsburg on the Defensive  Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg's nomination to the High Court appeared to be on the defensive over conflict-of-interest questions.


Boxing Notebook; Leonard Still Has Hagler's Number
LEAD: The mind of a fighter is a fragile item, especially when forced to come to terms with defeat.
A case in point is Marvin Hagler.


Devils No Match For the Islanders
LEAD: After slightly more than four years in the National Hockey League, Pat Flatley of the Islanders says he believes he has learned at least one lesson.
Whatever you do, never take the game home with you.
It's an admirable maxim, but it gets a little difficult to employ when you've got nowhere else to take it.


5 in the Warsaw Ballet Defect While in Canada
LEAD: Five members of the Warsaw Ballet Company will seek asylum in Canada after defecting during a North American tour, it was reported today.


China's New Style and Substance
LEAD: When Zhao Ziyang, trailed by the other four members of the new Politburo's Standing Committee, met the world press in the Great Hall of the People on Monday afternoon, not one of the Chinese leaders wore the familiar, high-collared Mao suit.


GCA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GCA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
17,928,000
31,701,000
Net loss
10,344,000
cd1,053,000
9mo sales
52,008,000
102,349,000
Net inc
b9,840,000
d543,000
Share earns
1.72
1.86
Shares outst
6,436,000
292,000


8 Charged in Schemes To Divert Technology
LEAD: A Federal grand jury in Asheville, N.C., indicted two Japanese businessmen and two Hungarian diplomats today, charging them with diverting an American-made laser system used in making semiconductors to Hungary in violation of United States export control laws.


Going Out Guide
LEAD:  Old Horns, New Sounds


Taishan Journal; The Wellspring of Chinatowns Still Bubbles Over
LEAD: The dilapidated brick villages and bright green rice paddies in this corner of southern China sometimes seem as American as chop suey.


Challenges for Jordan: New League Rule and New Role
LEAD: Through the years, rule changes in basketball have often been made with a particular player in mind.
George Mikan's dominating center play was responsible for widening the lane from 8 to 12 feet.
When Wilt Chamberlain was piling up points, the lane was widened again, this time to its present 16 feet.


Telex Set Back In Legal Fight
LEAD: A Federal judge issued a temporary restraining order today that prevents the Telex Corporation from using a state anti-takeover law to block the New York financier Asher B. Edelman's $65-a-share bid for the company.
Judge David L. Russell of the


FIRST MISSISSIPPI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST MISSISSIPPI CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b14,603,000
c6,514,000
Share earns
.72
.33
b-Includes a gain from Melamine Chemical public offering of $8.8 million.
c-After a tax credit of $6.6 million.


Seasonal Shift
LEAD: A stroller walking in the cloudy but mild weather yesterday along a group of trees in Riverside Park that had partly shed their leaves.
Temperatures today should seem more like summer, with the high expected to reach into the upper 70's under sunny skies. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


Hartford Elects Black Woman As New Mayor
LEAD: Carrie Saxon Perry, a Democrat, won Hartford's mayoral race tonight to become the first black woman to be elected mayor of a major Northeastern city.


EMERSON ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMERSON ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,639,700,000
1,346,919,000
Net inc
123,440,000
106,808,000
Share earns
.53
.46
Yr sales
6,170,279,000
5,242,369,000
Net inc
467,166,000
427,439,000
Share earns
2.00
1.83


Olympia May Bid for Santa Fe
LEAD: Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the Canadian real estate and investment concern, said today that it might be willing to pay $63 a share in cash, or more, for the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation, heating up a takeover battle that could be the largest ever outside of the oil industry.


America Whets Its Appetite For Hearth-Baked Breads
LEAD: Americans are ready for better bread.


2 Exxon Divisions Get New Presidents
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation announced new presidents yesterday for two major divisions.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Utah Jazz cut Billy Donovan, the rookie guard from Providence. . . .
The Portland Trail Blazers cut Ron Rowan, the former St.
John's guard. . . .
The Cleveland Cavaliers placed Kent Benson, the center, on the injured list because of a hyperextended elbow. . . .
The Houston Rockets placed the forward Robert Reid on the injured list for 30 days to rehabilitate his right knee.


Simms Out Sunday and Maybe Longer
LEAD: Phil Simms, whose spectacular Monday night performance against the Cowboys ended abruptly when he was sandwiched between two defenders, will miss the game next Sunday night against the Patriots and, by the way Coach Bill Parcells described the injury today, he could be out even longer.


BUILDERS TRANSPORT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUILDERS TRANSPORT (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
48,176,000
38,779,000
Net inc
1,443,000
1,178,000
Share earns
.29
.23
9mo rev
138,207,000
109,653,000
Net inc
5,010,000
b4,505,000
Share earns
.99
.89


WORKERS ACCUSE TRANSIT AGENCY OF HARASSMENT
LEAD: Several current and former Transit Authority employees accused the agency yesterday of sexual discrimination, harassment and mismanagement.


BRINTEC CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRINTEC CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
79,653,000
79,224,000
Net inc
1,944,000
2,652,000
Share earns
.16
.22
9mo rev
246,657,000
238,260,000
Net inc
5,643,000
10,948,000
Share earns
.47
.90


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Alco Standard Corp., Valley Forge, Pa., said it had sold two of its gift and glassware companies for an undisclosed amount of cash.
Alco said Silvestri Corp. and Toscany Imports Ltd. had been sold in leveraged buyouts.
The units contributed about $84 million in revenue in the 1987 fiscal year.


A Weekly for Doctors To Begin in February
LEAD: Gerald L. Taylor, former publisher of Harper's Bazaar and National Lampoon, is starting a publication of his own, The New York Doctor, a weekly scheduled to make its debut Feb. 29.


Corrections
LEAD: The headline of a brief music review yesterday about Margaret Price's song recital on Sunday afternoon misstated the site.
It was the Metropolitan Opera House.


Britons Hail a Comeuppance
LEAD: For the London financial district, the recent slide in stock prices has been a source of understandable distress.
But beyond the Victorian palazzos and pin stripes of the City of London, Britain's equivalent of Wall Street, there has been an altogether different - and, in some ways, distinctively English - reaction to the travails of the financial markets.


About Real Estate; Office Project in Yonkers Getting a Second Chance
LEAD: When a promised $6.6 million Urban Development Action Grant needed to turn an unused tract of land at the northern edge of Yonkers into an office park fell through three years ago, it seemed that the project had been derailed for good.


Horse Show Opens
LEAD: Vince Wholey using a coach horn to herald an event yesterday at the National Horse Show.
Page A25 (NYT/Susan Farley)


High Fat, Low Cost
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Sports People; McMahon Questionable
LEAD: It didn't keep him from throwing three touchdown passes in the Bears' 31-28 victory over the Kansas City Chiefs last Sunday, and it may not keep him out of action against the Green Bay Packers next Sunday, but Jim McMahon, the Chicago quarterback who returned to the lineup just 10 days ago after recovering from shoulder surgery, is nursing a new injury, a pulled groin muscle.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.34
6.67
5.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.61
5.66
5.25
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.08
6.30
5.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.74
8.78
7.05
30-YR.


How We Got Into This Economic Gridlock; In Defense of Deficit
LEAD: To the Editor:


The U.N. Today; Nov. 4, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


McGwire Gets Rookie Award
LEAD: Mark McGwire, the Oakland first baseman whose 49 home runs set a major-league record for a first-year player, was unanimously selected as the American League rookie of the year yesterday by the Baseball Writers Association of America.


MacGregor Avoids Bankruptcy Action
LEAD: MacGregor Sporting Goods Inc. said a Federal Bankruptcy Court had ordered the dismissal of an involuntary bankruptcy motion filed against the company by three unsecured creditors.
The company said that, in connection with the dismissal, it had agreed to pay 20 percent of the debt owed to unsecured creditors on invoices that were past due as of Oct.


Nathan's to Open 23 New Outlets
LEAD: Nathan's Famous Inc. and two New York restaurateurs, Irving and Murray Riese, said they had signed an agreement to open 23 franchised Nathan's fast-food restaurants in Manhattan in the next five years.
The new units would more than double the number of Nathan's restaurants.


3 Fannie Mae Offerings Yielding 8.40% to 9.57%
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association yesterday announced yields for three issues of debentures totaling $2.3 billion.
As expected, the yields on the quasi-government agency's debt were higher than for Treasury issues of similar maturity.


Soviet Seeks to Enhance U.N. Peacekeeping Role
LEAD: The Soviet Union is pressing the General Assembly to help it draw up ''a new comprehensive system of international security'' that would give the United Nations an enhanced role in preserving peace, according to diplomats here.


Ousted Merrill Trader Hired
LEAD: Bear, Stearns &amp; Company said yesterday that it had hired Howard A. Rubin, the mortgage securities trader who was dismissed by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company earlier this year after Merrill experienced a $377 million trading loss.


Sports People; Smith Suspends Reid
LEAD: Dean Smith, coach of the University of North Carolina basketball team, has suspended two players, J. R. Reid, center, and Steve Bucknall, forward, from its season-opening game against Syracuse after the players' arrests on assault charges.


How to Protect the Global Economy
LEAD: The task of governments now is to protect the ''real'' economy - production, income and employment - from the downward pressure exerted on private spending by the shocking loss of recently acquired financial wealth (about one trillion dollars in the United States alone, $14,000 per family).
That small reductions in wealth have typically caused only very small reductions in spending offers no ground for complacency.


A Suicide Dilemma
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Wave Ballet Delayed
LEAD: The first performance of ''Elena's Aria'' by Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker, an experimental Belgian choreographer, in the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival was canceled last night.
The New York premiere of the work was rescheduled for 8 o'clock tonight.


Man Held in Threat On Cabinet Member
LEAD: An unemployed chemist the police say was armed with three guns and at least 600 bullets was arrested today after a report that he had told his mother that he was going to kill Secretary of State George P. Shultz, the authorities said.


3 Top U.P.I. Editors Quit, Citing Doubts On Assuring Quality
LEAD: The three top editors at United Press International resigned today after less than a year at the news service, praising its staff but saying they could no longer assure the quality of its report.


Vast Changes in Environment Seen
LEAD: Changes in the environment brought about by human activity are now occurring globally or over broad regions at a speed that may exceed the ability of people and their institutions to respond, according to and social scientists who attended a meeting last week.


HOLLY SUGAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOLLY SUGAR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
99,494,000
96,580,000
Net inc
2,289,000
1,174,000
Share earns
2.04
1.05
6mo rev
184,749,000
155,701,000
Net inc
3,734,000
2,286,000
Share earns
3.33
2.04


Rio Algom Says Little On Ouster of Chief
LEAD: George R. Albino, the chairman and chief executive of Rio Algom Ltd., a large Canadian mining company, has been ousted by the company's board.


Missile Pact Prompts Talks On West's Nuclear Defense
LEAD: Western defense ministers met here today to consider options for improving NATO's nuclear defenses in light of the emerging treaty to eliminate medium- and shorter-range missiles.


LIFE IN THE 30's
LEAD: THE painters.
Don't the very words strike fear into your heart?
We've all seen it happen.
A colleague comes into the office.


East Bloc Seems Divided on Speech
LEAD: One day after Mikhail S. Gorbachev's Kremlin speech on the Bolshevik Revolution, Moscow's closest Eastern European allies appeared to be applying a selective approach to its message, depending on whether their own policies reflected or clashed with Mr.
Gorbachev's campaign for political and economic change.


Voters Approve $68 Million Jail For Westchester
LEAD: Westchester County voters tonight approved a $68 million bond issue to build a 530-bed jail intended to relieve overcrowding at the county's correctional complex at Valhalla.


MICROWAVE COOKING
LEAD: ONE of the most endearing qualities of the microwave oven is its ability to make risotto perfectly with a minimum of stirring.
I have friends who have bought an oven just because they tasted my risotto.
Although I love this traditional dish of Italian arborio rice slowly cooked to creamy succulence, it had almost dropped out of my repertory because I didn't like the fussiness involved in standing and stirring for 40 minutes as


Reagan Names Ex-Government Aide to Labor Post
LEAD: President Reagan today named Ann Dore McLaughlin, a veteran of many Government public relations posts, to the job of Secretary of Labor.


Corrections
LEAD: A Boston dispatch yesterday, about the dean of the College of Communciation at Boston University, misstated Osborn Elliott's affiliation with the Columbia University School of Journalism.
He is its former dean and remains a professor there, on sabbatical.


Growing Up to Be Queen of the Rodeo
LEAD: Sawdust flies when Joni James gallops into an arena.
Wearing a cowboy hat and fitted western shirt and pants, she has smiled through years of interviews and modeling sessions.


Star Role for Hollywood Offices
LEAD: Dawn Steel, the new president of Columbia Pictures, does not have David Puttnam's job, but she will probably use the former Columbia chairman's office.
And when Ms.
Steel moves onto the studio lot, she will undoubtedly put Mr.
Puttnam's Biedermeier burlwood sofa into mothballs and remodel his recently remodeled suite.


Quebecers Pay Their Respects to Levesque
LEAD: A mourner passing the open coffin of Rene Levesque yesterday in Montreal.
A state funeral for the former Premier and separatist leader, who died Sunday, is to be held tomorrow in Quebec City. (Reuters)


Younger Chefs Add Fitness to the Menu
LEAD: GARY FUMICELLO was cheered to victory as he ran in an event here in 1986, holding a pan of eggs in one hand and waving aloft his other hand, which was swathed in bandages after an encounter with a kitchen knife.
The injury was work related.
Mr.
Fumicello is a student at the New England Culinary Institute.


Shutdown of Nuclear Plant Is Rejected by Maine Voters
LEAD: The beleaguered nuclear power industry won a victory in Maine yesterday, where voters rejected an effort to shut down the state's only nuclear power plant.


Scholars Say Gorbachev Fell Short on Objectivity
LEAD: The speech Monday by Mikhail S. Gorbachev on the 70th anniversary of the Russian Revolution provoked sharply differing interpretations among historians and political scientists who specialize on the Soviet Union.


Clash of Police And Fire Dept. Brings Warning
LEAD: First Deputy Mayor Stanley Brezenoff, warning that continued clashes between New York City police officers and firefighters ''could be a prescription for disaster,'' summoned the heads of both agencies to City Hall yesterday to ease the tension.


G.M.'s Progress On Job Reductions
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it had eliminated 12,000 American salaried jobs in the first nine months of 1987, putting it well ahead of schedule in its plans to eliminate 40,000 jobs by the end of next year.
The company, which said the job cuts would save it $2 billion a year, said it expects to reduce salaried employment by another 7,200 in the final three months of the year.


The Reactions To Gorbachev
LEAD: A day after Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speech on the Bolshevik Revolution, American scholars drew sharply differing lessons about its meaning.


Recital: Jean Deis, Tenor
LEAD: JEAN DEIS, a tenor and professor of voice at Indiana University, gave a recital at Merkin Concert Hall Monday evening that marked his return to performing after a protracted struggle with cancer.
When Mr.
Deis was first reviewed in these pages 31 years ago, he was praised for ''wonderfully assured upper tones,'' and he has them still.


Zulu Chief Defends His Role In New South African Panel
LEAD: The paramount chief of six million Zulus in South Africa, Gatsha Buthelezi, today defended his participation in the South African Government's experiment in interracial administration here.


Music: St. Paul Orchestra
LEAD: GOOD ideas never die, but they do change faces.
The two most fertile instrumental groupings to develop out of the Classical period, the symphony orchestra and the string quartet, each spawned its own rich literature.
Inevitably, the thought occurred to composers to unite the ensembles in one piece.


G.E. Discloses Irregularities
LEAD: The General Electric Company said today that it had notified the Pentagon of accounting irregularities in contracts involving nuclear missiles.


Pepsico Agrees To Buy Calny
LEAD: Pepsico Inc. has agreed to buy Calny Inc., the operator of 142 Taco Bell restaurants on the West Coast, for about $36.2 million, Calny said.
Under the agreement, Pepsico would pay $11 for each of Calny's 4.8 million shares outstanding, valuing the company at $52.8 million.
Calny said the Taco Bell Corporation, a subsidiary of Pepsico, already owns 31.5 percent of its common stock.


THE TIGER ROARS
LEAD: Mr.
Carlucci, is a graduate of Princeton University, an institution with the motto: ''Princeton in the Nation's Service.'' Whether you believe in conspiracy theories or are just keeping score, Mr.
Carlucci as Defense Secretary would put Princeton graduates in the nation's top three economic and national security posts.


Assault on the Ice
LEAD: In hockey they call it a cross-check, but if Dave Brown had done what he did to Tomas Sandstrom anywhere except on the ice, it would be called assault.
Mr.
Brown has been given a 15-game suspension without pay, while his team, the Philadelphia Flyers, may sign another player to replace him.
Both player and team got off too lightly.


Reagan Plans Sanctions End
LEAD: President Reagan is likely to soon lift some of the trade sanctions imposed on Japan seven months ago during a dispute over Japanese dumping of computer chips, the Administration said today.
The White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said $84 million of sanctions would be lifted ''probably this week,'' leaving $165 million in sanctions.


Dollar Up After Fall To Lows
LEAD: The dollar rallied on world currency markets yesterday after traders pushed it to new lows against the West German mark and the Japanese yen.


Secretary? Not Yet
LEAD: Although the White House has yet to announce it, official Washington is sure Mr.
Weinberger will step down and Frank C. Carlucci, the national security adviser, will take his place.
Like many others in the drama, Mr.
Carlucci is holding his cards close to the vest.
A reporter who chased him down a Capitol corridor for comment yesterday finally got his attention by shouting, ''Mr.


Sandinista Defector Being Questioned by U.S.
LEAD: United States officials said today that they were intensively questioning a Nicaraguan military defector to determine his value to them.


JOHNSTON INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSTON INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
28,482,000
26,053,000
Net inc
2,090,000
b1,784,000
Share earns
.63
.56
Shares outst
3,313,000
3,213,000
b-After a loss of $61,000 from discontinued operations.


LOW RATINGS FOR U.S. AIRLINES
LEAD: United States airlines fared poorly against European and Asian carriers in a worldwide survey of almost 30,000 passengers who fly often.


Graf Is No. 1 for '87, but Debate Goes On
LEAD: Her lead in the computer rankings and the Virginia Slims points standings is now insurmountable.
Thus, Steffi Graf, the 18-year-old West German, will finish the year as the top-ranked tennis player in the world, ending Martina Navratilova's five-year reign as No. 1.
But is it that clear-cut?


New Day Is Dawning in Tiny Pacific Palau
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wall Street Job Outlook Dims
LEAD: Investment banks, shaken by layoffs and the stock market collapse, are likely to reduce hiring for next year at the undergraduate and graduate levels, according to Wall Street recruiters and college placement officials.


Texaco's Best Hope: U.S. Supreme Court
LEAD: The price of Texaco Inc.'s stock fell almost 10 percent while the Pennzoil Company's shares soared more than $10 yesterday as the financial and legal communities pondered the significance of the Texas Supreme Court's decision to let stand the $10.53 billion judgment against Texaco.


National Horse Show; Best Loses on Final Obstacle
LEAD: The seven Merchant Marines lifted their hunting horns and provided a musical announcement.
With the flourish customary to this event, the 104th National Horse Show officially started last night at Madison Square Garden, which had been hastily transformed from a hockey rink to a hunt course.


JIFFY LUBE INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JIFFY LUBE INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,956,000
9,316,000
Net inc
1,949,000
633,000
Share earns
.12
.05
6mo rev
34,700,000
18,247,000
Net inc
3,260,000
1,200,000
Share earns
.21
.11


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Vacherin Arrives


Professors Study the Plunge
LEAD: On Monday, Oct. 19, when most of the investing world saw disaster, two professors of finance at Cornell University saw opportunity - the chance to test out fundamental market analysis theories in a free-falling stock market.


Market Inquiry In Hong Kong
LEAD: A Government committee will examine the operation of the Hong Kong stock and commodity exchanges, an official disclosed today.


High Tech Gets a Test At the Polls
LEAD: Some voters on the Upper West Side and in Greenwich Village got a look yesterday at the latest solution to the problems of voting the old-fashioned way: state-of-the-art electronic voting machines.


3 Rangers Hurt in Loss
LEAD: Brett Hull scored two goals tonight as the Calgary Flames beat the Rangers, 5-3, in a game in which three New York players were injured.


A Weinberger Echo
LEAD: News that Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger will be stepping down has set some of his long-time Congressional foes to thinking about legislative battles they had in the good old days before he set eyes on the Pentagon.


Moses Files Are Opened
LEAD: The New York Public Library has opened the Robert Moses archive, containing 160 linear feet of papers and photographs dating from 1912.
Included is personal and professional correspondence with such figures as Franklin D. Roosevelt, Al Smith, Fiorello La Guardia, Benjamin Cardozo and Herbert Lehman.


MANITOWOC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANITOWOC CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Sales
44,111,052
63,919,042
Net inc
1,865,728
4,670,748
Share earns
.17
.43


Sports People; Canucks' Fine Reduced
LEAD: The British Columbia Supreme Court has reduced by $300,000 the fine that the Vancouver Canucks were assessed by John Ziegler, president of the National Hockey League, over the signing of Pat Quinn as general manager.
The Canucks were fined $310,000 and Quinn was suspended on Jan. 9 from coaching in the league until 1990.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE MEDUSA FREQUENCY.
By Russell Hoban. 143 pages.
Atlantic Monthly Press. $16.95.


Stage: Goethe's 'Stella' In New Directors Project
LEAD: ''STELLA'' begins in a cloud of mystery.
A wife, long ago abandoned by her husband, arrives with their daughter in a small town where the daughter is about to begin working as a servant to a baroness.
The baroness (the title character) lives alone in a mansion.
She, too, has been abandoned - in her case, by her lover.


Schwab Gets Loan Waiver
LEAD: The Charles Schwab Corporation said today that it had been forced to obtain a waiver of a provision of its bank loan agreement because the stock market downturn had put it in danger of violating the minimum-capital requirement.


MARINE TRANSPORT LINES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARINE TRANSPORT LINES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
32,571,000
29,911,000
Net loss
b1,169,000
327,000
9mo rev
91,146,000
85,518,000
Net loss
b2,055,000
c10,619,000
b-After gains of $23,000 and $1,686,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, on the sale of vessels.


Arizona Governor Granted Delay Of Grand Jury Inquiry Into Loan
LEAD: Gov.
Evan Mecham today won a temporary delay of a grand jury investigation of a $350,000 loan he received, allowing him to seek to remove the State Attorney General from the case.


TV Review; Chain-Gang Classic Remade as HBO Film
LEAD: CLEARLY, Daniel Mann, the director of ''The Man Who Broke 1,000 Chains,'' had a strong contract.
Nestled in the opening credits, right between the names of the stars, is the following statement: ''After director completed director's cut, final version was supervised by production company.'' In short, there was trouble in the editing room and this may account for some of the film's nagging shortcomings.


Abused Girl's Father Denies Wrongdoing at Hearing
LEAD: The lawyer for a Manhattan man accused of trying to kill his 6-year-old daughter asserted last night at an arraignment that his client was not guilty of wrongdoing.


Court Won't Delay Airlines' Merger
LEAD: A Federal appeals court refused to delay the merger of USAir Group Inc. and Piedmont Aviation Inc. while it considers a competitor's challenge to the Transportation Department's approval of the deal.
The Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia rejected the petition, filed by America West Inc.


ENVIRODYNE INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENVIRODYNE INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
122,151,000
91,547,000
Net inc
11,321,00
6,748,000
Share earns
.62
.37
Shares outst
18,276,000
18,055,000
9mo sales
360,097,000
226,433,000
Net inc
31,116,000
b13,228,000
Share earns
1.71
.84
Shares outst
18,234,000
15,659,000


Cans, a Man, a Plan: New Redemption Center Struggles
LEAD: Guy Polhemus had an idea of how to help the poor that was almost too good.
It is helping them, but for a period it nearly left him bankrupt.


PENTAGON'S STYLE LIKELY TO CHANGE AFTER WEINBERGER
LEAD: The resignation of Caspar W. Weinberger as Secretary of Defense, which is expected to be announced later this week, seems likely to change the chemistry of policy making during the final 14 months of President Reagan's term.


Caps Continue Mastery of Canucks
LEAD: Bob Gould scored his first goal of the season with 2 minutes 53 seconds left in the third period tonight, giving the Washington Capitals a 3-2 victory over the Vancouver Canucks.


FINANCIAL NEWS NETWORK reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FINANCIAL NEWS NETWORK (OTC)
Year to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
36,810,785
15,407,831
Net inc
4,575,722
1,284,451
Share earns
.38
.12
Shares outst
12,168,043
11,011,137


Deaver Jury Hears Why He Was Hired
LEAD: Tobacco industry witnesses at the perjury trial of Michael K. Deaver said today that their key reason for paying $250,000 to obtain Mr.
Deaver's ''political influence'' was to counter the formidable lobbying talents of another former Reagan Administration official.


MOORE MEDICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOORE MEDICAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Sales
59,414,000
49,335,000
Net inc
1,295,000
1,122,000
Share earns
.46
.40
Shares outst
2,840,000
2,833,000
9mo sales
173,719,000
140,936,000
Net inc
3,422,000
3,291,000
Share earns
1.20
1.16
Shares outst
2,846,000
2,827,000


Reagan Plan For Banks
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has decided against pushing for new real estate and insurance powers for banks, focusing instead on persuading Congress to grant banks permission to underwrite securities, a top Treasury Department official said today.


The Abuse of History
LEAD: An American lawyer in Moscow in 1965 asked his Intourist guide-guards the way to the men's room, slipped out the back of a restaurant and took a taxi to an address he had been given by a Canadian newsman.
The politically defunct lawyer was seeking a rendezvous with a former Soviet leader he had spoken with in a kitchen six years before.


AUTODIE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUTODIE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,682,925
16,519,467
Net inc
101,654
1,712,125
Share earns
.02
.33
Yr sales
58,641,626
62,145,714
Net inc
180,521
5,739,146
Share earns
.04
1.17


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Oct. 30
Oct. 23
Oct. 31
1987
1987
1986
Gasoline production, daily
6.5
6.8
6.6
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.8
2.9
Gasoline stocks
219.6
222.3
221.8
Distillate stocks
124.6
125.3
151.2
Crude imports, daily
5.4
4.8
3.5
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.1
1.8
Crude stocks
349.0
337.8
348.4
Crude production, daily
8.2
8.2
8.4
Refinery utilization (%)
82.0
81.8
83.5


A Punitive Food Plan
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Cash Advances: Pat Cash of Australia, the Wimbledon champion who is seeded second in this tournament, survived a second-set struggle yesterday to beat Paul Annacone of the United States, 6-4, 6-4, and advance to the second round of the $840,000 Paris Open.
In other matches, Brad Gilbert of the United States, seeded seventh, defeated Claudio Mezzadri of Switzerland, 6-0, 6-3; Michiel Schapers of the Netherlands beat Thierry Tulasne of France, 6-3, 6-3; Tomas Smid downed another Czechoslovak, Marian Vajda, 6-3, 6-3; Alexander Volkov of the Soviet Union, upset Martin Jaite of


CRAIG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRAIG CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
249,500,000
227,305,000
Net inc
1,064,000
367,000
Share earns
.55
.20
Shares outst
1,994,000
1,798,000
Year-ago results were restated.


Beber, Silverstein Gets Humana Promotion Job
LEAD: Humana Inc. of Louisville, Ky., a major company in the health-care field, is giving all of its hospital promotion business to Beber, Silverstein in Miami, which already works for it.


Kerkorian Gain Seen On Pan Am
LEAD: Four of the principal unions at Pan American World Airways have decided to support Kirk Kerkorian, the West Coast investor, in his effort to take over Pan American World Airways, union sources said yesterday.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  For Benefit of Music


EASTMAN KODAK CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTMAN KODAK CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 4
1987
1986
Sales
3,913,800,000
3,484,500,000
Net inc
b396,100,000
c263,000,000
Share earns
1.18
.77
9mo sales
9,776,000,000
8,524,500,000
Net inc
b936,000,000
c299,400,000
Share earns
2.77
.88


Citicorp Rates Down Again
LEAD: Interest rates declined at Citicorp's regular weekly commercial paper auction yesterday.
It was the third consecutive week of declines, totaling more than a percentage point in that period.


Adopt-a-Monument Program Takes In 13 Statues in New York City
LEAD: Thirteen monuments that New York City put up for private adoption last spring have found benefactors, but six orphans remain - on Staten Island, in the Bronx and Queens, and in the heart of Manhattan.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If all internal party matters are discussed by one and all, then there will be no sense in having a party.
This, I think, is understood.''  - Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, a member of the Soviet Politburo.  [ A12:5. ]


Economic Scene; Rescuing The Dollar
LEAD: THE stock market had a worrisome day yesterday, and analysts rounded up the usual suspects: Some feared that the dollar might plummet if the central banks were unwilling to support it.
Others worried that, in Washington, cutting the budget deficit was stalled.
Still others feared the budget cuts might be too little (to rally the markets) or too much (for the economy to sustain).


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:  DEAR Diary:


STADIUM LOSES IN JERSEY; DEMOCRATS KEEP SENATE AND GAIN IN ASSEMBLY
LEAD: New Jersey voters yesterday rejected a proposal supported by Governor Kean to spend $185 million for a major league baseball stadium, and elected all 120 members of the State Legislature.


Treasury Bond Prices Rise
LEAD: Treasury bond prices rose nearly a point yesterday, cutting the yield of the 30-year issue to slightly above 9 percent.


Ginsburg Faces Queries Over Cable TV
LEAD: Concern grew among Republican senators today that Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg's nomination to the Supreme Court could be imperiled by charges of conflict of interest, and the Senate Republican leader summoned the nominee to the Capitol to explain his involvement in decisions affecting regulation of the cable television industry.


The Right Question To Ask About AIDS
LEAD: To the Editor:


Falwell Quits as Moral Majority Head
LEAD: The Rev.
Jerry Falwell, founder and leader of the fundamentalist Christian political group Moral Majority, announced today that he was giving up politics and returning full time to his church and television ministry.


Kasparov Wins Game 8
LEAD: Gary Kasparov incisively won the eighth game of his world championship chess match against Anatoly Karpov in Seville, Spain, yesterday to level their series.


KELLY SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KELLY SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
303,617,000
273,407,000
Net inc
15,321,000
10,688,000
Share earns
.64
.45
9mo sales
850,169,000
767,273,000
Net inc
36,866,000
27,949,000
Share earns
1.54
1.16


Kentucky and Mississippi Pick Democratic Governors
LEAD: Democrats won governorships last night in Kentucky and Mississippi, completing a shutout of the Republicans in this year's gubernatorial elections.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: FRESH tuna has become something of a national passion -a pleasantly surprising development, since until a decade or so ago most of the tuna eaten came out of a can and went into tuna salads.


About New York; Year of the Panda Is Lengthened By a Few Days
LEAD: It's been quite a season at the Bronx Zoo.
New York City's two most distinguished - and cuddly - visitors downed 6,800 pounds of bamboo, 736 eggs and 2,208 apples and carrots.


Khrushchev's Son-in-Law Is Elated With 'a Wind of Change'
LEAD: When Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speech ended Monday, Aleksei I. Adzhubei got an excited phone call from his youngest son, a biochemist.


Sports People; Knicks Waive Huston
LEAD: The Knicks trimmed their roster yesterday to the required 12 players by asking waivers on two veterans and placing two others on the injured list.
Geoff Huston, a guard, and Leo Rautins, a forward, were released after practice at the team's camp at the State University of New York at Purchase.


Celtics Confident Despite Key Loss
LEAD: It has become rather fashionable in recent years to dwell on why the Boston Celtics won't be as strong as they were the previous season.
About a year ago, Larry Bird's uncertain health, especially his back and elbow, was the trendy topic of concern.
At other times, the issue may have been Robert Parish's age, Dennis Johnson's poor shooting, Danny


West German Jobless
LEAD: The number of West Germans out of work fell slightly last month, but the job market has apparently stagnated, the Federal Labor Office said today.
The office said the total number of jobless, adjusted for seasonal factors, fell to 2.25 million in October, from 2.26 million in September.
The Labor Office president, Heinrich Franke, told reporters in Nuremberg, ''Taking all the data together, my overall verdict for October is stagnation.


FHP INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FHP INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
106,326,000
85,401,000
Net inc
2,504,000
2,816,000
Share earns
.20
.23


From Papp, All of Shakespeare
LEAD: The New York Shakespeare Festival will present all 36 plays in the Shakespeare canon, in a six-year, $33 million series that will also include television and book adaptations of the stagings, Joseph Papp, the producer of the festival, announced yesterday.


2 Sides Still Far Apart In El Salvador Conflict
LEAD: Despite recent efforts to seek reconciliation under a new regional peace accord, El Salvador today appears as deeply polarized as ever.


Bucks to Retire Bridgeman Jersey
LEAD: The Milwaukee Bucks will retire the uniform of Junior Bridgeman, who played in more games with the National Basketball Association team than any other player in its 20-year history.


2 Policemen Slain in Frankfurt Protest
LEAD: Two policemen were killed Monday night during a demonstration at the Frankfurt Airport, and this appears certain to stiffen demands by conservatives for tougher measures against violent radicals.


Caspar Weinberger's Mixed Legacy
LEAD: With Caspar Weinberger's expected departure after seven years as Secretary of Defense, President Reagan will lose a loyal counselor who tirelessly championed greater military spending.
But Mr.
Weinberger leaves a mixed legacy.
He strengthened America's defenses, yet with enormous profligacy.
He had little appreciation for the positive role of arms control in Soviet-American relations.


INDONESIA DROUGHT TOLL
LEAD: Indonesia's vital rice crop has been saved from drought, but other cash crops have suffered and the nation may have to import some crops, Achmad Affande, Agriculture Minister, said today.
Indonesia, which has the largest farm area in Southeast Asia, anticipated the cyclical drought and took some preventative measures, Mr.


Price of Crude Drops Again
LEAD: Crude oil prices fell for the second consecutive day yesterday, to the lowest level in about a month, hurt by what traders called speculation of growing friction within OPEC and renewed stock market volatility.


An Unsuitable Response
LEAD: To The Living Section:


CONTINENTAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINENTAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b87,000,000
c97,400,000
Share earns
1.39
1.54
9mo net inc
b245,600,000
c329,500,000
Share earns
3.91
5.48
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $6,000,000 and $10,500,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, and realized capital gain of $2.2 million for the quarter and a capital loss of $10 million from a pre-tax loss on the sale of tax-exempt U.S.


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 1987
LEAD:  The  Markets


How We Got Into This Economic Gridlock
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Updated Boot and a Breakfast-Table Whimsy
LEAD:  1.
Boot for Today  This updated classic black leather boot has tiny metal studs on a patchwork design, stylishly created with strips of black suede.
The boot, which has a gracefully shaped low heel, costs $240 at Maraolo, 782 Lexington Avenue (61st Street) and 1321 Third Avenue (76th Street).


JAI ALAI: AN IMPORTED SPORT FOR ALL-AMERICAN DREAMERS
LEAD: It was Halloween night, but the strangest sight at the Milford Jai Alai Fronton was simply the size of the crowd.
Most evenings this time of year, the courtside stands are freckled with fans.
The house was packed, though, crammed all the way up to the smoke-choked $2 seats with some 6,000 screamers, dreamers and get-rich-quick schemers.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Valley National Corporation is offering $100 million of 9 percent notes, due in 1989, at a price of 100 through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


DOW FALLS BY 50.56 AS FIVE-DAY RALLY ENDS FOR WALL ST.
LEAD: The stock market lurched downward yesterday as a return of volatile trading ended a fragile, five-day rally.


Sports News Briefs; Lions Trade Giles For Draft Choice
LEAD: The Detroit Lions traded Jimmie Giles, the disgruntled tight end, to the Philadelphia Eagles yesterday for an undisclosed 1988 draft choice.
Giles played in four games this season for Detroit, catching six passes for 62 yards and no touchdowns.
He complained publicly last week about a lack of playing time.


Stage: A 'Kismet' Revival
LEAD: THE Equity Library Theater's ''Kismet'' is always exuberant and often hilarious, but at times the pedestrian direction of Russell Treyz reduces its whimsies to mere absurdities.
People who like this musical, dreadful rhymes and all, will believe anything, and the higher a director lets his imagination fly, the better.


Britain Sees 4% Growth
LEAD: Britain's economy will grow about 4 percent this year despite the recent stock market plunge, but growth may slow to 2.5 percent in 1988, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nigel Lawson, said today.


Poland's $8 Billion Pact
LEAD: The debt rescheduling accord struck last week between Poland and its Paris Club group of creditor governments covers more than $8 billion, a Polish Government spokesman, Jerzy Urban, said today.
The amount covers almost a quarter of Poland's total $35 billion foreign debt, two-thirds of which is owed to Paris Club members, he said.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-13


Bringing the Movies to Life
LEAD: MOVIES today boast spectacular special effects, the latest in sound systems and ever-improving color and clarity.
But Douglas Trumbull is not impressed.


Debt Swaps In Mexico
LEAD: Mexico is reviewing its debt-for-equity conversion program to assess the inflationary impact, but the program has not been suspended, the central bank governor said.


Who Was Who in Weekly Reader's Early Days
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Violence Erupts in Haiti As Election Council Bars
LEAD: Violence flared again today in Haiti hours after a dozen associates of Francois and Jean-Claude Duvalier, the former dictators, were rejected as presidential candidates.


Monroe Nominated to Hall of Fame
LEAD: Earl Monroe, who spent almost nine seasons with the Knicks, was one of four players and five coaches nominated today for election to the Basketball Association Hall of Fame.


ABC Joins Venture With Weintraub
LEAD: The Weintraub Entertainment Group and ABC News said they would pool their news film archives into a single library.
The joint venture, called ABC/ Weintraub Pathe, will use the film archives to develop new programming for home video cassettes and cable television, the companies said.
They declined to disclose specific applications or terms of the deal.


ALEXANDER &amp; ALEXANDER SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALEXANDER &amp; ALEXANDER SERVICES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
273,400,000
267,400,000
Net inc
b15,400,000
cd900,000
Share earns
.36
-
9mo rev
837,600,000
786,400,000
Net inc
b57,700,000
d40,800,000
Share earns
1.36
.99


Bridge: Pair and Team Competition: The Gulf Between Strategies
LEAD: As all tournament players know, there is a considerable gulf between the strategy called for in pair play, scored by match points, and team play, scored by imps, or international match points.
The pair player is concerned with small profits and losses, but when he shifts to a team event, his focus is on large ones.


Charles F. Bonilla, 78, a Professor at Columbia
LEAD: Prof.
Charles Francis Bonilla, who retired in 1978 after 30 years on the faculty of Columbia University's department of chemical engineering, died of a heart attack Saturday at Morristown (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 78 years old and lived in Tenafly, N.J.


Koch Keeps Embassy Busy, But Sandinistas Are Wary
LEAD: At the American Embassy here, a political officer had a tired greeting for a visitor a few days ago.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: CHANGES in American society are drawing new attention to the form of sexual expression most widely practiced, yet least talked about: masturbation.
Compared with the 1940's and 50's, when Alfred Kinsey did his studies, many more people today say they approve of sexual self-stimulation and perform it fairly often.


His Honor, the Diplomat
LEAD: What better place for New York's Mayor Koch to be now than Central America?
The stock market crash and the city's impending financial difficulties, the search for a new Schools Chancellor, the quarrel between the Police and Fire Departments on handling emergencies, NBC's renewed threat to leave the city - all apparently can wait.


THE DIFFICULT BIRTH OF THE LOTUS AGENDA
LEAD: MITCHELL D. KAPOR, the man who introduced spreadsheets to the computer industry, was grappling with a particularly vexing problem in 1985 when he was chairman of the Lotus Development Corporation: little slips of paper.
The little notes intended to help him organize his life were everywhere - on his desk, stuck to his telephone, stuffed in the pockets of his brightly patterned Hawaiian shirts.


DIASONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIASONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
69,286,000
54,246,000
Net inc
b4,405,000
c2,588,000
Share earns
.06
.04
9mo sales
192,096,000
150,579,000
Net inc
b10,535,000
c6,464,000
Share earns
.15
.10


William Styron Named To Legion of Honor
LEAD: The author William Styron has been awarded the medal of the Commander of the Legion of Honor, the highest degree of the highest honor the French Government can bestow on a French or foreign citizen.


Interfirst Bank Is Repaid
LEAD: Edwin L. Cox Jr., a Dallas businessman who was under Federal investigation earlier this year for loans received while a director of the Interfirst Bank of Dallas, said today that he has repaid the remaining $36 million owed the bank.


BERCOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BERCOR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 2
1987
1986
Sales
49,537,000
41,953,000
Net inc
374,000
326,000
Share earns
.09
.08
6mo sales
89,608,000
73,077,000
Net loss
b355,000
821,000
b-After an extraordinary credit of $80,000 from an accounting change.


I.B.M. Moves Up OS/2 Shipping Date
LEAD: Putting an end to months of speculation, the International Business Machines Corporation said today that it would begin to ship the first release of its OS/2, the next generation of its personal computer operating system, in December, a few months ahead of schedule.


EXPEDITORS INTERNATIONAL OF WASHINGON reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXPEDITORS INTERNATIONAL OF WASHINGON (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
39,710,884
30,181,214
Net inc
1,757,678
1,175,583
Share earns
.31
.21
9mo rev
104,506,012
74,372,895
Net inc
4,289,135
2,888,265
Share earns
.75
.53


Gulf Fisherman Says U.S. Fired at Him
LEAD: The vessel hit by a United States Navy frigate on Sunday night was an unarmed Arab fishing boat, not an Iranian patrol boat, a fisherman who said he was aboard the fishing boat asserted today.
He said an Indian on the boat had been killed.


INSPIRATION RESOURCES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSPIRATION RESOURCES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
234,875,000
208,561,000
Net inc
b8,400,000
d4,600,000
Share earns
.12
.07
9mo rev
1,013,436,000
950,766,000
Net inc
24,407,000
c748,000
Share earns
.37
-


Enforcing of Height Limit Is Urged for Tower
LEAD: The Manhattan Borough President and the mid-Manhattan community board have called on New York City to enforce the height limit for the nearly completed Cityspire tower, which is almost 11 feet taller than approved and the subject today of a City Planning Commission review.


Calling Mr. Baker
LEAD: Relations between President Reagan's chief of staff, Howard H. Baker Jr., and Congressional conservatives have never been particularly warm, but in recent weeks things have grown downright frosty.
Viewing Mr.
Baker as something less than a faithful guardian of the Reagan doctrine on such issues as tax increases, military spending and the nomination of ideologically correct Supreme Court justices, conservatives these days rarely bother to hide their frustration.


Pragmatic Revolution in China
LEAD: The distinguishing mark of China's 13th Communist Party Congress was its steadiness, the legacy of a decade under the skillful hand of Deng Xiaoping. ''The Big 13,'' as the Beijing press called it, brought few real surprises.


Wells, Rich Is Losing Two of Its P.&amp;G. Brands
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, which rarely moves accounts except as a form of discipline, has switched two brands out of Wells, Rich, Greene and into the Leo Burnett Company and N. W. Ayer, which joined its roster last year when it acquired Cunningham &amp; Walsh.


Taste and Nutrition
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Senate Backs Renewal Of Special Prosecutors
LEAD: The Senate voted 85 to 10 today to renew the law authorizing special prosecutors to investigate allegations of wrongdoing by senior government officials after rejecting, by a vote of 49 to 46, an attempt to make the bill apply to members of Congress.


MIDLAND CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDLAND CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
32,616,000
31,056,000
Net inc
2,853,000
1,973,000
Share earns
.83
.58
9mo rev
93,520,000
89,727,000
Net inc
8,171,000
4,751,000
Share earns
2.38
1.39


Furor Growing in France on Iran Arms-Sale Case
LEAD: A political scandal involving the illegal sale of artillery shells to Iran deepened today as a Paris daily published the full text of a secret Defense Ministry report that directly implicated President Francois Mitterrand.


Two Children, Trapped in a Refrigerator, Die
LEAD: A 3-year-old girl and her 4-year-old brother died yesterday evening shortly after their grandfather, who had been searching for them for nearly three hours, found them trapped unconscious in an old refigerator in the backyard of their home in Jamaica, Queens, the police said.


Army Accepts Copters Despite Some Problems
LEAD: The Army has accepted delivery of 285 new Apache helicopter gunships even though it is still working with the manufacturer to correct a number of problems on the aircraft that were identified two years ago, officials say.


BANKS OF MID-AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKS OF MID-AMERICA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
270,000
257,000
9mo net loss
24,587,000
34,599,000
The latest third quarter includes a provision for possible loan losses of $17,207,000, compared with $4,950,000 in the year-ago period.


CARLISLE COS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARLISLE COS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
141,772,000
115,378,000
Net inc
5,364,000
4,918,000
Share earns
.64
.54
Shares outst
8,378,000
9,149,000
9mo sales
407,579,000
350,936,000
Net inc
b14,347,000
14,973,000
Share earns
1.71
1.63
Shares outst
8,378,000
9,176,000


MBIA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MBIA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
32,133,000
27,725,000
Net inc
b16,928,000
13,367,000
Share earns
.45
.36
9mo rev
102,141,000
79,317,000
Net inc
b56,328,000
39,743,000
Share earns
1.50
1.06


G.M. to Shut Plant And Lay Off 3,700
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said today that it would close indefinitely its 3,700-worker assembly plant in Framingham, Mass., because of slow sales of the Chevrolet Celebrity and the Oldsmobile Cutlass Ciera.


Let's Have True Repeal Of McCarran-Walter
LEAD: To the Editor:


HAWKEYE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAWKEYE BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,760,000
c24,839,000
Per share
.16
-
9mo net inc
b12,191,000
c46,935,000
Per share
1.14
-
b-After extraordinary gains of $593,000 for the quarter and $9,099,000 for the 9 months.


LOEWS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOEWS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,227,442,000
2,093,492,000
Net inc
125,404,000
156,715,000
Share earns
1.63
1.92
Shares outst
76,781,000
81,503,000
9mo rev
6,743,282,000
6,264,960,000
Net inc
404,713,000
443,878,000
Share earns
5.16
5.44
Shares outst
78,454,000
81,503,000


SONESTA INTERNATIONAL HOTELS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SONESTA INTERNATIONAL HOTELS CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,570,000
17,153,000
Net loss
b451,000
c17,801,000
Share earns
-
5.84
9mo rev
39,006,000
52,768,000
Net loss
b1,200,000
c15,916,000
Share earns
-
5.21


5 More Broadway Theaters Classified as Landmarks
LEAD: Five Broadway theaters were granted landmark status yesterday by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, almost doubling in one afternoon the number of houses designated in the theater district.


ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,066,000,000
3,326,000,000
Net inc
140,000,000
161,800,000
Share earns
.51
.55
Yr sales
12,123,000,000
12,296,000,000
Net inc
b635,100,000
611,200,000
Share earns
2.27
2.06


Persevering Political Survivor: Willie Wilson Goode
LEAD: Shortly after 5:30 P.M. on May 13, 1985, W. Wilson Goode's life changed forever.


HERITAGE-NIS BANK FOR SAVNGS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HERITAGE-NIS BANK FOR SAVNGS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,323,000
1,993,000
Per share
.33
-
9mo net inc
7,114,000
4,671,000
Per share
1.02
-
The company went public in October 1986.


DATASCOPE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATASCOPE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
21,300,000
17,250,000
Net inc
976,421
454,653
Share earns
.22
.12
Shares outst
4,436,000
3,845,000


Man Seized as 'Biggest' Pimp
LEAD: A man the police said was a pimp with an estimated income of $500,000 a year was arrested yesterday after four months of surveillance and undercover work.


RALEIGH FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RALEIGH FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,300,000
668,000
Per share
.37
-
9mo net inc
2,892,000
2,250,000
Per share
.84
-
The year-ago per share earnings are not available since the company became public July 6.


Dollar Tests New Lows In Spite of Intervention
LEAD: The dollar fell today to at a record low in Japan against the yen after softening in nervous trading yesterday.


Ginsburg's Legal Philosophy
LEAD: Following are answers by Douglas H. Ginsburg to two of the questions posed by the Senate Judiciary Committee in connection with his nomination last year to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia:  Judicial Activism  Q. Please discuss your views on the following criticism involving ''judicial activism.


5-Transplant Child Better
LEAD: The 3-year-old Kentucky girl who received five new organs in experimental transplant surgery was taken off a respirator today, a sign of steady improvement, hospital officials said.
The child, Tabatha Foster, was able to breathe on her own and talk for the first time since the 15-hour operation began Saturday, said a spokesman for Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh.


Wood Radiator Covers Can Add Sitting Space
LEAD: NOAH BLOCK, a co-owner of the Building Block, a cabinet shop, says that customers find plenty of reasons to order his custom-made radiator covers.
The covers can create extra sitting space, cover up unsightly radiators, protect skin and clothing from hot coils and provide additional shelf space.


Rev. R.B.Y. Scott, 88, Old Testament Scholar
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
R.B.Y.
Scott, an Old Testament scholar and former William H. Danforth Professor of Religion at Princeton University, died Sunday at a home for the elderly in Toronto, where he had lived for several years.
He was 88 years old.


REAGAN EXPECTED TO SEEK MORE AID FOR THE CONTRAS
LEAD: On the eve of a crucial two-month period for carrying out a Central American peace plan, the Reagan Administration has decided to seek $30 million in new non-lethal aid for the Nicaraguan rebels, Administration and Congressional officials said today.


COASTAMERICA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COASTAMERICA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
82,958,000
81,555,000
Net loss
b323,000
c1,011,000
Share earns
-
.14
9mo rev
259,416,000
245,725,000
Net inc
b1,390,000
2,253,000
Share earns
.17
.32


Test Set for AIDS Antibodies In Recipients of Tainted Blood
LEAD: Tests for antibodies to the AIDS virus will be offered to people who received transfusions from a San Francisco blood bank where officials estimate up to one out of every 100 blood units supplied from 1981 to 1983 was tainted with the virus.


Lower Growth In G.N.P. Seen
LEAD: The United States will not come close to reaching its 3.5 percent economic growth target in 1988, although it probably will not enter a recession either, despite recent turmoil on financial markets, economists said here today.


Charmed Life on Horse Show Circuit
LEAD: MOST people inherit their way to the pinnacle of the horse show milieu, but a fortunate few, like Katie Monahan, have ridden their way to its heights.


Same Old Stereotype
LEAD: To The Home Section:


UNION VALLEY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION VALLEY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
36,399,000
20,301,000
Net inc
1,510,000
816,000
Share earns
.38
.23
9mo rev
81,587,000
47,301,000
Net inc
4,031,000
b1,828,000
Share earns
1.02
.53


Delay at Southland
LEAD: The Southland Corporation, which is in the middle of a $4.9 billion leveraged buyout by the company's founding Thompson family, said that it would postpone its Nov. 5 shareholder meeting until Nov. 12.
The Dallas company, which owns the 7-Eleven convenience store chain, said that the meeting had been delayed ''to provide time to complete the sale of the $1.5 billion of subordinated debt necessary to finance the merger.


Hector To Start For Jets
LEAD: He may have lost a half-step during the strike, but Freeman McNeil's telepathy was certainly on target.


NAPA VALLEY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NAPA VALLEY BANCORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
807,000
563,000
Per share
.33
.33
9mo net inc
1,858,000
1,514,000
Per share
.75
.88
Shares outst
2,481,000
1,734,000
The company said the year-ago periods include after-tax securities gains of $100,000.


Charlotte Y. Martin
LEAD: Charlotte Y. Martin, a benefactor of education, died Tuesday.
She was 68 years old.


College Football; Fordham Aims at Liberty Title
LEAD: Fordham, which has won seven of its eight games this season, can capture the Liberty Conference championship Saturday if it beats Pace (3-4) at Pleasantville, N.Y., as is generally expected.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: MALFUNCTIONING floor or desk lamps are dangerous.
If a lamp flickers, won't light, has a frayed cord, requires delicate positioning to operate or frequently burns out bulbs, you should repair it immediately or discontinue using it.


UNITED BRANDS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED BRANDS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
784,078,000
790,627,000
Net inc
b7,373,000
4,298,000
Share earns
.47
.26
9mo sales
2,392,823,000
2,462,825,000
Net inc
b53,527,000
52,810,000
Share earns
3.40
3.32


BELDING HEMINWAY CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELDING HEMINWAY CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
36,688,000
31,189,000
Net inc
1,499,000
937,000
Share earns
.64
.36
Shares outst
2,368,000
2,632,000
9mo sales
107,764,000
90,587,000
Net inc
3,712,000
2,338,000
Share earns
1.56
.89


SUMMIT HEALTH LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUMMIT HEALTH LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
131,505,000
129,337,000
Net inc
1,231,000
3,638,000
Share earns
.04
.12


Advertising; Louis Dorfsman Retires From CBS Design Post
LEAD: Louis Dorfsman, vice president and creative director for advertising and design at CBS Inc., and one of the best-known graphics people in the business, has retired after 41 years with the company to start his own studio.


Elusive Spirit of Compromise on Budget
LEAD: The stock market collapse forced the impossible: a summit meeting between the White House and Congress on a deficit-reducing package.


NATIONAL BANC OF COMMERCE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL BANC OF COMMERCE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,002,000
931,000
Per share
.41
.47
Shares outst
2,452,171
1,975,422
9mo net inc
3,014,000
2,776,000
Per share
1.23
1.41
Shares outst
2,444,591
1,967,539


Soviet Historians Welcome the Openness, Warily
LEAD: A panel of Soviet historians said today that Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speech on Soviet history this week opened the way for a more intensive study of past problems but that restricted access to archives remained a serious obstacle.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 5, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


General Dynamics Names President
LEAD: The General Dynamics Corporation yesterday named Herbert F. Rogers president and chief operating officer, effective Jan. 1.


NEVADA POWER CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEVADA POWER CO (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
377,227,000
383,921,000
Net inc
55,046,000
44,844,000
Share earns
1.98
1.62


FIRST AMERICAN SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMERICAN SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
774,000
1,060,000
Per share
.35
-
The bank converted to stock form in July 1987.


Pop: Mamas and the Papas
LEAD: ALTHOUGH ''Papa'' John Phillips is the only original member of the Mamas and the Papas, who opened a monthlong engagement at Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, on Tuesday, the group seems even more an extended family today than in 1966, when its first hit, ''California Dreamin','' beckoned the world to the lotus land of Los


Reagan Fantasies, Budget Realities
LEAD: The stock market crash, President Reagan now says, two weeks after the fact, was a warning ''we can't afford to ignore.'' What counts is what the President now does.
And so far, he and his aides have shown little fire in the negotiations with Congress on reducing the budget deficit.
They're simply using the meetings as an opportunity to rehearse old arguments over priorities and old nostrums against tax increases.


Deaver 'Made No Special Demands,' Witness Says
LEAD: Acting Secretary of Transportation James H. Burnley testified at the perjury trial of Michael K. Deaver today that Mr.
Deaver ''made no special demands'' on him in telephone conversations in 1985 in connection with Trans World Airlines.


SOURCE CAPITAL INC reports earnings for As of Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOURCE CAPITAL INC (NYSE)
As of Sept 30
1987
1986
Assets
310,609,772
297,202,826
Share earns
41.98
40.11
Assets represent net assets.


Director of Guggenheim Retiring After 27 Years
LEAD: Thomas M. Messer, the director of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation and of its museums in New York and Venice for 27 years, has announced his retirement.
He said yesterday that he had no specific plans, adding, ''But my 68th birthday is coming up and although, like most Aquarians, I tend to fall in love with institutions, I just want to look at myself and see what's left of Tom Messer.


AMERICA WEST AIRLINES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICA WEST AIRLINES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
163,006,000
84,294,000
Net loss
11,936,000
b2,790,000
Share earns
-
.22
9mo rev
411,291,000
232,760,000
Net loss
26,852,000
b482,000
Share earns
-
-


Belgium's Jobless Rate
LEAD: Belgium's unemployment rate fell to 12.1 percent in October, from 12.2 percent in September, the National Labor Office said today.
Belgium's jobless rate is one of the highest in the European Community, surpassed only by Ireland and Italy.


ACETO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACETO CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,240,000
17,996,000
Net inc
588,000
486,000
Share earns
.17
.14


Why So Many Losers
LEAD: To The Home Section:


U.S. Plan Stirs GATT Debate
LEAD: An American proposal to open service industries to more international competition was criticized today by third-world nations anxious to protect their fledgling service sectors.


Decision on Harmon
LEAD: Based on a ruling by an arbitrator, John Culver, a former Senator from Iowa, Ronnie Harmon does not have to repay Norby Walters most of the money he received from the agent with whom he had a contract from March 1985 until August 1986.
According to a report yesterday in The Atlanta Constitution, Culver voided the contract that Harmon signed on the ground that Walters and Lloyd Bloom, an associate, had violated regulations of the National Football League Players Association regarding agents.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Smoothing the Edges
LEAD: Marion C. Blakey, director of public affairs at the Education Department, is taking a similar post at the White House, a job that entails coordinating public events between the White House and other agencies.


CNA FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CNA FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,798,900,000
1,572,300,000
Net inc
108,400,000
98,000,000
Share earns
1.67
1.50
9mo rev
5,263,800,000
4,527,800,000
Net inc
279,900,000
340,800,000
Share earns
4.30
5.30


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''As a barometer at home there has not been great turmoil among the people outside the stock market.
It has not created great aggravation and worry in the public, and to the extent that there is no urgency in the grass roots, maybe we're reflecting that.''  - Senator Bob Packwood,


Surgery for Well's Victim
LEAD: Jessica McClure, the 19-month-old girl who survived 58 1/2 hours stuck in an abandoned well, underwent her fifth operation today at Midland Memorial Hospital.
The surgery was to help repair a severe scrape on Jessica's forehead.
Skin grafts were also taken from the little girl's thigh to be transferred to her right foot, which was wedged in an awkward position and suffered reduced blood flow.


New York City Begins $600 Million Offering
LEAD: New York City is offering $600 million of new bonds in a financing that does not seem to have suffered noticeably from fears that the city's economy would be hurt by the recent declines in stock prices and employment cutbacks at securities firms.


Exchanges Giving Chicago a Lift, Too
LEAD: Just as New York has flourished in recent years from the boom on Wall Street, so has Chicago prospered from the rising fortunes of its options and futures exchanges.


Williams Rejects Job
LEAD: Miffed after learning that he was not under consideration to become the new manager of the Chicago Cubs.
Billy Williams, the Hall of Fame outfielder, has told the Cubs he will not manage in the club's minor-league system as planned.
Williams, who played for the Cubs nearly all of his 18-year major-league career and served as a coach with the team for six years, has talked with John Madigan, the club's new chairman.


Issues, Money and Reagan Helped Democrats
LEAD: A combination of local issues, attractive and well-financed Democratic candidates and signs of disillusionment with President Reagan combined to make Tuesday's local elections in New York State a Democratic triumph, Republican and Democratic politicians agreed yesterday.


JEFFERSON NATIONAL BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERSON NATIONAL BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
451,000
315,000
Per share
.21
.15
9mo net inc
1,407,000
1,027,000
Per share
.66
.58
Shares outst
2,118,316
1,780,802


CHEMED CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEMED CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
101,423,000
94,827,000
Net inc
6,053,000
b5,803,000
Share earns
.68
.65
9mo rev
291,351,000
266,673,000
Net inc
15,629,000
b16,340,000
Share earns
1.74
1.83


Crime and the Constitution
LEAD: President Reagan hails Judge Douglas Ginsburg, his nominee for the Supreme Court, as a crime fighter.
At the swearing-in of F.B.I.
Director William Sessions, Mr.
Reagan said: ''The next justice on the Supreme Court better be ready to deal with that challenge  [ of crime fighting ] , and Judge Ginsburg is ready.


Advertising; Movie Ads For Word Processor
LEAD: SMITH-CORONA, which has restricted advertising for its portable word processor to magazines for the last year, is now prepared to return to moving pictures.
That does not mean broadcast television, but rather cinema and cable TV advertising.


SENDING PAINTINGS ABROAD HELPS RAISE PROFITS AT HOME
LEAD: Vincent van Gogh's ''Irises'' - a glowing study of a patch of purple irises and one white bloom - was returned to New York last week after a four-week, 17,500-mile journey to Tokyo, London, Geneva and Zurich.


Index Futures Tied By Ruder to Plunge
LEAD: David S. Ruder, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, said today that various forms of index futures trading played a significant role in the recent collapse of the stock market.


Nixon Injured Again
LEAD: Norm Nixon, the veteran guard who missed the 1986-87 season because of an injured left knee, ruptured his right Achilles' tendon during practice yesterday and will be sidelined for the 1987-88 season, the Los Angeles Clippers announced.
Nixon, a two-time All-Star guard, was injured near the end of the practice session after he passed the ball and made a quick cut.


NASA OFFERS PLAN TO AID BUSINESS USE OF SPACE PROGRAM
LEAD: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration announced plans Tuesday to expand opportunities for commercial ventures in space in connection with its space shuttle program and proposed space station.


FABRICLAND INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FABRICLAND INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,236,956
11,225,046
Net inc
433,399
347,831
Share earns
.16
.13


Juror in Murder Trial Indicted For Perjury During Screening
LEAD: An assistant district attorney in Queens said yesterday that a juror who voted to acquit three reputed mob figures accused of slaying a detective had a brother-in-law who was convicted of acts tied to organized crime.


KAY JEWELERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAY JEWELERS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
78,148,000
54,823,000
Net loss
353,000
b111,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
210,717,000
150,510,000
Net loss
4,292,000
664,000
b-Net income


Report Clears Space Agency Head Of Conflict in Booster Rocket Pact
LEAD: A Congressional investigation has found no evidence that Dr.
James C. Fletcher, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, or other space officials violated conflict-of-interest regulations in 1973 when they chose Morton Thiokol Inc. to produce the solid-fuel booster rockets for the space shuttle.


Jews on 'Hit List,' Trial Told
LEAD: A man who counterfeited money to help finance a white supremacist group, the Order, testified today that Jacob K. Javits and Armand Hammer were on a ''hit list'' of leading Jews targeted by the extremists.


Bank Merger Set In Pennsylvania
LEAD: Pennbancorp and the Union National Corporation said they had agreed to a merger that would create a $6.5 billion institution which would become the sixth-largest bank holding company in Pennsylvania.
Under the terms of the agreement, Pennbancorp and Union National shareholders would each receive about 50 percent of the common shares of the new parent on a fully diluted basis.


CAMBREX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAMBREX CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,757,000
13,022,000
Net inc
1,540,000
c412,000
Share earns
.42
.10
Shares outst
3,799,768
3,477,557
9mo rev
82,420,000
44,680,000
Net inc
b6,583,000
c1,284,000
Share earns
1.92
.33
Shares outst
3,632,354
3,477,557


Mr. Murdoch's Shadow
LEAD: By freedom of the press we mean a privately owned press free of government interference.
But whether we have an honest press, a diverse and independent press, then depends on something else: who the owners are.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Atlantic Research Co., Alexandria, Va., said it would buy the liquid rocket propulsion business of the Bell Aerospace division of Textron Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.


DREYER'S GRAND ICE CREAM reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DREYER'S GRAND ICE CREAM (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
47,273,000
39,629,000
Net inc
1,498,000
2,730,000
Share earns
.24
.37
Shares outst
6,302,000
7,437,000
9mo sales
124,616,000
102,537,000
Net inc
3,172,000
6,818,000
Share earns
.50
.92
Shares outst
6,341,000
7,390,000


FIRST FINCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FINCORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
676,456
671,713
Per share
.27
.27
9mo net inc
1,909,787
1,337,386
Per share
.77
.54


GOULD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOULD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
230,400,000
227,400,000
Net loss
b300,000
c4,300,000
Share earns
-
.10
9mo rev
690,500,000
681,400,000
Net inc
b10,800,000
d106,400,000
Share earns
.24
-


British Banks Cut Key Rates
LEAD: British banks cut key interest rates today by half a percentage point, to 9 percent.
The Bank of England led the way as it maneuvered to offset the decline of the dollar.


Gilford: Jack Gilford At Ballroom
LEAD: JACK GILFORD is in the tradition of the great silent clowns, the comic masters of the early days of films.
He may be the last of them, and even he depends on speech and song for most of his performance at the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, where he is making his first cabaret appearance in 39 years.


A Rescue Devised for Specialists
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is devising a plan to rescue a critical group of stock exchange firms - known as specialists - in the event of market plunges like the one on Oct. 19, according to a senior Treasury official.


Larry Davis Accused of Threatening Woman by Letter to Stop Her From Testifying
LEAD: Prosecutors said yesterday that Larry Davis, who faces trial on charges of killing four suspected drug dealers in the Bronx, mailed a threatening letter from jail to the mother of his 2-year-old child to deter her from testifying against him.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about the Boston Celtics misidentified one player.
The man wearing No. 31 was Fred Roberts


Suffolk Democrats Stun G.O.P., Taking Top Post and Legislature
LEAD: Suffolk County Democrats stunned Republicans on Tuesday by capturing the County Executive's office for the first time in 16 years, upsetting two longtime Republican Town Supervisors and gaining a plurality in the County Legislature.


Corrections
LEAD: A Washington dispatch yesterday about the prospects for change under the next Secretary of Defense gave an incorrect date for the Antiballistic Missile Treaty.
It was signed in 1972.


BONRAY DRILLING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BONRAY DRILLING CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,470,000
1,463,000
Net inc
24,000
52,000
Share earns
.06
.12


ITEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ITEL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
340,900,000
81,200,000
Net inc
b6,400,000
c62,200,000
Share earns
.07
3.21
Shares outst
25,300,000
18,800,000
9mo rev
923,900,000
217,900,000
Net inc
9,200,000
c53,900,000
Share earns
-
2.94


PRIMARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIMARK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
206,161,000
192,714,000
Net loss
992,000
1,461,000
9mo rev
993,570,000
1,147,420,000
Net inc
34,929,000
38,151,000
Share earns
1.78
1.94


The Dance: Garth Fagan Troupe
LEAD: THINGS may have seemed a little noisier than usual at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday, with whistles and tumultuous applause at the start of the evening and whoops and cheers at the close.
Garth Fagan's Bucket Dance Theater is back in town.


Emigres Reunited in U.S.
LEAD: Two Jewish families were reunited in Capitol Hill ceremonies today after long battles to leave the Soviet Union.
Lev Pevzner, 73 years old, a Russian-born resident of Indianapolis, was reunited with his son, daughter-in-law and granddaughter after eight years.
Keith Braun, 28, a Detroit lawyer, was reunited with his wife, Svetlana.


An Arrest in German Killings
LEAD: A 33-year-old man was detained on suspicion of killing two policemen in a protest near the Frankfurt airport two days ago, the Government said today.
The man, Andreas Eichler, was arrested hours after the killings, during a protest by extremists wearing masks.


SBARRO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SBARRO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,119,785
15,565,321
Net inc
2,049,732
1,411,998
Share earns
.23
.16
9mo rev
57,753,883
37,621,484
Net inc
4,335,811
2,957,153
Share earns
.49
.36


MOUNTAIN MEDICAL EQUIPENT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOUNTAIN MEDICAL EQUIPENT CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,294,000
6,962,000
Net inc
56,000
b396,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
12,164,000
13,842,000
Net inc
109,000
b318,000
Share earns
.04
-


BIOSPHERICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOSPHERICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,767,705
2,109,220
Net inc
216,250
137,142
Share earns
.06
.04
9mo rev
7,539,580
5,742,472
Net inc
422,145
269,275
Share earns
.11
.07


Gretzky Overpowers Rangers
LEAD: Wayne Gretzky scored three goals and increased his career assist total to 1,000 tonight to lead the Edmonton Oilers to a 7-2 whipping of the struggling Rangers.


CRITICS CAUTIOUS ON JUDGE'S RECORD
LEAD: While the White House is aggressively promoting Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, President Reagan's nominee to the Supreme Court, the judge's potential opponents are moving with caution as they explore his record and assess areas of possible vulnerability.


Rutledge to Get a Rare Start
LEAD: Jeff Rutledge, left, leaving practice yesterday with Raul Allegre, the Giants' place-kicker, at Giants Stadium.
Rutledge, who joined the team in 1982, is scheduled to make his second start since 1983 Sunday against the Patriots.
Page B14. (NYT/Ruby Washington)


NORTH CANADIAN OILS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH CANADIAN OILS LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
24,900,000
22,400,000
Net inc
6,300,000
b900,000
9mo rev
72,800,000
93,000,000
Net inc
16,400,000
11,100,000
Share earns
.32
.10
Shares outst
19,900,000
11,600,000


Transactions
LEAD: BASEBALL  ATLANTA (NL) - Dale Murphy, outfielder, signed three-year guaranteed contract extension.
CALIFORNIA (AL) - Ruppert Jones, outfielder, became free agent.
DETROIT (AL) - Jack Morris, pitcher, became a free agent again.
HOUSTON (NL) - Dave Smith, Larry Andersen and Danny Darwin, pitchers, became free agents.


EMPIRE OF AMERICAN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMPIRE OF AMERICAN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,108,000
c20,703,000
Per share
.11
1.29
9mo net inc
b12,857,000
c78,482,000
Per share
.58
5.14
b-After extraordinary credits of $4.9 million for the quarter and $5.5 million for the 9 months.


Tougher Student Loan Rules Planned
LEAD: Calling the rate of default on student loans intolerable, Secretary of Education William J. Bennett said today that he planned to draw strict new guidelines that could make hundreds of schools ineligible for Federal student aid.


Advertising; Omnicom Rebounds And Earns $2.9 Million
LEAD: The Omnicom Group Inc., parent company of BBDO Worldwide and DDB Needham, reported third-quarter earnings of $2.9 million, or 12 cents a share.
The results mark a turnaround from the period a year earlier, when the company lost $29.8 million because of a restructuring.
Omnicom said its revenue increased 4 percent, to $185.6 million, from $178.5 million in the third quarter last year.


Spain Rejects U.S. Deal on Bases, Foreshadowing the Treaty's End
LEAD: Spain has turned down a last-minute compromise proposal by the United States to salvage the 34-year-old defense treaty that permits American military installations on Spanish soil.


CORCOM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORCOM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,125,000
5,376,000
Net inc
293,000
309,000
Share earns
.08
.09
9mo sales
17,260,000
5,715,000
Net inc
686,000
b622,000
Share earns
.20
-
b-Net loss


Goode Turns to Unification of a Divided Philadelphia
LEAD: Even before his narrow victory over Frank L. Rizzo seemed assured Tuesday night, Mayor W. Wilson Goode turned to the future.


ROYAL INTERNATIONAL OPTICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROYAL INTERNATIONAL OPTICAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
24,628,000
22,377,000
Net inc
1,435,000
780,000
Share earns
.21
.11
6mo rev
48,061,000
43,348,000
Net inc
2,464,000
1,652,000
Share earns
.36
.24


Big Opportunity Has Rutledge Excited
LEAD: Since he is so unaccustomed to a starting role in his nine years as a quarterback in the National Football League, Jeff Rutledge had no intention today of talking about his new assignment with the Giants.


CONSOLIDATED FREIGHTWAYS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED FREIGHTWAYS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
589,307,000
549,115,000
Net inc
16,362,000
24,325,000
Share earns
.43
.63
9mo net inc
54,011,000
66,591,000
Share earns
1.40
1.73


Leonard H. Steibel, 72; International Lawyer
LEAD: Leonard H. Steibel, a founding partner and senior member of the New York City law firm Smith, Steibel, Alexander &amp; Saskor, died of cordoma, a rare form of cancer, Saturday at his home in Sands Point, L.I..
He was 72 years old.


Venture Group at G.E. Is Eager to Go It Alone
LEAD: Harry T. Rein is leaving the General Electric Company, but not with rancor.


KEYSTONE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEYSTONE FINANCIAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
6,114,000
5,750,000
Per share
.50
.49
9mo net inc
18,422,000
16,765,000
Per share
1.51
1.43
The year-ago results restated to reflect acquisition of Pennsylvania National Financial Corp.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Missing Deadlines
LEAD: A key deadline is about to be missed on Capitol Hill: the date of Congressional adjournment.


Greenspan Basel-Bound
LEAD: Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, will meet next week with central bankers of other countries at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, Switzerland, the Fed said today.


National Horse Show; Canada Wins Cup in Jumpoff
LEAD: The Nations' Cup, a horsemanship contest among international teams from the United States, Britain, France and Canada, had to be decided by a timed jumpoff between France and Canada last night at the National Horse Show.
The Canadians won on the strength of clear rounds from three of their four riders.


'Grow Up!'
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Forcibly Hospitalized Woman Identified
LEAD: The first person hospitalized under an effort to remove mentally ill homeless people from Manhattan's streets was identified by her relatives in a court hearing yesterday as a 40-year-old former secretary from a middle-class family in Livingston, N.J.


DOFASCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOFASCO INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
536,900,000
469,200,000
Net inc
39,300,000
33,200,000
Share earns
.59
.49
9mo sales
1,616,600,000
1,473,500,000
Net inc
117,000,000
101,100,000
Share earns
1.76
1.49


Dollar Hits a New Low; Tokyo Stocks Also Fall
LEAD: The dollar continued its steady slide today, dropping to yet another record low of 135.35 yen, the lowest it has reached in Toyko since the late 1940's.


Voters in Referendums Protect the Pocketbook
LEAD: From Maine to California, Americans voted their economic worries Tuesday, rejecting environmental efforts because of the accompanying costs and approving gambling measures as an alternative to taxes and a spur to growth.


Endowment Offers Teachers Sabbaticals for Humanities
LEAD: The National Endowment for the Humanities said Monday that it would sponsor paid sabbatical leaves for one elementary or high school teacher from each state to study the humanities.


MBS TEXTBOOK EXCHANGE reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MBS TEXTBOOK EXCHANGE (OTC)
Year to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
46,865,000
41,285,000
Net inc
3,630,000
2,305,000
Share earns
.76
.58
Shares outst
4,777,000
4,000,000


Appointees Represent a Range of Financial Constituencies
LEAD:  James C. Cotting  Chairman of Navistar


Cuomo, at Capitol, Renews His Request For Economic Plan
LEAD: Governor Cuomo of New York, saying the Presidential race was not the best forum for debating the country's economic future, today pressed his plan for the creation of a commission that would issue economic recommendations after the 1988 election.


CENTURY TELEPHONE ENTERRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTURY TELEPHONE ENTERRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
37,730,000
35,303,000
Net inc
7,422,000
4,212,000
Share earns
.62
.36
9mo rev
111,022,000
106,411,000
Net inc
16,623,000
12,217,000
Share earns
1.40
1.06


PLYMOUTH FIVE CENTS SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLYMOUTH FIVE CENTS SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
377,000
463,000
Per share
.16
-
9mo net inc
873,000
647,000
Per share
.38
-
The company went public in July 1986.


Reagan Chooses 4 Executives for Panel on Market Turmoil
LEAD: President Reagan today appointed four executives, each apparently selected to represent a different sector of the investment community, to the task force he created two weeks ago to study the turmoil in the financial markets.


Trucks Need More Inspection, Not Regulation
LEAD: To the Editor:


CENTURI INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTURI INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
46,122,099
42,434,074
Net inc
b662,556
78,114
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
16,616,170
16,280,670
9mo rev
143,384,007
121,989,554
Net inc
b2,354,576
c3,066,047
Share earns
.14
-


K-TRON INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*K-TRON INTERNATIONAL INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,791,000
8,269,000
Net inc
b1,580,000
c2,261,000
Share earns
.41
-
9mo rev
30,065,000
25,563,000
Net inc
b3,098,000
c188,000
Share earns
.80
-


Koch Visits Grave of Slain Newspaper Editor in Managua
LEAD: Mayor Koch laying a wreath yesterday in Managua at the grave of Pedro Joaquin Chamorro.
Next to Mr.
Koch is Mr.
Chamorro's widow, Violetta, publisher of opposition newspaper La Prensa.
Mr.
Chamorro, who was the editor of La Prensa, was assassinated in 1978 by gunmen believed to be associatedwith Gen.


STANLEY INTERIORS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANLEY INTERIORS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
48,330,000
41,353,000
Net inc
b679,000
678,000
Share earns
.17
.32
9mo sales
134,593,000
119,958,000
Net inc
b1,529,000
1,745,000
Share earns
.38
.86
Shares outst
4,013,000
2,115,000


5 Central America Nations to Outline Final Measures to Comply With Pact
LEAD: Central American governments will announce on Thursday the measures they intend to take to comply with a new peace treaty that may provide a final opportunity to negotiate the conflicts dividing the region.


Crash Kills Man, and Another Is Accused of Oiling the Road
LEAD: A 20-year-old Queens man was killed Tuesday night when his car hit a slick of oil, spun out of control and struck a tree in Flushing.
Hours later, a 58-year-old man who lives nearby was charged with second-degree manslaughter, and the police said he poured the oil onto the street minutes before the accident.


PENNSYLVANIA REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNSYLVANIA REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,395,611
4,839,079
Net inc
b3,165,963
c3,160,974
Share earns
.39
.39
Yr rev
19,526,261
18,940,915
Net inc
b11,552,727
c10,986,437
Share earns
1.42
1.41
Shares outst
8,143,867
7,767,672


BANK OF EAST TENNESSEE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF EAST TENNESSEE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
62,581
-
Per share
.04
-
9mo net inc
131,777
-
Per share
.10
-
The company began operations on Nov. 21.


GRANITE STATE BANKSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRANITE STATE BANKSHARES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
263,000
544,000
Per share
.13
.26
9mo net inc
989,000
1,438,000
Per share
.47
.68


HERS
LEAD: ''I WANT to be white, like Brant,'' my 3-year-old said to me the other day.
We were on our way home from the Denver Zoo.


Upset Puts a Young Democrat in the Mayor's Seat in Yonkers
LEAD: Two years ago a 26-year-old Yonkers Democrat, Nicholas C. Wasicsko, surprisingly won election to the City Council in his first political race.
On Tuesday, he turned heads again, this time becoming Mayor of the state's fourth largest city.


SIGNAL APPAREL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIGNAL APPAREL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
24,595,000
23,706,000
Net inc
613,000
1,146,000
Share earns
.16
.30
9mo sales
71,584,000
68,385,000
Net inc
3,123,000
3,135,000
Share earns
.81
.82


FIRSTFED FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRSTFED FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,822,000
4,213,000
Per share
.53
.59
9mo net inc
12,188,000
11,385,000
Per share
1.70
1.60
The per share earnings reflect a 3-for-2 stock split to be paid on Oct.


IMASCO LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMASCO LTD
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,230,121,000
1,152,497,000
Net inc
77,036,000
55,606,000
Share earns
.61
.44
6mo rev
2,405,396,000
2,266,289,000
Net inc
147,189,000
108,532,000
Share earns
1.17
.92


REFLECTONE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REFLECTONE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,335,623
10,052,039
Net inc
b233,221
c2,082,783
Share earns
.15
-
6mo rev
29,848,984
21,501,282
Net inc
b470,056
c2,269,447
Share earns
.30
-


Ballet: 'La Fille,' By Ashton
LEAD: SIR FREDERICK ASHTON'S choreographic version of ''La Fille Mal Gardee'' - that sunniest of ballets - looked particularly sweet and bright as performed by the Joffrey Ballet on Tuesday night and Sunday afternoon at the City Center Theater.
On these occasions, several dancers appeared in leading roles for the first time this season.


BRANFORD SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRANFORD SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
544,000
252,000
Per share
.35
-
9mo net inc
1,600,000
926,000
Per share
1.03
-
The year-ago per share earnings are not available; the bank converted to stock ownership Nov.


BURRITT INTERFINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURRITT INTERFINANCIAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,152,000
1,001,000
Per share
.38
.33
9mo net inc
3,012,000
b2,453,000
Per share
1.00
.82
b-After an extraordinary loss of $182,000 represents a loss of $182,000, net of tax effect, for a prepayment penalty on a Federal Home Loan Bank advance.


PHILADELPHIA SUBURBAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILADELPHIA SUBURBAN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,901,000
25,353,000
Net inc
2,174,000
2,416,000
Share earns
.30
.33
9mo rev
77,147,000
72,676,000
Net inc
5,665,000
b6,029,000
Share earns
.78
.83


Recital: Sylvia Kahan
LEAD: SYLVIA KAHAN put together what is uncommon on New York recital stages: a well-organized, stimulating mix of piano music, played in like fashion.
Ms.
Kahan's recital Tuesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall included three song variations by William Byrd, Yehudi Wyner's Sonata for Piano from 1954 in a slightly revised version, Beethoven's Sonata in E-flat (Op.


Economic Spotlight Is on Bonn
LEAD: Wherever the Germans turn, someone is telling them what to do.


Fake Hunger Strikers Caught in Jersey Jail
LEAD: Four county jail inmates were moved to isolation after the sheriff said he found they were eating candy bars and sandwiches while maintaining they were on a hunger strike.


Editors' Note
LEAD: A Washington dispatch last Thursday about effects of the stock market plunge on campaign finances quoted an unidentified political strategist as saying a fund-raising dinner for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee in New York City Oct. 26 was ''a bomb.''


FIRST WYOMING BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST WYOMING BANCORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b843,000
c502,000
Per share
.18
.11
9mo net loss
b8,019,000
cd2,482,000
Per share
-
.53
b-Includes loan loss provisions of $320,000 for the quarter and $9,721,000 for the 9 months; the 9 months also includes a $2 million provision for possible adjustment of carrying value of real estate acquired through foreclosures.


Opting for a Fight
LEAD: In the bitter battle over Robert Bork, President Reagan insisted that those who defeated his nominee for the Supreme Court were driven by impermissible ideological motives.
Now the President's second choice of Douglas Ginsburg makes clear who's forcing ideology and politics into the selection of a ninth justice.


Stocks Fall In Seesaw Session
LEAD: The stock market continued to slump yesterday in another edgy session marked by wide price swings.


EA ENGINEERING, SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EA ENGINEERING, SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,193,900
3,514,100
Net inc
246,100
328,100
Share earns
.10
.20
Shares outst
2,568,400
1,608,400
Yr rev
13,602,000
11,686,400
Net inc
550,900
882,800
Share earns
.23
.53
Shares outst
2,387,600
1,679,900


EMPI INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMPI INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,749,082
2,817,651
Net inc
83,895
44,077
Share earns
.05
.02
9mo sales
7,859,600
7,688,279
Net inc
184,920
163,700
Share earns
.11
.09


In Jersey, Top Democrats Proclaim Victory, and So Do Republicans
LEAD: Governor Kean and leaders of the Legislature all found things to please them in the legislative elections Tuesday as Democrats kept control of the Senate and Republicans, despite losses in the midterm election, held on to control of the Assembly.


KANEB SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KANEB SERVICES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,751,000
25,036,000
Net loss
b9,866,000
c17,048,000
9mo rev
72,389,000
89,731,000
Net loss
b26,965,000
cd144,638,000
b-Includes charges of $716,000 and $1,216,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, from writedown of assets and other adjustments, and the 9-month also includes a gain of $2,800,000 from cumulative effect of accounting change.


CITIZEN SAVINGS NEW YORK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZEN SAVINGS NEW YORK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,494,000
c5,871,000
Per share
.75
-
9mo net inc
b3,848,000
c8,043,000
Per share
1.92
-
b-After tax credits of $362,000 for the quarter and $1,305,000 for the 9 months.


KIROV PRINCIPAL DANCER TO PREFROM IN 'GISELLE'
LEAD: Olga Likhovskaya, a principal dancer with the Kirov Ballet of Lenin-grad, will appear as guest artist in ''Giselle'' with the Warsaw Ballet to-night at the Lehman Center for the Performing Arts in the Bronx, Bed-ford Park Boulevard West and Goul-den Avenue.


Decision Delayed On Newmont
LEAD: The Delaware Supreme Court deferred judgment after hearing arguments over whether or not it should uphold a lower court ruling that effectively blocked T. Boone Pickens's attempt to take over the Newmont Mining Corporation.
Chief Justice Andrew Christie said a written ruling would be made ''within a reasonable time.


HOWARD SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOWARD SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
9,051,000
5,817,000
Per share
.64
.41
9mo net inc
25,328,000
17,106,000
Per share
1.78
1.24
All earnings restated for the acquisition of C &amp; C Insurance Associates under a pooling-of-interests in August 1987.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about efforts to enforce a New York City height requirement for the Cityspire tower misstated the record of Manhattan's Borough President, David N. Dinkins, on the issue.
He has taken no position.


Ecuadorean Debt Bought
LEAD: The World Wildlife Fund said today that it would buy up to $10 million in Ecuadorean debt from commercial banks and use the money to finance conservation projects in the South American country.


ON BEING JILTED BY THE DIVA
LEAD: Luciano Pavarotti and Piero Cappuccilli did it in Chicago, Jose Carerras and Ghena Dimitrova in Pittsburgh, Renato Bruson in New York, Ms.
Dimitrova and Luis Lima in San Francisco.
Major opera stars have been canceling their appearances this season with leading American companies at a distressing rate and are doing so even at the risk of ''burning their bridges in this country,'' according to company directors and officials.


Argonaut Buyout In Financing Snag
LEAD: Argonaut Group Inc. said that because of market turmoil, it is unclear when suitable financing can be arranged to complete its planned $620 million buyout led by the New York firm of Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen Ltd.
Argonaut's stock closed at $31.50 today, up 75 cents, in over-the-counter trading.


The 1987-88 Nets; New Season, Same Old Problems
LEAD: The turmoil the Nets have faced the last two seasons brings to mind the Aug. 12, 1985, news conference at which Dave Wohl was named the coach.


TOOTSIE ROLL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOOTSIE ROLL INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
44,336,000
39,379,000
Net inc
6,636,000
4,979,000
Share earns
.75
.56
9mo sales
88,759,000
85,364,000
Net inc
12,076,000
10,145,000
Share earns
1.37
1.15


I.B.M. Is Optimistic Despite Problems
LEAD: The chairman of the International Business Machines Corporation predicted today that ''we should return this company to operating margins in the range of 20 percent,'' the strongest indication yet that I.B.M. now believes its three-year slump is ending.


Exhibit of Art Against Apartheid Opens at U.N.
LEAD: New Yorkers will get their first chance to see part of a small but unusual art collection this week at the United Nations Headquarters.


State Department; LITTLE REPORT, WITH RIGHT SPIN, MAKES BIG SPLASH
LEAD: When the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research issued a slick, intricately documented study last August on Soviet disinformation techniques, hardly anybody in Washington took notice.
It bore the title, ''Soviet Influence Activities: A Report on Active Measures and Propaganda, 1986-87.


CLC OF AMERICA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLC OF AMERICA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
23,775,000
18,640,000
Net inc
b531,000
c3,013,000
Share earns
.13
-
9mo rev
65,217,000
53,954,000
Net inc
b789,000
c7,767,000
Share earns
.20
-


ADVO-SYSTEM reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVO-SYSTEM (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
140,450,000
115,462,000
Net loss
1,172,000
48,026,000
Yr rev
520,501,000
458,425,000
Net inc
b8,717,000
c52,310,000
Share earns
.51
-
b-Includes a tax loss carryforward of $1,055,000.


CBS Asks Advice on Cronkite Show on Apartheid
LEAD: CBS News, concerned that a secretly taped Walter Cronkite documentary about apartheid in South Africa might jeopardize the organization's news bureau there, has taken the unusual step of getting the opinion of an independent South African lawyer before approving the program for broadcast.


OCEANEERING INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OCEANEERING INTERNATIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
34,577,000
28,005,000
Net inc
303,000
b1,633,000
Share earns
.04
-
6mo rev
64,515,000
60,785,000
Net loss
1,065,000
2,010,000
b-Net loss


Rams Suspend Irvin
LEAD: The Los Angeles Rams have suspended the All-Pro cornerback LeRoy Irvin for conduct detrimental to the team.
He will not play Sunday when the Rams meet the New Orleans Saints, but Coach John Robinson said Irvin's status would be re-evaluated after he meets with the eight-year veteran next Monday.
Irvin, who has been complaining about his contract since early in training camp, called in sick with the flu last Thursday and the Rams responded by placing him on the inactive list and cleaning out his locker.


Washington Talk: Briefing; An Actor on the Hill
LEAD: E. G. Marshall, the actor, had some advice this week for the top negotiators from the White House and Congress who are struggling to reach a compromise on a deficit-reducing package.


BROOKFIELD FEDERAL BANK FOR SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROOKFIELD FEDERAL BANK FOR SAVINGS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
518,000
1,069,000
Per share
1.08
2.22
9mo net inc
1,669,000
2,362,000
Per share
3.47
4.91


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 5, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-14


30 Are Indicted in Miami in Drug Smuggling
LEAD: After a three-year investigation, Federal agents today arrested more than a dozen people accused of belonging to a sophisticated ring smuggling drugs in Colombia, the Bahamas and Florida.


Election Panel Officials in Haiti Flee New Violence in the Capital
LEAD: Several members of the Haitian electoral commission were in hiding today after a second night of arson attacks against election officials.


Ancient Boats Still Ply a Tense Gulf
LEAD: Visibility in the shipping lanes of the Persian Gulf was dropping in the amber dusk.
Suddenly, a young, twangy American voice came over the marine radio: ''Unidentified dhow one mile off my port bow, this is a U.S.
Navy warship.
State your intentions.'' The admonition was repeated once, then again, and each time the sailor's voice grew more insistent.


U.S. AGENCY REOPENS INQUIRY INTO MERCEDES ACCELERATION
LEAD: The National Highway Traffic Safety Ad-ministration, citing numerous com-plaints, has reopened its investigation of problems with sudden acceleration in 35,000 late-model Mercedes cars.


Yields Are Mainly Off
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market mutual funds were down for the week ended yesterday, while bank money market accounts remained unchanged.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  THE TOMMYKNOCKERS. By Stephen King. 558 pages. Putnam. $27.95.


ALLEN ORGAN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEN ORGAN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,424,586
5,673,418
Net inc
1,108,839
977,642
Share earns
.78
.68
6mo sales
17,822,556
16,849,578
Net inc
2,905,676
2,539,010
Share earns
2.03
1.77


Europe Jobless Rate Up
LEAD: The jobless rate for nine member states of the European Community, excluding Spain, Portugal and Greece, rose to 10.9 percent in September, from 10.8 percent in August, the community's statistical office said today.
The figures are seasonally unadjusted.
The total number of job seekers for the nine countries rose to 12.62 million, from 12.53 million.


GROW GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROW GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
136,439,000
122,510,000
Net inc
809,000
b2,101,000
Share earns
.05
.17
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $1,012,000.
The company attributed the decrease in earnings primarily to the integration of operations acquired from Georgia-Pacific Corp.


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS (GEORGIA) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS (GEORGIA)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
411,000
418,000
Per share
.43
.45
6mo net inc
852,000
830,000
Per share
.88
.89


The Stage: 'Conrack,' a Musical
LEAD: ''CONRACK,'' a new musical based on Pat Conroy's novel ''The River Is Wide,'' marks a striking change of pace for the AMAS Repertory Theater.


PHOENIX RE CORP reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHOENIX RE CORP
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,692,609
7,226,184
Net inc
1,418,964
552,594
Share earns
.35
-
9mo rev
29,653,396
7,226,184
Net inc
b3,801,670
552,594
Share earns
1.18
-
b-After a realized investment gain of $20,386.


2 Are Slain as a Gang Opens Fire In a Chinatown Gambling Parlor
LEAD: Two men, including the president of a Chinatown community association, were killed early yesterday when a group of 7 to 10 men burst into a basement gambling parlor and sprayed the room with gunfire, the police said.


Canada Captures Nations' Cup
LEAD: Lisa Carlsen of Canada guiding Kahlua over the hurdles in the international jumping competition last night at the National Horse Show at Madison Square Garden.
Page B16. (NYT/Ruby Washington)


Indian Museum Move
LEAD: To the Editor:


OMNICOM GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OMNICOM GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
185,550,000
178,537,000
Net inc
2,893,000
b29,804,000
Share earns
.12
-
9mo rev
563,019,000
541,832,000
Net inc
19,579,000
b10,677,000
Share earns
.80
-


McCray Reaches Terms
LEAD: Rodney McCray, the 6-foot-8-inch small member of the Houston Rockets' starting front line, reached agreement with the team yesterday on a six-year contract for an undisclosed amount of money.
McCray, who led the Rockets in assists, field-goal percentage and free-throw percentage last season while complementing the Twin Towers - Ralph Sampson and Akeem Olajuwon -said that contract negotiations picked up speed after he changed agents, replacing Howard Slusher with David Falk.


CHILI'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHILI'S INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
52,612,000
41,565,000
Net inc
2,343,000
1,604,000
Share earns
.39
.28
Year-ago results are restated.


SWEET HONEY IN ROCK AT CARNEGIE HALL FRIDAY
LEAD: Sweet Honey in the Rock, a five-woman group that specialized in the a cappella singing of black spirituals and political protest songs, is to per-form at Carnegie Hall on Friday at 8 P.M.


FIRSTFED AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRSTFED AMERICA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,853,000
1,367,000
Per share
.73
-
Yr net inc
10,462,000
5,229,000
Per share
2.67
-
The year-ago per share earnings not available; the company converted to stock ownership on Dec.


Marathon Completed
LEAD: Bob Wieland of Arcadia, Calif., who lost his legs in Vietnam, completed the New York City Marathon yesterday and lowered his 1986 time for the event from 98 hours 48 minutes 17 seconds to just over 81 hours.


MIDWEST FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDWEST FINANCIAL GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,190,937
2,977,499
Per share
.93
.66
9mo net inc
11,225,002
8,445,573
Per share
2.48
1.86


Pennzoil Up Again; Texaco Off a Bit
LEAD: The Pennzoil Company's stock price continued to soar yesterday, while Texaco Inc.'s flattened out.


ST PAUL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ST PAUL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
5,233,000
4,730,000
Per share
.44
-
9mo net inc
13,837,000
14,743,000
The company went public May 15.


CITY SAVINGS BANK OF MERIEN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITY SAVINGS BANK OF MERIEN (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
510,192
328,428
Per share
.34
-
9mo net inc
1,489,831
741,136
Per share
1.00
-
The year-ago per share earnings are not available; the bank went public Sept.


SUPRADUR COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUPRADUR COMPANIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,652,000
6,422,000
Net inc
516,000
377,000
Share earns
.49
.36
9mo sales
23,490,000
18,647,000
Net inc
1,384,000
1,362,000
Share earns
1.32
1.30


A Baby Bell Non-Phone Profit
LEAD: In the three years since the seven regional telephone holding companies became independent from the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, they have been seeking to become more than just providers of local phone service.


MEESE COMPLETES TESTIMONY TO JURY
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d concluded his grand jury testimony today in the criminal investigation of his involvement with the Wedtech Corporation, and his attorneys predicted he would be exonerated.


VHC LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VHC LTD
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,637,557
4,807,818
Net inc
b1,425,152
c258,873
Share earns
.67
.12
9mo rev
18,592,030
13,959,276
Net inc
b2,458,190
c784,178
Share earns
1.15
.37
b-After an extraordinary gain of $510,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary credit of $850,000 for the 9 months.


SOUTHHOLD SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHHOLD SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,751,000
2,094,000
Per share
.50
-
9mo net inc
6,993,000
5,577,000
The remaining per share earnings are not available, bank converted to stock ownership on April 28, 1987.


GENZYME CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENZYME CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,619,000
3,231,000
Net inc
134,000
56,000
Share earns
.01
.01
9mo rev
13,031,000
9,180,000
Net inc
266,000
b206,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Going Out Guide
LEAD:  Latin Culture Explored


GULF RESOURCES &amp; CHEMICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GULF RESOURCES &amp; CHEMICAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
30,391,000
28,533,000
Net inc
1,157,000
b995,000
Share earns
.11
-
9mo rev
132,883,000
94,292,000
Net inc
38,518,000
b963,000
Share earns
3.87
-


Abused Girl Has Died, Hospital Says
LEAD: Elizabeth Steinberg, the 6-year-old Manhattan girl whose adoptive parents have been charged with trying to kill her, was declared brain dead yesterday but remained on life support systems last night.


ANTIQUE TEXTILES AT COOPER-HEWITT
LEAD: WE wear them, we decorate with them but ''no one knows precisely when printed fabrics were first done,'' said Gillian Moss, associate curator of textiles at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, who has organized a show called ''Color by the Yard: Printed Fabric, 1760-1860.''


MAYFAIR INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAYFAIR INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,440,352
6,387,870
Net inc
b1,380,616
505,764
Share earns
.36
.17
Shares outst
3,840,369
2,925,294
9mo sales
23,110,149
18,018,660
Net inc
b3,623,976
1,415,807
Share earns
.94
.48
Shares outst
3,839,682
2,925,294


GREAT AMERICAN BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT AMERICAN BANCORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
60,000
b3,012,000
Per share
.03
-
9mo net inc
1,493,000
b3,821,000
Per share
.69
-
b-Net loss


Raphael Soyer, Social Realist Artist, is Dead at 87
LEAD: Raphael Soyer, an artist whose gently rendered portraits of New York artists, dancers and the city's lonely and dispossessed won him fame that lasted from the 1930's to the present, died of cancer yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old.


Brain Graft on Elderly Tested
LEAD: Researchers operated today on the first elderly person to undergo an experimental brain graft technique against Parkinson's disease.
The operation was the first of six intended to see whether the new technique, already tried on younger patients, could help older victims of the disease.


MEDICAL GRAPHICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDICAL GRAPHICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,285,573
2,578,184
Net loss
299,329
b129,199
Share earns
-
.08
9mo sales
6,786,897
6,956,376
Net loss
297,365
b263,684
Share earns
-
.16
b-Net income


OCCUPATIONAL-URGENT CARE HEALTH SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OCCUPATIONAL-URGENT CARE HEALTH SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,697,728
446,528
Net inc
b715,405
c30,478
Share earns
.16
-
9mo rev
4,338,790
612,631
Net inc
b1,434,927
c251,711
Share earns
.32
-


Advertising; Lorillard to Remain At Saatchi &amp; Saatchi
LEAD: After a three-month search, Lorillard Inc. has decided to keep the creative work for its True cigarettes at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton.
The company does its own media work in-house.


Vehicle Sales Up 10.8% Despite Wall St. Plunge
LEAD: Domestic auto makers today reported strong sales for the last 10 days of October.
Buyers appeared unaffected by the stock market's 508-point plunge on Oct. 19 and the subsequent turmoil.


Baseball Notebook; It's No Off Season on a Wide Variety of Fronts
LEAD: Jack Morris is trying again, but Dale Murphy decided not to try free agency at all.
Benito Santiago won, as expected, but the San Francisco Giants lost, which was not expected.


Georgia Power To Appeal Ruling
LEAD: The Southern Company said its Georgia Power Company unit would appeal a regulatory agency's decision to disallow a portion of its investment in Unit 1 of the Vogtle nuclear power plant.
The Georgia Public Service Commission denied the utility's request to reconsider its decision to disallow $951 million of investment in the plant.


U.S. Proposes to Fine Shipbuilder
LEAD: Federal officials today proposed fines totaling $4.2 million against the Bath Iron Works for conditions that safety inspectors said endangered the thousands of workers at the shipyard.
The conditions included exposure to asbestos and to raw sewage, the inspectors said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Hadco Corp. has signed a $10 million revolving credit agreement with the Bank of Boston Corp.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 5, 1987
LEAD: THE MARKETS  The stock market continued to slump in another session marked by wide price swings.
Selling by institutions helped drag down share prices, analysts said, but there were indications that some stability may be returning.
The Dow Jones industrial average tumbled more than 50 points early in the day, then rose as much as 17 points above Tuesday's close, but ended down 18.24 points, or 0.93 percent, at 1,945.29.


UNITED SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
905,000
631,000
Per share
.44
-
6mo net inc
1,793,000
1,378,000
Per share
.88
-
The company converted to a stock organization during the fourth quarter of fiscal 1987.


BEVERLY SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEVERLY SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b441,000
c389,000
Per share
.15
-
9mo net inc
b1,288,000
c992,000
Per share
.44
-
b-After tax credits of $55,000 for the quarter and $166,000 for the 9 months.


OEA INC reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OEA INC (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,841,142
12,550,725
Net inc
1,595,791
1,576,913
Share earns
.48
.48
Yr sales
41,865,900
41,023,200
Net inc
5,362,500
5,340,900
Share earns
1.61
1.61


Suffolk County's Evolution
LEAD: The rare election of a Democrat, Patrick Halpin, as Suffolk County Executive, adds weight to the party's triumphs in Tuesday's election.
Governor Cuomo, who campaigned for Mr.
Halpin, was quick to claim credit.
But it's also important to heed the county's changing character.


Swapo Denies Pretoria Fight
LEAD: The South-West Africa People's Organization said today that its guerrillas were not involved in a battle in Angola in which South Africa reported its forces suffered 12 fatalities and killed 150 guerrillas.
The South African military command initially announced that its troops had overrun two Swapo bases in southern Angola and killed 150 guerrillas, and later released news of casualties.


BAMBERGER POLYMERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAMBERGER POLYMERS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
33,882,000
23,385,000
Net inc
721,000
401,000
Share earns
.27
.21
Shares outst
2,625,000
1,875,000
9mo sales
93,371,000
74,555,000
Net inc
2,030,000
1,275,000
Share earns
.82
.68
Shares outst
2,488,000
1,875,000


House Calls for Voiding Of a Biaggi Conviction
LEAD: The House of Representatives yesterday asked a Federal judge in Brooklyn to set aside, on constitutional grounds, Representative Mario Biaggi's conviction for unlawfully traveling across state lines to accept an illegal gratuity.


Corrections
LEAD: A Paris dispatch on Friday about a device used in French taxis to deter muggers misstated the electric charge involved.
It is 52,000 volts of current at a very low amperage -0.02 amperes - not at low tension.


CALPROP CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALPROP CORPORATION (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
24,119,193
6,708,541
Net inc
1,418,401
322,794
Share earns
.41
.10
9mo rev
41,312,608
24,555,285
Net inc
1,870,407
1,583,228
Share earns
.54
.55
Shares outst
3,469,000
2,864,464


Europe Check on Japan
LEAD: The European Community will continue to monitor Japanese exports for violations of American trade sanctions until Washington lifts all punitive tariffs, a community official said today.
The statement came as President Reagan announced that some sanctions against the Japanese were being lifted.


CFS FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CFS FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
16,000
1,300,000
Per share
-
.42


AMERICAN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (DUVAL COUNTY) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (DUVAL COUNTY)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
437,960
285,818
Per share
.46
-
9mo net inc
1,195,962
538,071
Per share
1.26
-
The year-ago per share earnings are not available; the bank converted to stock form of ownership from mutual form in January 1987.


Talking Deals; Eurotunnel's Stock Offering
LEAD: THE company managing the ambitious English Channel tunnel project that will link France and Britain signed an $8.75 billion loan package yesterday that was put together by a consortium of 198 banks.


Market Place; Few Earnings Estimates Cut
LEAD: THERE have not been many downward revisions by analysts for 1988 corporate earnings in the wake of the stock market's Oct. 19 debacle, according to companies that gather such information.


Voting Produces Strong Evidence Of Importance of Race in Politics
LEAD: The results of the 1987 state and local elections offer powerful evidence of the continuing importance of race in American politics.


GOODY PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOODY PRODUCTS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
54,907,000
45,811,000
Net inc
3,727,000
c2,626,000
Share earns
.57
.41
9mo sales
161,155,000
130,863,000
Net inc
b11,346,000
c8,332,000
Share earns
1.75
1.30


WURLITZER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WURLITZER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,104,000
10,293,000
Net loss
222,000
911,000
6mo sales
19,814,000
18,978,000
Net loss
1,149,000
2,491,000


BIG GAIN FOR WOMEN POSTED IN THE ELECTION
LEAD: The Women's Campaign Fund said yesterday that politicians who are women posted major gains in Tues-day's elections, particularly in may-oral contests.


Weinberger Insisted His Plans Be Secret, A High Official Says
LEAD: The capital has been caught in an odd position this week over the departure of Caspar W. Weinberger, the Secretary of Defense.


NEAR MISS IS TIED TO AIR CONTROLLER
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration said yesterday that an apparent error by an air traffic controller caused an incident in Chicago last week in which a United Airlines jet missed a commuter plane by a distance estimated by the United crew at 50 to 75 feet.


Advertising; Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond Gets Chicken by George
LEAD: Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond has become agency for Chicken by George, a new company founded in Louisville, Ky., by Phyllis George and her husband, John Y. Brown, the former Governor of Kentucky.


MINNTECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MINNTECH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,673,000
2,954,000
Net loss
432,000
b60,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
5,459,000
5,350,000
Net loss
666,000
b181,000
Share earns
-
.13
b-Net income and includes tax credits of $18,000 and $72,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


House Backs a Lie Detector Ban
LEAD: The House voted 254 to 158 tonight for a bill to impose a sweeping ban on the use of lie detector tests by most private employers.


Gang Wars At Center Ice
LEAD: WATCHING two National Hockey League players drop their gloves, skate in small circles like partners at a square dance, then engage in a pushing, grappling and punching match - featuring a clumsy attempt to undress one another - is so absurd that sometimes it is actually funny.
That is the most benign aspect of a hockey fight.


N.A.M. Called Hopeful on '88
LEAD: American manufacturers are still confident about economic prospects for next year despite the stock market plunge, Jerry Jasinowski, chief economist of the National Association of Manufacturers, said today.


LAUREN'S FULL TAFFETAS
LEAD: WITH perfect pitch, Ralph Lauren showed a low-key collection that should will women to keep cool but still acknowledge the current fashion rhythm.
Oscar de la Renta unleashed a whirlwind of ruffles and devastating black dresses in a Spanish-inspired collection, and Arnold Scaasi continued his longtime love affair with flowers and poufs.


French Honor Levesque
LEAD: Members of the French National Assembly stood to observe a minute of silence today in honor of the Rene Levesque, the Quebec nationalist who died in Montreal Sunday.
Speaker Jacques Chaban-Delmas will represent France at Mr.
Levesque's state funeral on Thursday.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bank One, Lexington, an affiliate of the Banc One Corp., Columbus, Ohio, elected William R. Guthrie president and chief executive.


In Texas, Contempt by Court
LEAD: By refusing to hear the $10 billion dispute between Texaco and Pennzoil, the Texas Supreme Court offends federalism and fairness.
Contempt of court is one thing; this refusal amounts to a contempt by a court.


INDIANA BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDIANA BANCSHARES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
353,000
298,000
Per share
.73
.98
Shares outst
483,215
316,414
9mo net inc
872,000
748,000
Per share
2.37
2.41


HAMILTON OIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAMILTON OIL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
49,032,000
40,320,000
Net inc
2,228,000
b3,101,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
229,870,000
201,196,000
Net inc
16,085,000
5,911,000
Share earns
.57
.17


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (ALABAMA) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (ALABAMA)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b674,000
c435,000
Per share
.61
-
Yr net inc
b2,741,000
c2,646,000
Per share
2.47
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $144,000 for the both periods.


N.F.L. Settles Coliseum Suit
LEAD: The Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum Commission received $19.6 million from the National Football League today as settlement of an antitrust suit filed when the N.F.L. attempted to block the Raiders' move from Oakland.


Chess Game Adjourned
LEAD: The ninth game of the world chess championship was adjourned today with the champion, Gary Kasparov, sealing his 43d move.


CCC INFORMATION SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CCC INFORMATION SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,180,000
3,631,000
Net inc
943,000
586,000
Share earns
.10
.08
Shares outst
9,278,000
7,532,000
9mo rev
16,955,000
9,591,000
Net inc
2,476,000
1,528,000
Share earns
.30
.20
Shares outst
8,334,000
7,496,000


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.08
6.06
6.55
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.61
5.25
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.08
6.08
5.36
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.69
8.74
7.07
30-YR. TREAS.


Hartford's New Mayor Says Her First Goal Is to Reduce Street Crime
LEAD: Mayor-elect Carrie Saxon Perry, the first black woman to head a major Northeastern city, said today that her first goal would be to try to defuse youth gangs and reduce shooting incidents on the streets of Hartford.


DOMINION RESOURCES INC reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOMINION RESOURCES INC (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,283,000,000
2,942,000,000
Net inc
435,900,000
372,100,000
Share earns
4.62
4.05


PENN SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENN SAVINGS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,318,000
1,034,000
Per share
.62
-
9mo net inc
3,648,000
2,979,000
Per share
1.70
-
The company went public Aug. 15, 1986.


CONCEPT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONCEPT INC (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,144,000
8,557,000
Net inc
1,114,000
843,000
Share earns
.19
.14
Yr sales
37,358,000
30,132,000
Net inc
3,278,000
2,261,000
Share earns
.56
.38


Publishing: Author Rebuffed by Court
LEAD: A State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan has upheld Random House in its suit to recover the $150,000 it had advanced to Leo Damore for a book to be titled ''Senatorial Privilege: The Chappaquiddick Deception.''


BMC INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BMC INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
34,369,000
30,998,000
Net inc
980,000
b167,000
Share earns
.18
-
9mo sales
104,433,000
90,337,000
Net inc
1,594,000
b260,000
Share earns
.30
-
b


BAY STATE GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAY STATE GAS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
40,875,000
32,996,000
Net loss
b3,542,000
2,381,000
Yr rev
290,910,000
288,233,000
Net inc
14,854,000
14,111,000
Share earns
2.42
2.23
b-Includes a non-recurring after-tax charge of $523,000 from the write-off of call premiums associated with an economic refunding of long-term debt.


Transportation Dept. Starts Random Worker Drug Tests
LEAD: The Department of Transportation disclosed today that it had begun random drug testing of its employees in safety-related jobs.


Corrections
LEAD: A Moscow dispatch on Oct. 22 about the removal of Geidar A. Aliyev from the Communist Party Politburo omitted one name from a list of currentPolitburo members appointed before Mikhail S. Gorbachev came to power.


POE &amp; ASSOCIATES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POE &amp; ASSOCIATES INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,918,000
8,573,000
Net inc
b40,000
1,179,000
Share earns
.01
.30
9mo rev
24,068,000
24,822,000
Net inc
b1,903,000
3,652,000
Share earns
.51
.84
Shares outst
3,756,000
4,247,000


UDC-UNIVERSAL DEVELOPMENT LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UDC-UNIVERSAL DEVELOPMENT LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
57,534,509
60,662,063
Net inc
8,002,940
9,865,467
Share earns
.74
.92
Shares outst
10,746,851
10,655,110
9mo rev
153,255,607
140,085,041
Net inc
20,497,066
20,113,440
Share earns
1.89
1.96
Shares outst
10,723,573
10,138,173


Belfast Journal; Periwigs and Robes, but Not a Jury of Their Peers
LEAD: Beyond the barbed wire fence surrounding Crumlin Road Criminal Court, the Honorable Robert Babington was presiding in Courtroom 4 as a periwigged arbiter of Northern Irish justice.
It is a system in which individual jurists weigh the fate of accused terrorists by sitting as judge and jury.


BANISTER CONTINENTAL LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANISTER CONTINENTAL LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
73,527,000
58,872,000
Net inc
1,090,000
b13,551,000
Share earns
.18
2.69
9mo rev
124,961,000
94,406,000
Net inc
1,825,000
b13,920,000
Share earns
.34
2.76


Platinum and Oil Plunge Amid Fears of Inaction
LEAD: Platinum futures prices plunged the limit allowed for daily trading yesterday on expectations of an economic slowdown.


CITIZENS BANK (NORTH CAROINA) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS BANK (NORTH CAROINA)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
85,659
69,540
Per share
.09
.07
9mo net inc
397,315
300,872
Per share
.43
.41


Landscapes That Recall Rural Simplicity
LEAD: THE landscape architect Michael Van Valkenburgh recalls first fantasizing about the land as a boy when he brought the cows home from pasture in the Catskills to his family's modest dairy farm in Lexington, N.Y.
Today, his work retains what he sees as ''the deliberate simplicity of that remembered agrarian landscape,'' as in the way a plantation of trees is angled into the hillside.


Wide Fraud Is Found Among Illegal Aliens Who Seek Amnesty
LEAD: Immigration officials said today that they had detected fraud in thousands of the applications for legal status filed by illegal aliens who said they had worked in the United States as farm laborers.


Washington Talk: Briefing; New Jersey Fame
LEAD: A new phrase has entered the Washington lexicon: ''Doing a New Jersey.''


CORNERSTONE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORNERSTONE FINANCIAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
528,000
506,000
Per share
.27
.37
Shares outst
1,971,000
1,369,000
9mo net inc
1,630,000
1,572,000
Per share
.85
1.15
Shares outst
1,909,000
1,365,000


Israel's Arab-Jewish Percentage Is Stable
LEAD: To the Editor:


Restoring Baronial Splendor in Pittsburgh
LEAD: ''I WANT to put back as much as possible - the smells, the sounds, the flowers,'' said Thierry Despont, the architect who is restoring Clayton, home of the coke and steel baron Henry Clay Frick. ''I want the telephone to ring.''


Bridge: League Begins a Hot Line, Not for Questions on Play
LEAD: A hot line to solve the problems of bridge players might be expected to be popular, especially if it is an 800 number.


Comegys Traded To Nets
LEAD: In an effort to strengthen their injury-riddled front line, the Nets obtained Dallas Comegys from the Atlanta Hawks yesterday for a second-round draft choice in 1989 or 1990, depending on where the Nets finish.


Kerkorian Bid Opposed in Poll
LEAD: An overwhelming majority of Pan American World Airways pilots in New York are opposed to having the pilots union pursue a proposal made by Kirk Kerkorian to take over the airline, a union official said yesterday.
The New York base accounts for about half of the carrier's pilots, and the official said sentiment was running 20 to 1 against the proposal in a poll of the pilots.


Program Trading Getting a Rebirth
LEAD: After dropping off sharply because of New York Stock Exchange restrictions, program trading is on the rise again.
That is partly because the Big Board lifted some of its curbs, but also because program traders have improvised to make up for the continued ban on automatic execution of stocks through the exchange's computers.


Comdisco Ends Arbitrage Unit
LEAD: Comdisco Inc., a computer sales and leasing company based in Rosemont, Ill., said yesterday that it had decided to discontinue its risk arbitrage business because of heavy demands from stockholders and big institutional investors.


FIRST WORLD CHEESE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST WORLD CHEESE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,059,957
5,944,080
Net inc
b133,838
40,159
Share earns
.05
.02
9mo sales
14,993,716
11,702,688
Net inc
b345,097
117,477
Share earns
.12
.06
b-Includes tax credits of $53,400 for the quarter and $86,400 for the 9 months.


Rauschenberg Painting Sets Record
LEAD: Robert Rauschenberg's ''Backwash,'' an abstract study of paint and lettering from 1959, was sold last night for $814,000, a record price at auction for the artist that almost doubled the previous high.
The painting was bought by an unidentified collector in a sale at Sotheby's that totaled $17.7 million, the second highest total ever for an auction of contemporary art.


Reagan Appoints Members of Panel Studying the Market Turmoil
LEAD: President Reagan meeting yesterday at the White House with Nicholas F. Brady, in front of fireplace, head of the task force on market volatility; Robert Glauber, left, who was appointed executive director, and the four new members.
Next to Mr.
Glauber was Robert G. Kirby, and at right, from foreground, were John R.


LEXINGTON SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEXINGTON SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
667,000
686,000
Per share
.29
-
9mo net inc
1,742,000
1,303,000
Per share
.76
-
The company converted to public form of ownership in December 1986.


SOVIET WON'T PUSH POLICY ON ALLIES, GORBACHEV SAYS
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev, calling for a ''more sophisticated culture of mutual relations'' among Communist countries, said today that the Soviet Union favored a more flexible approach in its relations with its allies.


DANCE: 'ELENA'S ARIA'
LEAD: ANNE TERESA DE KEERSMAEKER, the 27-year-old Belgian choreographer who made more than a splash last year with her turgid emotional and minimalist-tinged choreography, returned last night to the Brooklyn Aacademy of Music's Next Wave Festival.


HOUSTON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOUSTON INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,135,680,000
1,101,220,000
Net inc
203,676,000
184,845,000
Share earns
1.75
1.65
Shares outst
116,717,000
112,274,000
9mo rev
2,811,945,000
2,757,399,000
Net inc
361,141,000
335,712,000
Share earns
3.11
3.03
Shares outst
116,004,000
110,940,000


BUFFETS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUFFETS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,608,000
7,002,000
Net inc
815,000
258,000
Share earns
.13
.04
9mo sales
36,090,000
19,823,000
Net inc
2,338,000
1,027,000
Share earns
.38
.18


TYSON FOODS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TYSON FOODS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Sales
502,498,000
459,989,000
Net inc
18,634,000
14,603,000
Share earns
.29
.23
Yr sales
1,785,969,000
1,503,719,000
Net inc
67,764,000
50,289,000
Share earns
1.06
.79


U.S. Regrets Death of Fisherman in Gulf
LEAD: The State Department expressed regret today that an Indian fisherman was killed when a United States Navy frigate opened fire on three Arab fishing boats in the Persian Gulf.


Avco Financial
LEAD: Avco Financial Services is offering $100 million of noncallable 9 3/8 percent notes due in 1992 at a price of 99 5/8, to yield 9.47 percent, through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The five-year notes are rated A-3 by Moody's and A by S.&amp;P. and were offered to yield 1.2 percentage points more than Treasury notes of similar maturity.


BDM INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BDM INTERNATIONAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
75,138,000
89,535,000
Net inc
4,512,000
3,050,000
Share earns
.38
.26
9mo rev
235,459,000
240,013,000
Net inc
14,215,000
9,401,000
Share earns
1.19
.85


Chicago Journal; U.S. Squares Off Against Tough Gang
LEAD: Each day a group of sullen young men, ''soldiers'' in the parlance of the El Rukns gang, file into the courtroom here, filling a back bench and watching with hard stares as the Government works to make its case against four of their leaders.


U.S. ARMY PRIVATE FLIES TO WEST, 7 MONTHS AFTER DEFECTION TO SOVIET
LEAD: A United States Army private who defected to the Soviet Union seven months ago returned to the West today and said he would surrender to the American authorities.


Court Guardian Seeks New Rules For Whitehead
LEAD: The court-appointed guardian of 19-month-old Baby M has urged the New Jersey Supreme Court to keep Mary Beth Whitehead away from the child for longer than the five years she recommended earlier.


FIRST FEDERAL OF THE CAROLINAS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL OF THE CAROLINAS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
837,000
839,000
Per share
.50
.84
Shares outst
1,683,000
810,000
Yr net inc
3,618,000
3,039,000
Per share
2.86
3.11
Shares outst
1,147,000
803,000


CROSS &amp; TRECKER CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROSS &amp; TRECKER CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
96,922,000
105,531,000
Net loss
16,579,000
d255,000
Yr rev
422,220,000
399,301,000
Net loss
b24,450,000
cd189,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Includes a loss of $4,385,000 from discontinued operations.


Rising Nuclear Trade Stirs Fear of Terrorism
LEAD: The risk that terrorists will obtain commercial nuclear materials as they are transported between nations is likely to increase in coming years, according to a review of security measures conducted by the Pentagon.


Defense Hints at Fake Story By a Howard Beach Witness
LEAD: A defense lawyer suggested yesterday that before a motorist returned to the scene where his car had killed a black man in Howard Beach, Queens, the motorist and his father concocted a phony story about the accident.


SECURITY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SECURITY BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,879,000
4,431,000
Per share
.64
.58
9mo net inc
13,900,000
12,976,000
Per share
1.82
1.69
The year-ago figures are restated.


GREAT SOUTHERN FEDERAL SAVNGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT SOUTHERN FEDERAL SAVNGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
376,000
345,000
Per share
.21
.19
Yr net inc
1,206,000
996,000
Per share
.66
.54


NICARAGUANS HOPE FOR PEACE STEPS
LEAD: Political leaders and many ordinary Nicaraguans are hoping that major announcements expected Thursday will begin to change the course of their country's violent history.


AMERICAN STANDARD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN STANDARD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
840,100,000
767,600,000
Net inc
31,200,000
c29,900,000
Share earns
.98
.83
Shares outst
31,708,000
36,091,000
9mo sales
2,497,900,000
2,228,000,000
Net inc
b85,800,000
c155,500,000
Share earns
2.68
4.15
Shares outst
32,038,000
37,424,000


CITADEL HOLDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITADEL HOLDING CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
8,849,000
7,081,000
Share earns
2.55
2.05
9mo net inc
b19,410,000
24,237,000
Share earns
5.60
7.04
b-Includes a $4.5 million write-off of the FSLIC secondary reserve, a $6 million payment to Great Western Financial Corp.


TNP ENTERPRIESES INC reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TNP ENTERPRIESES INC (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
359,015,602
371,890,950
Net inc
18,887,225
16,557,856
Share earns
2.30
2.04
Shares outst
7,553,733
7,358,600


Manufacturers In Mexico Deal
LEAD: The Manufacturers Hanover Corporation said yesterday that it had completed a debt-for-equity deal in which $19.8 million in loans to Mexico had been converted into a stake in two Mexican hotel holding companies.


Businessman Opposes Roth
LEAD: Sam Beard, a Democrat who has been promoting his Senate campaign platform for nearly a year, officially declared his candidacy today for the seat held by William V. Roth Jr.
Mr.
Beard, a wealthy 48-year-old businessman, said the key issues for 1988 would be the creation of jobs and economic growth, and he attributed the declining economy to the a tax-cutting bill sponsored by Mr.


Calendar: Walk in Queens, Amish Crafts
LEAD:  Queens Walking Tour  Queens Historical Society, 143-35 37th Avenue, Flushing; 718-939-0647.


Esposito on the Defensive
LEAD: Patience, not one of Phil Esposito's more readily apparent virtues, was nonetheless his explanation for his most recent trade.
In a move he said would further his design for a young, mobile defense, the general manager of the Rangers yesterday traded Willie Huber and Larry Melnyk to the Vancouver Canucks for Michel


Hanging A Vivid Jungle
LEAD: MOST of the jungle of plants and hanging baskets filling the abundant number of east windows in my house are foliage plants: true ferns, various asparagus ferns (which aren't ferns at all, but are close kin to the tasty edible kind) and spider plants.


Advertising; Ladies' Home Journal Promotes Its Editor
LEAD: Myrna Blyth, the editor in chief of The Ladies' Home Journal, has been promoted to publishing director.
The move means that Ms.
Blyth, 47, will continue as the chief of editorial and will also have the publisher, Roert D. Thomas, reporting to her, while she reports to James A. Autry, president of the Meredith Corporation's Magazine Group.


Concert: New Works By Musical Elements
LEAD: ROBERT BEASER and Daniel Asia, who run the new-music group Musical Elements, set about to have fun Tuesday night at the 92d Street Y, and by and large they - and those members of the audience willing to unburden themselves of modernist solemnities - did, too.


G&amp;K SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*G&amp;K SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
21,512,000
19,447,000
Net inc
1,778,000
1,277,000
Share earns
.22
.18
Shares outst
8,084,000
6,964,000
Share earnings and shares outstanding reflect a 3-for-2 stock split paid September.


DOTRONIX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOTRONIX INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,182,256
3,921,394
Net inc
698,772
b419,628
Share earns
.25
.19
b-Includes a tax credit of $35,000.


For Shoppers, More Doubts
LEAD: The stock market plunge has prompted nearly one-third of Americans to postpone, cancel or cut spending on such things as vacations, houses and cars, according to a poll published today.


A DANCE ABOUT LIVING WITH AIDS IS PLANNED
LEAD: ''Daily Living'', a dance about liv-ing with AIDS, will be performed by Loren MacDougal on a program of solo pieces on Friday and Saturday at the Triplex at Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street.
The dance was choreographed by Lee Connor, who died of AIDS in September.


Reagan Lifts Some Of Japan Sanctions
LEAD: President Reagan today announced a further partial lifting of trade sanctions against Japan.
They were imposed last April after Japan failed to comply with a 1986 agreement on computer memory chips.


Northrop Faulted on MX Testing
LEAD: An Air Force advisory board accused the Northrop Corporation today of improperly testing components of the MX missile's guidance system but said the system nonetheless ''appears to be remarkably accurate.''


Gorbachev Fills In Some Blank Pages
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speech on the 70th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution was a microcosm of the reform process he has been leading.
The speech shows how far he has come in his willingness to tell the truth about Soviet history, and how far he still has to go.
It also raises serious doubts about whether he can get there - the same sorts of doubts that arise concerning his prospects for reforming the


Q &amp; A
LEAD: Q. My year-old fir deck was stained with a semisolid stain instead of a deck stain.
As a result it is now peeling, bubbling and splotchy and looks 10 years old instead of almost new.
The cost of sanding off this stain so the deck can be restained properly is exorbitant.
What can be done now and next season to correct this problem?


For Contras in One Area, Growing Civilian Support
LEAD: Guerrillas backed by the United States have organized an extensive and clandestine network of civilian support here in north-central Nicaragua, residents of the area say.


COMMERCE CLEARING HOUSE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCE CLEARING HOUSE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
120,234,000
107,439,000
Net inc
6,472,000
4,918,000
Share earns
.36
.27
9mo rev
431,728,000
392,232,000
Net inc
46,151,000
41,405,000
Share earns
2.56
2.30


MARK CONTROLS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARK CONTROLS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
15,183,000
16,007,000
Net inc
b901,000
c932,000
Share earns
.18
-
9mo sales
44,073,000
50,880,000
Net inc
b1,551,000
c688,000
Share earns
.32
-


CATALYST ENERGY DEVELOPMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CATALYST ENERGY DEVELOPMENT (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
97,625,000
90,850,000
Net loss
b2,521,000
c1,624,000
Share earns
-
.12
9mo rev
286,796,000
147,762,000
Net inc
3,310,000
6,547,000
Share earns
.20
.22


November, in a Balmy Mood, Casts Silhouettes of Summer
LEAD: Visitors to Captree State Park on Long Island sitting by the sun-flecked water as the temperature climbed to an unseasonal 77 degrees.
Today is expected to be cooler, under partly cloudy skies. (NYT/Barton Silverman)


Bonn Pursues Privatization
LEAD: The West German Government said today that it would proceed with its privatization program next year despite the slump in world stock prices.


Turning the Ordinary Into the Unusual
LEAD: NANCY HYON paints paper lamp shades and wood lamp bases in tortoise shell, rose quartz and lapis lazuli.
She makes simple or intricate designs that duplicate any fabric pattern.
A plain shade can also be turned into what seems like parchment.
By using gold, silver or aluminum leaf, she can create antique finishes.


Beer Is Replaced
LEAD: A brand of nonalcoholic beer will be sold instead of regular beer at Saturday's Maryland-Penn State football game, city officials have announced.


Transplant Ethics
LEAD: To the Editor:


Airline Ticket Fraud
LEAD: Ticket fraud costs the world's airlines up to $500 million a year, according to estimates by the International Air Transport Association published today.
In its latest quarterly magazine, the I.A.T.A. said it had begun a training program to help staff from its 168 member airlines spot fraudulent tickets.


TV Executives Testify on N.F.L. Policy
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission, as part of its investigation into whether antitrust laws were violated in the awarding of National Football League television contracts, has taken testimony from some top executives of the major networks, including Laurence A. Tisch of CBS, according to people familiar with the investigation.


PRESIDENTIAL LIFE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRESIDENTIAL LIFE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b8,447,000
c6,801,000
Share earns
.40
.32
9mo net inc
b28,063,000
c19,075,000
Share earns
1.31
.89
b-After realized investment gains of $3,166,000 for the quarter and $12,627,000 for the 9 months, and an extraordinary loss of $5,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary credit of $433,000 for the 9 months.


Improving New York City's Ambulance Service
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cenith Group Sets Joint Bid for Ionics
LEAD: A Boston partnership with a 5.8 percent stake in Ionics Inc. has criticized the company's recently announced stock buyback plan and proposed a joint buyout that values the concern at $62.8 million.
In a letter on Tuesday to Ionics' chairman, Averell Daniell, Cenith Partners L.P. proposed a buyout of the company at $17 a share in a deal involving Cenith and


A STRONG BEAR CAN LIFT A SHADOW
LEAD: When James S. Brady, the newly appointed press secretary to President Reagan walked into his White House office on Inauguration Day, Jan. 20, 1981, he found a bulletproof vest.
It had been left him by Jody Powell, President Carter's press secretary.
Pinned to the vest was the note: ''Dear Jim, It's not the bullets that get you in this job, it's the ants and the gnats.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: TENNIS  Wilander Upset by American: Jim Grabb of the United States used a strong serve-and-volley game to upset second-seeded Mats Wilander of Sweden, 7-5, 6-4, last night in the second round of the $525,000 Stockholm Open-Scandinavian Championships.
Grabb, a 23-year-old former all-American at Stanford who is ranked only 76th, eliminated another Swede, Thomas Hogstedt, 7-6, 7-6, in the first round Monday.


Palestinian Guerrillas In Accord With Shiites
LEAD: A Palestinian guerrilla group has reached a peace agreement with its Shiite Moslem opponents in Lebanon, but skirmishes continued today around a southern district near Sidon.


Metro Matters; For Shalala, 'Rotten' Reality Of School System
LEAD: Three years ago this week, the president of Hunter College, Dr.
Donna E. Shalala, ignited a debate about the New York school system by declaring the problem was not with the apples.
Rather, she said, the whole barrel was rotten.
Since then, reading scores have improved.
The dropout rate has been reduced.


Key Hearing In Robins Suit
LEAD: The A.H.
Robins Company, maker of the Dalkon Shield, and the thousands of women who say they were harmed by the contraceptive will square off Thursday in a long-awaited hearing to determine how dearly Robins will have to pay.


INTERCHANGE FINANCIAL SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERCHANGE FINANCIAL SERVICES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
598,114
566,192
Per share
.35
.32
9mo net inc
1,748,614
1,410,032
Per share
1.01
.82


Keep the Anglo-Irish Pact
LEAD: The Protestants and Catholics of British-ruled Northern Ireland agree on one rare point: Both would do away with the one-judge, no-jury courts that now try terrorist cases.
They would accept as a sensible alternative the system that is used in the Irish Republic: three judges, one usually of a different faith from the accused.


ARDEN GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARDEN GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
90,000,000
98,000,000
Net inc
b1,890,000
1,598,000
Share earns
.97
.66
9mo sales
273,000,000
304,000,000
Net inc
b5,891,000
4,417,000
Share earns
2.74
1.81
Shares outst
2,062,644
2,312,103


Gentle Shapes From a Young Ceramist
LEAD: The refined shapes of Nicholas Bernard's ceramics are the result of 15 years of experience, yet he is only 28 years old.
Now that his work is shown in galleries around the country, he hopes that his parents will stop asking, ''How are you going to feed yourself making pots?'' His current exhibition of ceramics at the Wallengren/ U.S.A.


INSIDE
LEAD:  New Student Loan Policy  Education Secretary William J. Bennett said he was planning new guidelines that could make many schools ineligible for Federal aid.
Page A16.
Random Drug Tests Begin  The Transportation Department said that it had begun random drug testing of employees, but that only one had been found to use drugs.


Tracor Chief Executive Steps Aside After Sale
LEAD: Now that his company is being sold, Frank W. McBee Jr., one of the five founders of Tracor Inc., a military contractor in Austin, Tex., plans to step down Jan. 1 as chairman and chief executive.


Bond Prices Rise Cautiously
LEAD: The bond market ended yesterday on a cautious note after the Treasury announced the results of the $9.25 billion 10-year note auction, showing that demand for the issue was not as strong as expected.


Palestinian Apartheid
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ugandan Cult Carrying Out Suicide Raids
LEAD: If your faith is strong, the rebel priestess teaches her soldiers, enemy bullets will turn back in midair and kill those who fired them.


SOVIET DISAVOWS CHARGES THAT U.S. CREATED AIDS
LEAD: Soviet scientists have disavowed charges in the Soviet-sponsored press that the AIDS virus was artificially cultivated at a secret American military base.


Unisys Introduces Its Top Computer
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation introduced its most powerful computer, the A17.
Unisys said the computer would range in price from $3.1 million to $8.9 million, depending on whether it comes with one, two, three or four processors.
The one- and two-processor models will be available in May and the bigger ones in June, Unisys said.


G.O.P. to Report on Iran Deal Special to The New York Times
LEAD: Republican members of the House committee on the Iran-contra affair have concluded that President Reagan did not know about the diversion of profits from the Iran arms sales to Nicaraguan rebel groups, Congressional officials said today.


BROOKLYN SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROOKLYN SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
309,000
b718,000
Per share
.27
-
9mo net inc
930,000
b417,000
b-Net loss  The bank converted to stock ownership in March.


GMAC Notes
LEAD: The General Motors Acceptance Corporation is offering $300 million of notes due in 1990 at a price of 99.93, to yield 8.90 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Rated Aa-1 by Moody's Investors Service and AA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, the issue yields about 95-hundredths of a percentage point more than three-year Treasury notes.


Fossil of the Largest Sea Bird Is Discovered in the Carolinas
LEAD: Fossils of the largest sea bird ever known, an extinct creature with a wingspan of more than 18 feet, have been discovered in South Carolina and identified by scientists of the Charleston Museum and the Smithsonian Institution.


BOLAR PHARMACEUTICAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOLAR PHARMACEUTICAL CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
24,622,521
15,642,459
Net inc
4,544,277
2,855,529
Share earns
.23
.15
9mo sales
54,885,618
39,237,154
Net inc
10,018,122
7,318,105
Share earns
.51
.38


SOUTHERN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,089,715,000
1,988,471,000
Net inc
318,057,000
317,298,000
Share earns
1.10
1.14
Shares outst
290,435,342
279,811,530
9mo rev
5,397,660,000
5,241,811,000
Net inc
714,258,000
701,763,000
Share earns
2.48
2.53
Shares outst
287,967,709
277,373,619


NATO Ministers Urge Senate to Back Treaty
LEAD: Western defense ministers urged the Senate today to approve the emerging treaty banning medium- and shorter-range missiles.


Thatcher Plea On U.S. Budget
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, after intervening in the American budget crisis with a message to President Reagan, said today that she was ''very anxious'' that the United States budget-cut talks succeed.


Simms's Season Is Stuck in Neutral
LEAD: The symbolism was inadvertent, but fitting.


About Real Estate; New Haven Projects Built To Blend With Old Area
LEAD: Turnbridge Crossing and Phoenix Landing, two condominium projects under construction diagonally across from one another in the Fair Haven area of New Haven, are going forward under design restraints meant to preserve the section's historic character.


Custody of Boy Awarded To His Father's Gay Lover
LEAD: A judge today awarded custody of a 16-year-old youth to his late father's homosexual lover, saying this was what the youth wanted and that it would give him the ''stable and wholesome environment'' his mother could not provide.


Hedda Nussbaum
LEAD: To her friends and former colleagues, the disintegration of Hedda Nussbaum seemed to have an inevitability they felt powerless to stop.


ONE PRICE CLOTHING STORES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONE PRICE CLOTHING STORES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,604,981
6,794,053
Net inc
522,594
531,469
Share earns
.08
.09
9mo sales
24,995,961
14,439,774
Net inc
1,448,350
1,052,209
Share earns
.22
.19
Shares outst
6,518,983
5,647,369


Vincent J. Malone
LEAD: Vincent J. Malone, a matrimonial lawyer for many years, died of emphysema Tuesday at his home in New Canaan, Conn.
He was 83 years old.


Art People
LEAD:  Awaiting Schnabels


PIC 'N' SAVE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIC 'N' SAVE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
78,625,000
69,109,000
Net inc
8,450,000
8,113,000
Share earns
.21
.21
9mo sales
215,063,000
187,659,000
Net inc
24,204,000
21,780,000
Share earns
.61
.55


Senator Simon Looks Strong, Says an Uncommitted Cuomo
LEAD: Governor Cuomo, who had for months hinted a preference for Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis as the Democratic Presidential nominee, indicated today that he might not endorse Mr.
Dukakis and expressed strong interest in Senator Paul Simon of Illinois.


SANDINIST AS AGREE TO INDIRECT TALKS ABOUT CEASE-FIRE
LEAD: In a step that could lead to a breakthrough in the Nicaraguan conflict, the Sandinista Government announced today that it was prepared to negotiate indirectly with rebel leaders on a cease-fire.


C.H. HEIST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*C.H. HEIST CORP
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Sales
12,842,490
11,512,404
Net inc
637,150
318,179
Share earns
.45
.21


POLY-TECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POLY-TECH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,903,000
17,243,000
Net inc
178,000
458,000
Share earns
.05
.13
9mo sales
54,010,000
45,956,000
Net loss
245,000
b1,440,000
Share earns
-
.44
b-Net income and includes an extraordinary gain of $426,000.


Brazil and Its Creditors Reach Debt Agreement
LEAD: Brazil reached an agreement last night with its bank creditors on a plan to make past-due interest payments on its foreign debt.


WHERE TO SEARCH FOR THE ELUSIVE LAST-MINUTE TICKET
LEAD: WEDNESDAY, 5:30 P.M.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 6, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


MEESE'S WIFE WRITES TO A JUDGE IN PRAISE OF CONVICTED FRIEND
LEAD: The wife of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d wrote a letter to a Federal judge last June in which she and ''my husband, Ed'' praised the son of a Tennessee Congressman, who was awaiting sentencing after his conviction for tax fraud.


Tor Halvorsen
LEAD: Tor Halvorsen, chairman of Norway's 780,000-member Federation of Trade Unions, died of cancer on Wednesday.
He was 56 years old.


9TH GAME IN CHESS MATCH IS DRAWN
LEAD: Anatoly Karpov and Gary Kasparov drew a long, grim battle yesterday in the ninth game of their world championship chess match in Seville, Spain.
The contest remains tied, now at 4 1/2 points.


Westies Informer Tells of Links to Gambino Mob
LEAD: A killer who turned informer testified yesterday about a dramatic meeting in a Brooklyn restaurant where the Westies gang joined forces with the Gambino crime family.


Carlucci a Tough Pragmatist in Pentagon's Corner
LEAD: When President Reagan was considering several ideas about how to retaliate against Iran's attack on a Kuwaiti tanker flying the American flag last month, he accepted the option proposed by his national security adviser, Frank C. Carlucci.


London Curbs 3 Firms
LEAD: London's Stock Exchange said today that it had placed trading restrictions on three unidentified brokerage firms that have not made sufficient progress in reducing backlogs of unsettled trades.
The restrictions were not related to the London market's tumble in the last few weeks, a stock exchange official said.


IN THE NIGHT
LEAD:  Gospel at the Gate


Vernon Evans
LEAD: Maj.
Gen.
Vernon Evans, United States Army, retired, a former chief of staff of the China-India-Burma theater, died of kidney failure Wednesday at the Carriage Hill nursing home in Bethesda, Md.
He lived in Washington and was 94 years old.


CABLEVISION SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CABLEVISION SYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
75,264,000
37,667,000
Net loss
11,597,000
b591,000
9mo rev
209,545,000
111,683,000
Net loss
31,599,000
15,346,000
b-Net income  There are no common share earnings for the year-ago quarter because net did not cover preferred dividend requirements.


Sports People; Shelton Jones Back
LEAD: For three seasons, Shelton Jones, a 6-foot-9-inch forward from Amityville, L.I., has been making versatile but generally undervalued contributions to the basketball program at St.
John's.
Spotlights were focused on such teammates as Chris Mullin, Walter Berry, Mark Jackson and Willie Glass.


GENERAL SCIENCES reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL SCIENCES (OTC)
Year to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,034,070
7,135,909
Net inc
534,845
372,526
Share earns
.27
.26
Shares outst
1,953,641
1,441,233
Share earnings and shares outstanding are adjusted to reflect a 1200-for-1 stock split effected in January 1986.


Moderate Activity Said to Cut Heart Deaths in Men at Risk
LEAD: Middle-aged men at high risk of heart disease who engage in moderate physical activities such as walking, gardening, yard work and swimming reduce their chances of death from heart attack by one-third, a new study has found.


STORAGE EQUITIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STORAGE EQUITIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,119,200
5,988,500
Net inc
2,591,700
2,980,900
Share earns
.25
.30
Shares outst
10,547,500
9,968,000
9mo rev
21,314,200
16,868,900
Net inc
8,046,200
b9,040,100
Share earns
.78
.97
Shares outst
10,368,700
9,336,000


Crespin Master Class
LEAD: Regine Crespin, the French mezzo-soprano, is to give a master class for advanced opera and voice students at the Mannes College of Music, 150 West 85th Street, tomorrow at 7 P.M.
The event is open to the public, free of charge, by reservation.
Tickets may be ordered by telephoning 580-0210, today from 9 A.M.


New Evidence Cited Against Drexel
LEAD: The Government has received documents bolstering allegations by Ivan F. Boesky that Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. engaged in illegal stock trading activities with his securities firm, according to legal sources with knowledge of the investigation.


Toyota U.S. Plant
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Company plans to invest about $200 million to build engines and axles in addition to cars at its new Kentucky plant site, a published report said.
The Louisville Courier-Journal, quoting unidentified sources, said Japan's leading auto company's planned addition to its plant near Georgetown, Ky., could create up to 500 jobs.


Program on AIDS Is Aimed at Heterosexuals
LEAD: ''AIDS: Changing the Rules'' is aimed at heterosexuals.
Are they at risk from acquired immune deficiency syndrome?
If so, what can they do about it?
The one-hour program, on Channel 13 at 10 o'clock tonight, presents Ron Reagan, the model Beverly Johnson and the salsa star Ruben Blades, followed by a discussion among public-health experts.


Exploding Star Studied By High-Altitude Fleet
LEAD: Hoping to peer deeper than ever before into the mystery-shrouded core of an exploding star, astrophysicists have begun launching an armada of instrument-laden aircraft, balloons and rockets over Australia and New Zealand.


SUNAIR ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNAIR ELECTRONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,068,580
1,432,581
Net inc
411,869
402,740
Share earns
.09
.08
Yr rev
8,624,525
8,361,395
Net inc
1,624,201
1,470,751
Share earns
.36
.31


Wild U.S. Trad
LEAD: In wild, heavy trading, the dollar plummeted yesterday, experiencing one of its worst days of the year.


Grey Profits Up 20.8%
LEAD: Grey Advertising yesterday reported its third-quarter earnings.
Net income rose 20.8 percent, to $2.9 million, or $1.48 a share, from $2.4 million, or $1.32 a share.
Revenues were $76.4 million, up 23.6 percent from the $61.8 million in the period last year.


Byrd Expects Trade Action
LEAD: Senator Robert C. Byrd, the majority leader, predicted today that lawmakers would approve a trade bill before year-end.
Mr.
Byrd's statement on the


Dance Open House
LEAD: Dance Theater of Harlem will hold its first open house of the 1987-88 season Sunday at 3 P.M. at the company's headquarters, 466 West 152d Street.
Among the performers are Ellis Larkins, the jazz pianist; Marie Brooks's Caribbean Dance Theater, and Jennifer Chase, the soprano.
Dedicated to the late Hector Tello, a member of the company's choreography workshop, the program will include a performance of Mr.


RLC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RLC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
118,261,000
111,517,000
Net inc
3,231,000
5,812,000
Share earns
.17
.32
Yr rev
441,814,000
419,519,000
Net inc
4,817,000
13,366,000
Share earns
.26
.73


Film: 'Less Than Zero,' Young Lives
LEAD: THE smartest thing that the makers of ''Less Than Zero'' have done is the thing that they didn't do: stick very closely to Bret Easton Ellis's novel, no matter how trendy and best-selling that book may have been.
For all its shock value, Mr.
Ellis's story of bored, jaded, affluent California teens-agers would have been paralyzingly downbeat on screen, if not worse.


Can Gorbachev Trust Us?
LEAD: Hopping across the country, the question people keep asking me is, ''Can we trust Gorbachev?''


PROTECTIVE LIFE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROTECTIVE LIFE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,790,000
c6,789,000
Share earns
.33
.47
9mo Net inc
b15,132,000
c18,742,000
Share earns
1.04
1.30
b-Includes capital gains of $863,000 and $5,571,000 for the quarter and 9 months, repectively.


Stage: 'Into the Woods,' From Sondheim
LEAD: WHEN Cinderella, Little Red Ridinghood and their fairy-tale friends venture into the woods in the new Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine musical, you can be sure that they won't miss the subconscious forest for the picturesque trees.
The characters of ''Into the Woods'' may be figures from children's literature, but their journey is the same painful, existential one taken by so many adults in


Our Towns; Joe on the Go: Zeal for Trouble In Heavy Traffic
LEAD: Yesterday morning at 6:10 Joe Levy was heading south through Westchester on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway.
He seemed a little subdued - there weren't any good traffic jams. ''All smooth,'' he radioed back to Shadow Traffic headquarters.


Pentagon After Weinberger: Cuts and Restraints
LEAD: Caspar W. Weinberger's legacy to the military, after seven years in which the Pentagon spent a total of $2 trillion, appears to be a future in which budgets will expand slowly or not at all.


GEICO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEICO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b61,002,726
c51,585,348
Share earns
3.65
3.02
Shares outst
16,692,024
17,104,348
9mo net inc
b165,224,380
c150,466,019
Share earns
9.85
8.65
Shares outst
16,770,563
17,403,301


ENVIROPACT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENVIROPACT INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,360,716
2,364,766
Net inc
470,214
28,507
Share earns
.15
.02
Shares outst
3,218,951
1,936,900
Year-ago results are restated.


New Toy Job For Backer
LEAD: Backer Spielvogel Bates, the agency for Fisher-Price's Little People playsets, has now been named to promote some related fun things to the young of the nation.
New World Video and Marvel


INSIDE
LEAD:  Navy's Highest-Paid Ensign


WARWICK INSURANCE MANGERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARWICK INSURANCE MANGERS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,199,576
7,736,223
Net inc
b1,297,942
c745,897
Share earns
.35
.19
9mo rev
40,995,086
20,903,978
Net inc
b3,603,714
c2,397,353
Share earns
.96
.74


Bonn Delays Sale Of Stake in VW
LEAD: The West German Government said it was postponing the sale to the public of its 16 percent stake in Volkswagen A.G. as a result of a sharp plunge in the car maker's stock price during the recent rout on world stock markets.
The Government's 4.8 million VW shares were worth 1.76 billion marks, or $1 billion, on Oct.


Art: Religious Works By Michael Tracy
LEAD: ''MICHAEL TRACY: Terminal Privileges,'' currently at P. S. 1, and ''John McCracken: Heroic Stance.'' in the same galleries last year, are complementary shows.
In both, the curator Edward Leffingwell has focused attention on an artist outside New York whose career defines a forceful and fertile response to Abstract Expressionism.


A System That Couldn't Save A Child From Lethal Abuse
LEAD: The case of Elizabeth Steinberg, a 6-year-old, sandy-haired victim of child abuse, has focused public outrage and criminal investigations on the girl's adoptive parents, who are accused of beating her to death in their Greenwich Village apartment.


Quebec Journal; Under the Fleur-de-Lis, All Canada Hails Levesque
LEAD: Rene Levesque's memory was honored here today not only by those who shared his dream of nationhood for Quebec but also by the leaders of the Canada he rejected.


NORTHWESTERN PUBLIC SERVCE CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHWESTERN PUBLIC SERVCE CO (OTC)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
109,900,219
123,404,786
Net inc
13,427,778
14,562,681
Share earns
3.25
3.40


Joel Barnet Steinberg
LEAD: The portrait of Joel Barnet Steinberg, who has been charged with the beating death of his 6-year-old adopted daughter in their Greenwich Village town house, is an incomplete image of an intense and complex man who closely shielded his inner life.


VITRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VITRONICS CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,959,000
1,765,000
Net inc
172,000
b101,000
Share earns
.04
.03
9mo sales
7,524,000
4,661,000
Net inc
428,000
b211,000
Share earns
.10
.06
b-After tax credits of $63,000 for the quarter and $92,000 for the 9 months.


FISTICUFFS ON THE FLOOR
LEAD: Two traders had a brief but angry scuffle at the London Stock Exchange yesterday, where stock prices fell before rallying at midday. (AP)


NEWPORT ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWPORT ELECTRONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,675,000
3,290,000
Net inc
164,000
111,000
Share earns
.13
.09
9mo sales
11,078,000
10,230,000
Net inc
569,000
619,000
Share earns
.46
.51


Einstein Manuscript
LEAD: Sotheby's will auction on Dec. 2 a 72-page unpublished manuscript by Albert Einstein.
The work has been described by John Stachel, professor of physics at Boston University and editor of the Einstein papers, as ''the most detailed review of the special theory of relativity that Einstein ever wrote.


A GOSPEL-FILLED WEEKEND AT THE TRIPLEX
LEAD: THOSE theatergoers who were fortunate enough to attend the Lee Breuer-Bob Telson musical ''The Gospel at Colonus'' at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's 1983 Next Wave Festival are not likely to forget the role played by the legendary gospel singer Clarence Fountain.
In this retelling of Sophocles' ''Oedipus at Colonus,'' set in a black Pentecostal church, the blind singer and his group, the Original Five Blind Boys of Alabama, collectively sang the role of Oedipus, the sightless exiled king of


President Accepts Weinberger's Resignation
LEAD: Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, right, arriving at the White House for ceremony.
He was followed by Frank C. Carlucci, national security adviser, who was named to replace him, and Lieut.
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, who was named to succeed Mr.
Carlucci.
Page 10. (AP)


DEMOCRATS QUARRELSOME IN DEBATE ON EDUCATION
LEAD: The six Democratic candidates for President all promised increased Federal spending on education tonight and then argued in a sharp debate here over how they would pay the bill.


De Keersmaeker's Innovative Choreography
LEAD: Among the new breed of headstrong young women who have become the leaders of experimental dance in Europe, Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker has had a surprisingly powerful impact in a short time.


New Report Shows More Cocaine in Howard Beach Victim's Body
LEAD: The black man killed by a car in the Howard Beach incident had 10 times as much cocaine or its residue in his blood than originally reported, it was disclosed yesterday.


MEDCO CONTAINMENT SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDCO CONTAINMENT SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
106,808,000
51,328,000
Net inc
5,013,000
3,579,000
Share earns
.11
.08
Results have been restated to reflect the merger of Porex Technologies Corp. into Medco and a 5-for-2 stock split in October.


WEINBERGER, AS EXPECTED, RESIGNS POST
LEAD: President Reagan today accepted the resignation of Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, a friend and trusted adviser for 20 years, and nominated Frank C. Carlucci, his national security adviser, as Mr.
Weinberger's successor.


Striving for a New Look
LEAD: This is the time of the year when his former boss, Hubie Brown, would walk to the nearest available chalkboard and scribble the number of victories he was establishing as the team's goal for the season.
Brown would then refer to the number for the remainder of the season, or until the team achieved the goal, whichever came first.


Polish Police to Question Walesa And Others Opposing Referendum
LEAD: The Polish authorities, apparently concerned over a Solidarity appeal for a boycott of a national referendum, have ordered eight people who signed the appeal, including Lech Walesa, to report for police questioning.


Import Quotas
LEAD: An international trade tribunal has ruled that some Japanese import quotas on food are illegal, and the United States is expected to use the ruling to put pressure on Tokyo to end other farm-trade barriers, American trade officials said today.
The ruling by a three-member panel established by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was said to have been quietly conveyed to Tokyo and Washington this week.


HYPONEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HYPONEX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,955,000
12,436,000
Net loss
751,000
550,000
Shares outst
5,780,000
6,049,000
9mo rev
114,662,000
85,377,000
Net inc
4,409,000
6,085,000
Share earns
.74
1.00
Shares outst
5,968,000
6,064,000


Edwards Journal; Black Tactic Is Adopted By White Mississippians
LEAD: For years in this tiny speck of a town halfway between Jackson and Vicksburg, blacks outnumbered whites but whites controlled the town government.
But by 1985 blacks had come to dominate local government, holding all five of the seats on the Town Council and the office of Mayor.


SUNSHINE-JR STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNSHINE-JR STORES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
48,154,080
42,760,542
Net inc
438,526
1,174,967
Share earns
.26
.69
9mo sales
133,147,519
128,386,255
Net inc
1,015,274
2,755,434
Share earns
.60
1.62


Sine Nomine Singers
LEAD: Sine Nomine Singers are to present a concert of music by Monteverdi tomorrow at 8 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
Tickets are $12.
Information: 362-8719.


No TV? Israel Is Savoring the Silence
LEAD: Israeli radio and television workers walked out on strike four weeks ago, counting on the traditional Israeli addiction to news to force the Government into conceding quickly to their wage demands.


STEWART SANDWICHES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STEWART SANDWICHES INC
Qtr to Sept 25
1987
1986
Sales
9,985,000
8,920,000
Net inc
226,000
319,000
Share earns
.14
.17
The year-ago first quarter includes a gain of $143,000 from the sale of assets in July 1986.


Louis Lortie, Pianist
LEAD: Louis Lortie, a Canadian pianist, is to perform works by Ravel and Chopin this evening at 8 o'clock at the Grace Rainey Rodgers Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Tickets are $15.
Information: 570-3949.


Minister With Wide-Ranging Goals
LEAD: The Rev.
Patricia Ann McClurg, the first female minister to head the National Council of Churches, was installed yesterday in Jacksonville, Fla., but amid the celebration that followed she was quick to say that her election did not signal the end to what she sees as a persistent problem of sexism in the nation's churches.


Gores See Hollywood Leaders On Issue of Lewd Rock Lyrics
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr., a candidate for the Democratic nomination for President, and his wife, Tipper, appeared privately before entertainment industry leaders in Los Angeles last week to discuss Mrs.
Gore's campaign against pornographic rock lyrics.


Transactions
LEAD: BASKETBALL


Commercial Drivers and Drink
LEAD: A panel of the National Academy of Sciences has called for tighter penalties against commercial bus and truck drivers who are found to be drinking, urging license suspensions even when a small amount of alcohol use is discovered.


GREY ADVERTISING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREY ADVERTISING INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
76,366,000
61,843,000
Net inc
2,210,000
1,852,000
Share earns
1.48
1.32
9mo rev
222,521,000
187,689,000
Net inc
7,603,000
6,794,000
Share earns
5.45
4.93


David L. Goldring
LEAD: David L. Goldring, a stockbroker, died Tuesday at his home in Litchfield, Conn.
He was 44 years old and also lived in Manhattan.
His wife, Nancy, said the cause of death was undetermined.


HARCOURT BRACE JOVANOVICH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARCOURT BRACE JOVANOVICH INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
598,464,000
411,103,000
Net inc
75,506,000
58,147,000
Share earns
1.21
1.51
Shares outst
52,177,000
38,482,000
9mo rev
1,338,458,000
958,146,000
Net loss
b22,946,000
c61,598,000
Share earns
-
1.70
Shares outst
44,522,000
36,255,000


Antique Collectors Lured by Reels
LEAD: IN recent years, antique angling gear and associated memorabilia, including old catalogues, fishing and hunting magazines and prints, have become hot items for collectors.


Washington Talk: Profile: John C. Stennis; PLOWING A STRAIGHT LINE TO THE END OF THE ROW
LEAD: As the overnight train from the Deep South pulled into Union Station, a tall, spare gentleman of 46 years descended the steps, his right hand raised in greeting to his new home.
Within hours John Cornelius Stennis of Mississippi was sworn into office as the newest United States Senator.
That was Nov.


FARM CREDIT SYSTEM reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FARM CREDIT SYSTEM
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,000,000
b560,000,000
9mo net loss
197,000,000
1,528,000,000
b-Net loss


British and U.S. Unions To Cast 'Carrie' Equally
LEAD: Officials of the American and British actors' unions announced yesterday an agreement to share equally in the casting of the musical ''Carrie.''


THE EVENING HOURS
LEAD: LOOKING like someone ready for a quiet evening in front of a television set, Bill Cosby sauntered into the spotlight in the Waldorf-Astoria ballroom in baggy gray pants and an orange and blue crew neck sweater.
He was not unaware that his audience - more than 900 people at a dinner-dance benefiting the New York City Mission Society - was a sea of black ties and sequins.


Horse Racing Notebook; AN AIMLESS SEASON AT HIALEAH
LEAD: It seems like celebrating Thanksgiving in June or Christmas in July: Hialeah Park, the jewel of Florida racing, opens Wednesday.


Biaggi Is Given A Prison Term Of 30 Months
LEAD: Mario Biaggi was sentenced yesterday to 30 months in prison and fined $500,000 for accepting an unlawful gratuity - vacations at a Florida spa - and obstructing justice.


Fed Reins May Stay Loose
LEAD: The Federal Reserve, in its efforts to head off a recession, may have to keep pouring lavish amounts of money into the economy for several months, various economists and other analysts maintain.


PITT-DES MOINES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PITT-DES MOINES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
68,026,000
50,979,000
Net loss
1,913,000
532,000
9mo rev
171,985,000
146,963,000
Net loss
5,530,000
3,042,000


12 Tamils Reported Killed, 150 Captured in Indian Drive
LEAD: Indian troops killed 12 guerrillas and captured 150 in their drive to disarm Tamil separatists in northern and eastern Sri Lanka, the state radio said today.


TV Weekend; O'Hara Tale Opens Series Based on Short Stories
LEAD: BEGINNING at 9 tonight on Channel 13, ''Tales From the Hollywood Hills'' is an umbrella title for a series of short-story adaptations, three this time around, more to come in other seasons.
The premiere entry, adapted by Andy Wolk and directed by Paul Bogart, is John O'Hara's ''Natica Jackson.'' Next week there is Budd Schulberg's ''Table at Ciro's'' and the following week F.


Big Paper Concern Fills Operating Post
LEAD: The Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation announced yesterday that James G. Crump Jr. had been named executive vice president and chief operating officer, effective Jan. 1.


On 7th Ave., Fashion Is Lively and Exotic
LEAD: Classic American styles, exotic African themes and echoes of the 1960's appear in Seventh Avenue collections as the week of spring and summer fashion openings enters the homestretch.


PERCEPTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PERCEPTRONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,815,842
8,371,806
Net inc
461,185
327,269
Share earns
.13
.09
6mo rev
29,254,273
16,635,694
Net inc
1,016,136
578,682
Share earns
.28
.15


Contra Leaders Term Move a Victory
LEAD: Nicaraguan rebel leaders tonight greeted the news that Managua has agreed to negotiate with them indirectly as a major political victory that vindicates their six-year war against the Sandinista Government.


Sailor Finishes Global Course in Growing Up
LEAD: At the time, the choice seemed simple.
Eighteen-year-old Tania Aebi was a rebellious teen-ager, a high-school graduate with no plans for the future who was working as a bicycle messenger in Manhattan.
Her father gave her an unusual option: he would send her to college or he would buy a small boat for her to sail around the world.


IN HOSPITAL COURTROOM, PLEA FOR FREEDOM
LEAD: The first person hospitalized under a new effort to remove mentally ill homeless people from Manhattan streets told a state judge yesterday that she was a ''professional'' street person, well able to care for herself, and longing to get ''back to the streets.''


N.F.L. Matchups; Surprise: Colts and Chargers Spotlighted
LEAD: If there is a game that symbolizes the utter futility in predicting how National Football League teams will do based on last year's record, it is the San Diego-Indianapolis affair Sunday.
It is a battle of division leaders, no less.


Market Place; Stocks to Buy Now, Perhaps
LEAD: ROBERT DAVID, a New York advertising executive, is not about to forsake the purchase of securities, despite the October market plunge. ''I probably will increase my holdings in some mutual funds, those that basically do long-term investing,'' he said.


Parents of Girl, 6, Charged With Murder After She Dies
LEAD: Brain dead from a fierce beating, 6-year-old Elizabeth Steinberg was taken off life-support systems and died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
Her adoptive parents, a Greenwich Village lawyer and a former writer and book editor, were charged with murder.


BIOMEDICAL DYNAMICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOMEDICAL DYNAMICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
331,177
275,030
Net loss
145,291
45,036
9mo sales
930,713
881,055
Net loss
224,503
103,424


OUTBOARD MARINE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OUTBOARD MARINE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
404,287,000
287,005,000
Net inc
b33,942,000
c501,000
Share earns
1.75
.03
Yr sales
1,289,152,000
971,828,000
Net inc
b61,794,000
c14,339,000
Share earns
3.38
.85
Shares outst
18,303,476
16,965,493


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a Moscow dispatch on Monday about Tass's coverage of the threat by a Politburo member to resign described Western reporting on the case incorrectly in some editions.
At least two Western newspapers, The Christian Science Monitor and El Pais of Madrid, reported on some elements of the episode a day before Friday, when The New York Times published its account.


National Horse Show; Spirited Puissance Ends in a Tie at 7-5
LEAD: The National Horse Show's $10,000 puissance stake, an event that pits horse and rider against a wall far too tall to be seen over, was so diligently contested last night at Madison Square Garden that four jumpoff rounds were needed before two co-champions - Buddy Brown on Aramis and Nick Skelton on Raffles


MATTEL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MATTEL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
318,058,000
344,406,000
Net loss
b14,173,000
c16,347,000
Share earns
-
.34
9mo sales
786,238,000
786,766,000
Net loss
b13,875,000
c18,640,000
Share earns
-
.31


Telex Warning To Edelman
LEAD: The Telex Corporation yesterday warned the investor Asher B. Edelman that it would carry out a recapitalization if his $876 million takeover offer was not completed promptly.


Social Security Brought Up In the Deficit Talks Again
LEAD: A proposal to reduce Social Security cost-of-living increases came up again today in talks on reducing the Federal deficit.
Several negotiators said that such a cut, although politically touchy, was the key to reaching a serious agreement.


Restaurants
LEAD: GREAT SHANGHAI RESTAURANT is a bustling Chinatown spot that specializes in the maritime cuisine of the south called Soo-Hang.
The extensive menu carries a little of everything, however, from the familiar to the exotic - and the overall quality is impressive.


NORANDA FOREST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORANDA FOREST
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,090,000,000
928,400,000
Net inc
57,700,000
22,900,000
Share earns
.56
.24
9mo sales
3,180,000,000
2,740,000,000
Net inc
154,000,000
b79,000,000
Share earns
1.68
.84


Washington Talk: Briefing; 4 Losses, 2 Wins
LEAD: Representative Morris K. Udall of Arizona, a senior statesman of the Democratic Party after 13 terms in the House, thinks his party is facing a must-win situation in next year's Presidential election.


AUCTION HOUSES EXHIBITING A BONANZA OF MASTERWORKS
LEAD: THE November art auctions - organized over the summer long before the stock market collapsed almost three weeks ago -move into high gear next week with sales that are expected to be the first to show how the financial crisis has affected the international art market.
Unlike this week's auctions of contemporary art, at which United States buyers dominated, the sales next week at Sotheby's, Christie's and Phillips were organized to attract the bids of collectors and dealers from Europe, Japan,


CONSOLIDATED NATURAL GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED NATURAL GAS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
254,601,000
276,189,000
Net loss
6,921,000
b5,484,000
Share earns
-
.07
9mo rev
1,621,217,000
1,948,802,000
Net inc
108,502,000
120,206,000
Share earns
1.30
1.45
Shares outst
83,275,000
82,792,000


ESSEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESSEX CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,751,000
6,725,000
Net inc
b11,000
cd131,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
19,421,000
19,054,000
Net inc
b4,000
d472,000
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $4,000 and $32,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


OAK HILL SPORTSWEAR reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OAK HILL SPORTSWEAR (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
40,066,000
32,818,000
Net inc
1,223,000
1,580,000
Share earns
.33
.40
Shares outst
3,720,000
3,938,000
9mo sales
93,969,000
74,284,000
Net inc
2,550,000
2,656,000
Share earns
.69
.69


Investors Moving In, Cautiously
LEAD: With the stability of the stock market still fragile, small investors are acting with caution, choosing to make safe investments or to hold on to what they have, analysts and brokerage officials say.


UNIVERSAL FOODS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSAL FOODS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
182,868,000
174,261,000
Net inc
7,213,000
6,021,000
Share earns
.61
.53
Yr rev
711,461,000
603,679,000
Net inc
24,809,000
b15,438,000
Share earns
2.10
1.42


What Should the Neighbors Do?
LEAD: It's all too common to hear the sounds of fierce battle in a neighbor's home - and not know quite what to do.
Does one call the police?
Or respect the family's privacy?
The brief life of Elizabeth Steinberg, age 6, who died yesterday in New York, makes clear the answer: One calls the police.


FILM: 'RUSSKIES,' A COMEDY ADVENTURE
LEAD: ALL the dopey, daffy, dizzy fun of glasnost is captured by ''Russkies,'' the heartburning adventure-comedy that opens today at the Manhattan Twin and other theaters.


U.S. Cable Group In Bid for Essex
LEAD: The Essex Communications Corporation said it had received a $233 million offer to be acquired by a rapidly growing broadcasting group.
Paul Field, chairman of Essex Communications, said his company was negotiating a definitive agreement with U.S.
Cable Television Group L.P.


High Court Nominee Admits Using Marijuana and Calls It a Mistake
LEAD: President Reagan's latest Supreme Court nominee, Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, saidtonight that he smoked marijuana once as a college student in the 1960's and on ''a few occasions'' in the 1970's.


Art: Fernand Leger Paintings at Acquavella
LEAD: THE loan show of ''Fernand Leger'' at the Acquavella Galleries is a remarkable achievement.
For the two rooms upstairs, the gallery has been able to borrow no fewer than 28 paintings that are dated between 1905 and 1921.
From the beginnings of Leger's Cubism in the ''Compotier'' of 1909, through a great series of ''Contrastes de Formes'' and some incisive allusions to Leger's later preoccupation with the factory, the level crossing, the circus, the machinist and the big city as a whole, the standard is remarkably high.


ALLEN GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEN GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
109,245,000
101,334,000
Net loss
b4,553,000
c3,794,000
Share earns
-
.30
9mo sales
326,793,000
317,442,000
Net loss
b1,859,000
c6,542,000
Share earns
-
.54


Hal Riney Is Chosen By Good Housekeeping
LEAD: Good Housekeeping magazine has selected Hal Riney &amp; Partners, New York, to handle its advertising after a monthlong, four-way competition.
The budget is in the $1.5 million to $2 million range.
Baron &amp; Zaretsky was the agency for the last three years.


BLOCK DRUG CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLOCK DRUG CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
94,058,000
84,011,000
Net inc
9,340,000
8,281,000
Share earns
.58
.51
6mo sales
178,147,000
157,637,000
Net inc
18,358,000
16,087,000
Share earns
1.14
1.00


ROBINS VALUATIONS FAR APART
LEAD: Lawyers representing the A. H. Robins Company and some 200,000 women who say they suffered infertility or other injuries from its Dalkon Shield birth control device offered sharply divergent estimates of the value of the claims in a bankruptcy hearing here today.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''We are going to negotiate a cease-fire through an inter-mediary''.


Posner Cedes At Sharon Steel
LEAD: Victor Posner, the financier facing a prison term for tax evasion, has agreed with the Sharon Steel Corporation's creditors to give up control of the bankrupt steelmaker.


Welfare-Reform Bill Imperils Long-Won Gains; Encourages Workfare
LEAD: To the Editor:


RETAILING CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RETAILING CORP OF AMERICA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
29,148,000
26,598,000
Net inc
378,000
285,000
Share earns
.12
.09
6mo rev
58,498,000
41,016,000
Net inc
851,000
491,000
Share earns
.27
.16


Up and Over
LEAD: Nick Skelton, aboard Raffles Apollo, clearing a 7-foot 5-inch wall in $10,000 puissance last night at National Horse Show.
Buddy Brown, riding Aramis, cleared the same height to become co-champion.
Page A35. (NYT/Steve Ross)


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Curren Upsets Mecir: Kevin Curren used his big serve to upset the No. 1 seeded player, Miloslav Mecir of Czechoslovakia, in the second round of the $840,000 Paris Open yesterday.
Curren, a native of South Africa now living in Austin, Tex., beat the world's fifth-ranked player, 7-5, 6-4, serving nine aces and numerous service winners.


Suprema Picks Agency
LEAD: Franznick &amp; Cusatis has become the first agency for the Suprema Specialties Company, which makes Suprema Imported Parmesan and Pecorino Romano grated cheeses.
Both products are distributed nationally.
The promotion budget, the agency said, will be about $1 million.
Print advertising, particularly in food publications, will be used, the agency said, and perhaps radio and television.


Villagers, Fleeing Strife, Find No Haven in Manila
LEAD: The Communist insurgency is coming to Manila and it is bringing with it its victims.
People who are caught in the middle of the nation's increasing polarization are finding they have nowhere to run.


ISOETEC COMMUNCIATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ISOETEC COMMUNCIATIONS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,103,000
15,862,000
Net inc
b2,050,000
c316,000
Share earns
.36
.08
Shares outst
5,720,000
3,830,000
9mo rev
75,170,000
46,151,000
Net inc
b4,744,000
c1,252,000
Share earns
.83
.33
Shares outst
5,713,000
3,820,000


RITZY'S, G D INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RITZY'S, G D INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,294,000
2,441,000
Net inc
9,000
b541,000
9mo rev
6,592,000
6,941,000
Net loss
130,000
1,011,000
b-Net loss  The year-ago periods' revenue restated for a change in accounting.


Art: Sigmar Polke's Witty Disappearing Act
LEAD: THE career of Sigmar Polke, a well-known West German painter whose art was a focal point of the most recent Venice Biennale, is being revealed to the New York art public in bits and pieces.
Over the past three years, there have been three shows of Mr.
Polke's recent paintings, one at the Marian Goodman Gallery and two at the Mary Boone Gallery.


MOSELEY HOLDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOSELEY HOLDING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
29,710,000
34,998,000
Net loss
b7,885,000
c806,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
56,547,000
70,544,000
Net loss
b15,154,000
c1,009,000
Share earns
-
.06


October Sales Sluggish for Retailers
LEAD: Sales of the nation's largest general retailers remained sluggish in October, but held up fairly well after the stock market collapse, the stores reported yesterday.


Chrysler Closes Troubled Plant
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation has closed its Bramalea, Ontario, assembly plant indefinitely to correct quality problems with the Premier car it inherited from the American Motors Corporation and Renault.


Rescue Democracy in Haiti
LEAD: At the voting urns and in the streets, Haiti's people have declared themselves emphatically in favor of a free presidential election later this month.
But Gen.
Henri Namphy's ruling junta is not impressed.
This week it showed itself, at best, barely willing to lift a finger to safeguard the democratic process.


COLUMBIA GAS SYSTEM INC reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLUMBIA GAS SYSTEM INC (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,793,071,000
3,639,122,000
Net inc
b104,995,000
c81,703,000
Share earns
2.17
1.70
Shares outst
43,260,000
40,926,000
b-After an extraordinary charge of $8,571,000 from premiums to refund high-cost debentures.


Devils Rebound on Home Ice
LEAD: The Devils came back strong tonight after their worst game of the season two nights ago, for a 5-3 victory over the St.
Louis Blues.


Budget Deficit Talks Shouldn't Be Adversarial
LEAD: To the Editor:


CONNECTICUT LIQUOR OFFICIAL CHARGED WITH BRIBE-TAKING
LEAD: The executive director of the State Liquor Control Commission was arrested today and accused of taking $1,500 in bribes.


A Lighthearted Jostle
LEAD: Dealers teasing each other yesterday toward the end of trading at the New York Stock Exchange.
The market was open an additional half-hour. (NYT/Ruby Washington)


MITEL CORP reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MITEL CORP (NYSE)
13wks to Sept 25
1987
1986
Revenue
103,700,000
116,300,000
Net inc
b4,800,000
cd65,800,000
Share earns
.04
-
26wk rev
196,400,000
231,100,000
Net loss
b900,000
d71,600,000
b-Includes special gains of $3.5 million and $7.5 million for the 13 weeks and 26 weeks, respectively.


Drugs Hinder AIDS Virus in Lab
LEAD: Scientists reported yesterday that two drugs hinder the AIDS virus in a test tube by sabotaging a key protein, suggesting a new class of substances that may fight the disease.


Broadway
LEAD:  The Roosevelts Are Coming


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  MAKERS OF THE NEW: The Revolution in Literature, 1912-1939.
By Julian Symons. 295 pages.
Random House. $19.95.


GARAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GARAN INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
33,474,000
26,348,000
Net inc
838,000
607,000
Share earns
.32
.20
Yr sales
108,835,000
105,386,000
Net inc
2,186,000
2,865,000
Share earns
.81
.96


Arsonists Damage Haiti Ballot-Printing Plant
LEAD: The wave of violence aimed at disrupting Haiti's first elections in 30 years continued this morning with arsonists heavily damaging one of the main printing plants for producing ballots.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-13  Bonn ordered cuts in interest rates to accelerate its economy.
Stocks and bonds rallied.
The dollar plunged again, especially against the West German mark.
Interest rates also were lowered by Britain and Switzerland and by American banks.


New Course, Fresh Risks
LEAD: So the stubborn, skeptical Germans have at long last said ''enough,'' and the leading nations of the world are finally moving in concert to calm the financial markets and prevent the disorders of October from building into a global economic tragedy.
That, at least, is the


CHEMICAL LEAMAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEMICAL LEAMAN CORP
Qtr to Oct 4
1987
1986
Revenue
56,927,839
53,102,168
Net inc
471,629
747,450
Share earns
.39
.61
9mo rev
170,804,797
149,071,880
Net inc
1,459,904
1,337,656
Share earns
1.20
1.09


TRI-STATE MOTOR TRANSIT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRI-STATE MOTOR TRANSIT CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
29,291,000
33,337,000
Net loss
1,392,000
b1,438,000
Share earns
-
1.20
9mo rev
88,571,000
98,775,000
Net loss
1,983,000
b4,130,000
Share earns
-
3.57


Piecemeal Peace in Central America
LEAD: Never mind the conflicting signals buzzing around Central America as the first phase of a regional peace plan came into effect yesterday.
No single piece of good news or pessimism can do justice to what is now happening in five nations, three of them bloody battlegrounds.


Film: Attenborough's 'Cry Freedom'
LEAD: THE mantle of greatness does not fall lightly onto the heroes of Sir Richard Attenborough's epic film biographies.
It is placed there by a heavy hand.
A great statesman, as in the director's ''Gandhi'' or his new ''Cry Freedom,'' about the murdered South African leader Stephen Biko, is apt to be bathed in beatific light as he delivers important speeches, and to be making speeches even when he talks with intimate friends.


U.S. Is Sending Stinger Missiles to Chad
LEAD: The United States has agreed to supply Chad with Stinger missiles and has sent an American team to Ndjamena to train its army to use them, Administration officials said today.


ACCOUNTS
LEAD: *  Brown Egg Council of New England to Theodore J. Charron Advertising.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing of New York regional election results yesterday incorrectly reported the result in the race for town supervisor in Pelham, N.Y.
The winner was Paul A. Daronco, a Republican, who received 1,431 votes.


MAGMA POWER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAGMA POWER (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,546,000
5,143,000
Net inc
b2,269,000
c1,977,000
Share earns
.11
.12
Shares outst
20,408,000
17,078,000
9mo rev
14,572,000
10,965,000
Net inc
b4,136,000
c1,030,000
Share earns
.21
.06
Shares outst
19,270,000
17,005,000


SHOPSMITH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHOPSMITH INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,180,000
7,340,000
Net inc
140,000
b734,000
Share earns
.10
-
6mo rev
15,665,000
16,770,000
Net loss
759,000
1,127,000
b-Net loss  The year-ago figures reflect a change in accounting methods.


At the Movies
LEAD:  A Deceiving Incident


A Trade Panel Urges Curbs on Japan
LEAD: A Reagan Administration trade committee recommended today that the Government retaliate against Japanese exports after negotiations broke down with Tokyo over foreign participation in Japanese construction projects, Administration officials said.


LEVITT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEVITT CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
28,051,000
21,948,000
Net inc
557,000
376,000
Share earns
.16
.11
Shares outst
3,390,000
3,400,000
9mo rev
69,810,000
51,736,000
Net inc
1,205,000
600,000
Share earns
.35
.18
Shares outst
3,399,000
3,400,000


SCEPTRE RESOURCES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCEPTRE RESOURCES LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,300,000
13,200,000
Net inc
1,600,000
100,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
48,800,000
52,400,000
Net inc
6,400,000
4,000,000
Share earns
.12
.04
Shares outst
29,673,000
25,776,000


Tokyo Helm: A New Style
LEAD: Noboru Takeshita's supporters, recognizing that there are widely shared doubts about his abilities, are offering him up as a potential Harry Truman of Japan.
There are surface resemblances.
Like Truman, Mr.
Takeshita will take over as Japan's Prime Minister on Friday in an atmosphere of lowered expectations.


Welfare-Reform Bill Imperils Long-Won Gains; Consistent Commitment
LEAD: To the Editor:


POWER CORP OF CANADA LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POWER CORP OF CANADA LTD
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b56,047,000
c38,847,000
Share earns
.43
.30
9mo net inc
b176,971,000
c175,476,000
Share earns
1.35
1.38
Shares outst
126,400,000
122,900,000
b-After extraordinary gains of $12,068,000 for the quarter and $42,236,000 for the 9 months.


The Board of Education Surrenders to Janitors
LEAD: Imagine reading that a large New York corporation had signed a contract with its janitors union and that under the terms of the contract the janitors were given virtual control over the corporation's physical plant.


In Poll, Confidence Slips Little
LEAD: Despite widespread fear that the stock market collapse will lead to a recession, overall public confidence in the national economy has slipped very little in the last two weeks, a New York Times Poll shows.


Patlex Wins Suit On Laser Patent
LEAD: The Patlex Corporation, in the latest of a string of victories, said it would take control of a Florida company that infringed on its laser patents as part of a court-approved settlement.
Patlex's agreement with the Control Laser International Corporation of Orlando should make it easier for the company to reach agreements with other companies that have resisted signing agreements to license its laser patents.


A Different Breed of Performer Takes the Stage at Lincoln Center
LEAD: A pair of camels led the way for circus animals being taken for a stroll through Lincoln Center yesterday.
The animals, part of the Big Apple Circus, were there as the circus was being set up in Damrosch Park.


Film: 'Fire And Ice'
LEAD: ''FIRE AND ICE'' must be the fanciest skiwear commercial ever made.
Willy Bogner, who designed the costumes as well as directed, produced and wrote this fashion show, belongs to a prominent West German ski apparel family.
He also filmed the ski scenes for a couple of James Bond movies. ''Fire and Ice,'' which opens today at the U.


STEVENS GRAPHICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STEVENS GRAPHICS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,854,000
13,493,000
Net inc
757,000
231,000
Share earns
.24
.06
9mo sales
47,515,000
40,597,000
Net inc
2,073,000
740,000
Share earns
.66
.18


INTERNATIONAL HYDRON reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL HYDRON (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
21,011,000
18,236,000
Net inc
2,009,000
b1,468,000
Share earns
.17
.13
9mo sales
61,012,000
50,694,000
Net inc
4,723,000
b2,897,000
Share earns
.40
.26


Jets Are Hoping To Hold the Line
LEAD: After watching their replacements turn a 2-0 record into a 3-2 slump, the Jets' regulars came back from the strike last month and drew the line.
Washington crossed it.
Last Sunday, the Jets drew another line, and Indianapolis crossed it.


People
LEAD: *
Suzanne M. Tongue has been promoted to senior vice president and management supervisor at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton.


Film: 'Hello Again'
LEAD: ''HELLO AGAIN'' is a high-concept comedy with a terminally low laugh content.
This may be why the ads, which publicize the gimmick, are slightly funnier than the movie that must dramatize it.


SWANK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SWANK INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
44,865,000
37,623,000
Net inc
3,456,000
1,831,000
Share earns
1.00
.53
9mo sales
95,361,000
83,225,000
Net inc
2,387,000
b1,601,000
Share earns
.69
-


Sports People; Nordique Suspended
LEAD: Gord Donnelly, a Quebec Nordiques defenseman, has been suspended for five games by the National Hockey League after a match penalty he received in a game against the Boston Bruins Oct. 29.


Big East Pact Extended
LEAD: Madison Square Garden and the Big East Conference announced a three-year extension of their agreement to hold the conference's postseason basketball tournament at the Garden.
The extension assures that the Garden will continue to host the popular four-day tournament through the 1990-91 season.


MONTANA SPECTACLE A DUD
LEAD: The annual spec-tacle of hundreds of bald eagles con-verging on Glacier National Park to feast on spawning salmon is proving to be a dud this year, park officials said, with the number of eagles down 80 per-cent and salmon almost nonexistent.
Riley McClelland, wildlife biologist for Glacier Park, cited the unusually warm fall.


Liang Shih-Chiu, a Shakespeare Translator, Dies
LEAD: Liang Shih-chiu, a popular Chinese writer who devoted about 30 years to the translation of all of Shakespeare's works into Chinese, died Tuesday in a hospital here after suffering a heart attack, family members said today.
He was 86 years old.


TEJON RANCH CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEJON RANCH CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,505,000
6,343,000
Net inc
248,000
568,000
Share earns
.02
.04
9mo rev
20,784,000
18,964,000
Net inc
823,000
665,000
Share earns
.06
.05


Sports People; A Holdout's Suit
LEAD: Kelly Stouffer, the lone remaining first-round holdout from last April's National Football League draft, said yesterday that his lawyers would file a suit against the St.
Louis Cardinals and the league early next week in an attempt to have him declared a free agent.


Pretoria Frees A Black Leader Jailed 23 Years
LEAD: A longtime leader of the outlawed African National Congress was freed today by the Government after 23 years in prison.


U.S. and Mexico in Trade Pact
LEAD: The United States and Mexico will sign a trade accord on Friday that falls considerably short of the more comprehensive commercial agreement that both sides had envisioned when they began negotiations earlier this year.


Ex-Exchange Student Says It With Tulips
LEAD: When residents stroll in Ardmore's Central Park next spring, they will know that Gunilla Lonnqvist DeLang, a foreign exchange student from Sweden 20 years ago, was here.


HANOVER INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANOVER INSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b28,891,533
c23,747,774
Share earns
1.40
1.15
9mo net inc
b92,963,532
c75,641,837
Share earns
4.51
3.67
b-Includes capital gains of $5,149,920 for the quarter and $14,140,221 for the 9 months, and a charge of $187,777 for the quarter and a tax credit of $127,223 for the 9 months.


STOCKS, BONDS GAIN
LEAD: In the first strong sign of international economic cooperation after a month of turbulence in the financial markets, West Germany ordered reductions in interest rates today to speed up its economy.
The Reagan Administration and other governments had urged Bonn to lower its rates because they feared the onset of a worldwide recession caused partly by high interest rates.


Officer Is Guilty Of Taking Bribe In 77th Precinct
LEAD: A suspended 30-year-old police officer from the 77th Precinct in Brooklyn was convicted last night of taking a $500 payoff from an undercover investigator pretending to be a drug dealer.
She was also convicted of official misconduct.


Public Financing Will Keep City Council Elections Out of Trouble
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fugitive Held In VW Case
LEAD: A West German man sought in a currency exchange scheme that defrauded the auto maker Volkswagen A.G. of more than $280 million has been arrested in Hollywood, the F.B.I. and West German authorities announced today.


Bridge: How a California Collegian Won Her First Gold Points
LEAD: Happiness for a top-ranked expert certainly is winning a major national title, or perhaps a world title.
Happiness for a tournament beginner is something quite different and might follow this scenario:


Film: 'Made in Heaven,' a Love Story
LEAD: HEAVEN is the place where movie directors go to test their whimsy, and Alan Rudolph's whimsy doesn't need testing - he's got fancifulness to spare.
In ''Made in Heaven,'' which opens today at the Manhattan Twin and other theaters, Mr.
Rudolph envisions a sweetly colored alternative to a black-and-white world.


INTERSTATE GENERAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERSTATE GENERAL (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,056,000
12,987,000
Net inc
2,753,000
2,455,000
Share earns
.28
.25
9mo rev
30,360,000
31,559,000
Net inc
7,091,000
4,795,000
Share earns
.74
.60
Shares outst
9,541,000
7,900,000


BOOLE &amp; BABBAGE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOOLE &amp; BABBAGE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,140,000
9,365,000
Net inc
b706,000
c328,000
Share earns
.20
.10
Shares outst
3,476,000
3,218,000
Yr rev
41,708,000
34,520,000
Net inc
b2,104,000
c1,264,000
Share earns
.63
.40
Shares outst
3,363,000
3,198,000


MACMILLAN BLOEDEL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACMILLAN BLOEDEL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
817,100,000
657,600,000
Net inc
82,700,000
31,700,000
Share earns
.77
.25
9mo sales
2,340,000,000
1,970,000,000
Net inc
217,700,000
b155,000,000
Share earns
1.99
1.39


SAFEGUARD SCIENTIFICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAFEGUARD SCIENTIFICS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
24,233,000
16,960,000
Net inc
723,000
599,000
Share earns
.13
.13
Shares outst
5,482,000
4,460,000
9mo sales
64,924,000
47,853,000
Net inc
9,198,000
b6,008,000
Share earns
1.83
1.35
Shares outst
5,017,000
4,460,000


Drop Seen In Demand For Steel
LEAD: American steelmakers, who have enjoyed higher prices and a return to profitability for much of this year, face a downturn in demand because of the collapse of stock prices, some steel analysts and economists predicted yesterday.


Film: 'Hiding Out'
LEAD: IT'S surprising that ''Hiding Out,'' which opens today at the Criterion Center and other theaters, has so little high style, since its director is Bob Giraldi, one of the reigning kings of rock video.
Mr.
Giraldi, who also directs commercials, takes a fairly ordinary approach to this easygoing teen-age comedy about a stockbroker in his mid-20's who must pretend to be a high-school student.


TRACOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRACOR INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
176,729,000
153,006,000
Net inc
8,155,000
b2,748,000
Share earns
.41
-
9mo sales
503,488,000
460,807,000
Net inc
22,963,000
12,175,000
Share earns
1.16
.63


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  IMPASSIONED TANGO


MINSTAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MINSTAR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
112,176,000
167,885,000
Net inc
b12,629,000
d26,397,000
Share earns
.76
1.50
9mo rev
336,382,000
484,822,000
Net loss
b4,419,000
cd6,734,000
Share earns
-
.38


PEERLESS MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEERLESS MANUFACTURING CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,336,765
1,625,592
Net inc
457,455
b131,372
Share earns
.49
-
b-Net loss and includes a loss of $149,865 from discontinued operations.


M.I.T., Pressed by U.S., Won't Buy Computer
LEAD: The Massachusetts Institute of Technology said yesterday that it was canceling plans to buy a multimillion-dollar supercomputer after Federal officials strongly objected to the prospect that the university might buy Japanese technology.


15 Horses Die in Gary Fire
LEAD: At least 15 horses were killed Wednesday when fire swept through a stable, but as many as 18 others were led to safety by nearby residents, fire officials said.


Washington Talk: Briefing; 99 Cents on the Dollar
LEAD: Joseph R. Mehrkens, who recently left the United States Forest Service after 17 years, today fired a broadside at the way it manages the Tongass National Forest in Alaska.


Albert W. Luhrs
LEAD: Albert W. Luhrs, a civil engineer and executive in the paperboard container industry, died of cancer on Oct. 25 at the Heritage Hall Health Care home in Leesburg, Va.
He was 89 years old and lived in Purcellville, Va.


U.S. ACCUSES MAN OF NAZI CAMP PAST
LEAD: The Justice Department announced today that it had begun deportation proceedings against a Chicago man accused of working as a guard in three Nazi concentration camps.
It cited evidence that he ''participated in the Nazi program of persecution'' of Jews and others in World War II.


Utilities Panel Won't Let Lilco Raise Its Rates
LEAD: The State Public Service Commission said today that it would not grant the Long Island Lighting Company a rate increase this year and suggested that Lilco abandon its effort to open the Shoreham nuclear power plant.


New York City Raises Offering to $750 Million
LEAD: Strong investor demand led New York City to increase the size of its bond sale to $750 million, from $600 million, and allowed securities dealers to reduce interest rates a tenth of a percentage point for some maturities.


Dollar Dips Still Lower In Tokyo
LEAD: Despite repeated intervention by the Bank of Japan to prop up its value, the dollar dipped briefly today to a new postwar low of 134.40 yen.


Deal Signed To Fill Tower At Union Sq.
LEAD: A major financial services concern, Integrated Resources Inc., signed a long-term lease yesterday to occupy all of the office space at Zeckendorf Towers, the 27-story office and apartment complex that dominates the Union Square area.


Corrections
LEAD: A book review yesterday misstated the price of Stephen King's novel ''The Tommyknockers.'' It is $19.95.


Appointee to Security Post Is Praised
LEAD: Hardly anyone has a bad word for Lieut.
Gen.
Colin L. Powell of the Army, who is about to become President Reagan's new national security adviser.


A Money Manager's Long Day
LEAD: J. Richard Walton, a professional money manager who invests in American stocks, is now beginning his business days with a 6 A.M. telephone call to London from his home in Irvington, N.Y.
Yesterday he learned that Japanese institutions were selling American stocks and that the dollar was once again under attack in the currency markets - factors he would have to consider in deciding whether to buy or sell stocks during one of the most turbulent times in financial history.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: ONE of the new productions on the Broadway theater district's Restaurant Row is called Grand Sea Palace (346 West 46th Street, 265-8130).
The theme of this pleasant-looking turquoise-colored establishment is Thai, although the plot gets awfully muddled when they offer everything from pasta primavera to salade


ARMTEK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMTEK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
327,202,000
208,764,000
Net inc
6,966,000
2,738,000
Share earns
.70
.28
Yr sales
1,198,390,000
800,136,000
Net inc
20,491,000
b37,608,000
Share earns
2.08
-


Triple Slaying in Bronx and a Killing in Queens
LEAD: Three men were killed yesterday in a Bronx shooting that the police said was drug-related, and a cabdriver was shot to death in Queens.


Film: Berri's 'Manon of the Spring'
LEAD: SEEING ''Manon of the Spring'' four months after having been thoroughly enchanted by ''Jean de Florette'' is like going back to bed in an attempt to continue an interrupted dream.
Sleep may come, but the dream is gone.


A Chronicler of Revolt, Defiant Behind Bars
LEAD: Govan A. Mbeki, the 77-year-old former chairman of the African National Congress, wrote his last book on tissue paper and smuggled it to a publisher.
He will not need to be so secretive with future manuscripts, for he was freed yesterday after 23 years in a South African prison.


Big Money Fund Influx
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 412 money market mutual funds increased $2.45 billion, to $260.52 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 112 institutional funds were up $2.47 billion, to $73 billion.
Assets of the 207 general purpose funds were up $61.2 million, to $79.41 billion.


Rate Cuts Push Dow Up by 40.12
LEAD: Stock prices rebounded strongly yesterday, encouraged by interest rate cuts in the United States and West Germany.
Stocks also closed higher in Tokyo.


From Balmy to Blustery in a Day - Ah, November!
LEAD: Autumn blew back into town yesterday, taking some hairdos with it at Broadway and 39th Street, and abrubtly ended a brief Indian summer. (NYT/Dith Pran)


Black Youth Is Beaten Outside a High School
LEAD: A black high school student in Brooklyn was beaten Wednesday during what the police are describing as a racially motivated attack.


Banks Cut Prime Again, To 8 3/4%
LEAD: The nation's leading banks yesterday lowered their prime lending rate by a quarter of a percentage point, to 8 3/4 percent, reflecting the Federal Reserve's continuing efforts to contain the negative effects of last month's plunge in stock prices.


Ladbroke Group's Offering Lags
LEAD: Ladbroke Group P.L.C. said that only about 1.68 million of the 70.4 million new shares that it offered at 378 pence a share, about $6.61, had been taken up.
The British property and leisure group's $:256 million, or about $448 million, offer was to help finance its $:645 million (about $1.13 billion) acquisition of the Hilton International Company hotel chain from the Allegis Corporation.


PENN ENGINEERING &amp; MANUFACTURING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENN ENGINEERING &amp; MANUFACTURING CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,605,000
11,488,000
Net inc
1,319,000
886,000
Share earns
.76
.51
9mo sales
40,931,000
33,439,000
Net inc
2,911,000
2,240,000
Share earns
1.68
1.29


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Oct. 27 about the views of writers and scholars from Communist countries on recent changes in the Soviet Union and China incorrectly described the circumstances under which a Budapest statue of Stalin was removed in 1956.
It was torn down by demonstrators, not by the authorities.


Senator Icon
LEAD: ''Teddy came to see me the other day and he said he was really tired of being referred to as the younger brother of the President,'' John Kennedy grinned during a talk in Boston in October 1963.
The new Senator from Massachusetts, the President said, was ''going out on his own.
Instead of being Teddy Kennedy, now he is changing his name to Teddy Roosevelt.


Vice Chairman Named At Coca-Cola Bottling
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Bottling Company Consolidated named as a vice chairman Frank Harrison 3d, the 32-year-old former vice president and son of the current chairman, Frank Harrison Jr.
The appointment, which took effect on Oct. 30, comes at the end of a tumultuous year for the company, which saw a wide staff shake-up in response to major losses in the last quarter of 1986 and the first quarter of 1987.


Treasury Issues Rise Sharply
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices rose sharply yesterday, as prospects of a more generous Federal Reserve policy and lower interest rates created strong demand by investors.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Down to a Dime
LEAD: There was a public outcry earlier this year when the Interior Department imposed a dollar admission fee at the Statue of Liberty.
Congress quickly passed a bill to repeal the fee and, on June 20, the department set up donation boxes at the site for voluntary contributions.


TELOS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELOS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
24,091,000
19,509,000
Net inc
1,035,000
c698,000
Share earns
.29
.20
6mo rev
46,133,000
38,695,000
Net inc
b2,160,000
c1,474,000
Share earns
.60
.41


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: The number of baseball players filing for free agency grew to 47 yesterday when Bill Almon of the Mets, Steve Garvey of the San Diego Padres and Dennis Martinez of the Montreal Expos added themselves to the list.
Martinez, the former Baltimore star, made a strong comeback with an 11-4 record for the Expos.


Fending Off Burglar, Dog Is Killed in Dryer
LEAD: A 4-year-old chihuahua died trying to protect her owner's property when a burglar threw her into a dryer and turned it on, Tompkins County sheriff's deputies said.


PATIENT TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PATIENT TECHNOLOGY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,743,000
7,883,000
Net inc
b405,000
de738,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
21,312,000
22,510,000
Net loss
c1,718,000
e850,000
b-Includes a non-recurring gain of $175,000 from a royalty agreement settlement.


FGIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FGIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b14,282,000
c11,972,000
Share earns
.46
.39
Shares outst
30,885,000
29,617,000
9mo net inc
b46,124,000
c29,171,000
Share earns
1.49
1.10
Shares outst
30,845,000
26,618,000


AMERICAN BARRICK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN BARRICK (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
32,300,000
21,400,000
Net inc
7,300,000
4,200,000
Share earns
.14
.21
9mo rev
83,000,000
65,300,000
Net inc
17,700,000
11,400,000
Share earns
.35
.57
Shares outst
50,808,000
39,963,000


British Army Stung by Tales of Brutality in Ranks
LEAD: After outbreaks of violence in two of its proudest regiments, the British Army is facing criticism that it has allowed a culture of brutality to develop in enlisted ranks.


A Pan Am Suitor Plans Huge Outlay
LEAD: One of the groups seeking control of Pan American Airways plans to spend $320 million for an initial restructuring program if it wins control, one of the investors said yesterday.


ROBINSON WILL RECEIVE &amp;26 MILLION FROM SPURS
LEAD: He didn't get a promotion, but David Robinson got a big, a very big, raise yesterday.


IN THE NIGHT
LEAD:  A Group Effort


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Moseley Set To Shed Unit
LEAD: The Moseley Holding Corporation said yesterday that it would quit the retail brokerage business and seek a buyer for that part of its operations because of mounting trading losses.


FUN AND COLOR BY MARC JACOBS
LEAD: The audience was yipping and yodeling along to the country and zydeco soundtrack as Marc Jacobs showed a spring collection Monday that was one of the season's most exuberant.


Adams's Goal Topples Flyers
LEAD: Greg Adams's second goal of the game with only 11 seconds left gave Vancouver a 4-3 victory over the slumping Philadelphia Flyers tonight, breaking the Canucks' seven-game streak without a victory.


College Football Notebook; Two Running Backs Who Are Making Big Gains
LEAD: Mike Gottfried, the head coach at Pitt, is not one to fuss.
He is indifferent to Craig Heyward's weight, although he suspects it may be more than the advertised 260 pounds, maybe as much as 275.


DAMON BIOTECH reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAMON BIOTECH (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,270,290
935,248
Net loss
1,551,353
3,524,228
Yr rev
7,376,772
3,792,491
Net loss
8,648,759
9,840,288
Shares outst
21,483,458
20,575,441
The latest periods include revenues and net income of $1,000,000 associated with the favorable settlement of litigation, and also includes a net loss of $1,400,000 resulting from the company's acquisition of Damon Biotech Europe Ltd.


Film: 'Steel Dawn'
LEAD: EARLY in ''Steel Dawn,'' a mysterious fighting man (Patrick Swayze) arrives at a hardpressed frontier farm run by a beautiful widow (Lisa Niemi), who has a spunky little son (Brett Hool), who soon grows attached to the stranger.
No, the mysterious fighting man's name is not Shane; it is Nomad.
And it is not the Old West; it is the new post-nuclear-war world beloved of new movie makers.


PRATT &amp; LAMBERT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRATT &amp; LAMBERT INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
60,755,000
50,738,000
Net inc
3,165,000
2,852,000
Share earns
.52
.48
9mo sales
173,081,000
148,671,000
Share earns
1.20
1.03
The share earnings reflect a 2-for-1 stock split paid Oct.


U.S. OFFICIAL FAVORS DIRECT TALKS
LEAD: A State Department official expressed hope tonight that the announcement that Nicaraguan officials were prepared for indirect negotiations with contra leaders meant that direct talks would begin soon.


MAINE PUBLIC SERVICE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAINE PUBLIC SERVICE (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,849,604
9,677,218
Net inc
749,316
c331,034
Share earns
.58
.12
9mo rev
34,508,497
32,485,675
Net inc
b3,866,799
c4,519,506
Share earns
3.47
4.16


SERVICE FRACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SERVICE FRACTURING CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,321,420
1,226,770
Net loss
334,575
2,618,893
6mo rev
4,514,605
2,681,087
Net loss
673,023
3,585,774


Time Saved, Time Lost, Time for a Sundial
LEAD: To the Editor:


West Germany Reacts To Pleas From Its Allies
LEAD: Bowing to growing international pressure, Germany's central bank today lowered a key interest rate in an effort to calm the turbulent financial markets.


ALBA-WALDENSIAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALBA-WALDENSIAN INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,928,557
8,643,152
Net loss
b910,446
c256,532
Share earns
-
.14
9mo sales
36,098,834
28,911,463
Net loss
b650,398
c2,664
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $1,447,000 for both the quarter and 9 months.


Penguins Catch Islanders
LEAD: The conventional wisdom holds that the Pittsburgh Penguins will go as far as Mario Lemieux takes them.
Tonight, with Lemieux gone after one period, the Penguins followed an improbable route to a 4-2 victory over the Islanders.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 1987
LEAD:  The  Markets


Iran-Contra Committees Approve the Final Report
LEAD: The Congressional committees on the Iran-contra affair approved a final report today concluding that President Reagan was responsible for allowing the normal processes of Government to be disregarded, committee members said.


A Cautious Approach to the Ice
LEAD: Anchoring almost every step with a grip on the boards, youngsters, many of them on the ice for the first time, slowly circumnavigated the Wollman Rink in Central Park.
The youngsters were part of a group of 200 public school students who were invited for a ceremony marking the opening for the season of the Wollman and the city's five other skating rinks.


ACTION AUTO STORES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACTION AUTO STORES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
19,815,413
12,519,933
Net inc
b611,933
235,452
Share earns
.21
.11
b-Includes an accounting change gain of $241,172.


Central American Peace Accord Goes Into Effect
LEAD: Central American governments announced a series of measures today to be carried out over the next two months to comply with a new regional peace treaty.


Strategies Of Small Traders
LEAD:  John L. Wells


Dining Out Guide; New Classic Italian
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
CHELSEA TRATTORIA ITALIANA, #108 Eighth Avenue, at 16th Street (924-7786) - **(Aug. 7, 1987) This trattoria serves some stellar pastas at affordable prices.


Washington Talk: Presidential Politics; THE BALANCE OF POWER MEANS A LOT OF FOOTWORK
LEAD: It was, Bob Dole says, the worst 48 hours of his Presidential campaign.


PATTEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PATTEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Revenue
35,100,000
26,200,000
Net inc
5,000,000
4,200,000
Share earns
.29
.27
6mo rev
58,500,000
38,200,000
Net inc
7,800,000
5,600,000
Share earns
.45
.40


Welfare-Reform Bill Imperils Long-Won Gains
LEAD: To the Editor:


Philip C. Katz
LEAD: The nation's oldest Medal of Honor winner, Philip C. Katz, who was awarded the medal for rescuing a wounded comrade under fire in World War I, died here on Oct. 29, a month short of his 100th birthday.


SYNBIOTICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYNBIOTICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,501,000
1,135,000
Net loss
b42,000
51,000
6mo rev
3,501,000
2,066,000
Net inc
b369,000
c107,000
Share earns
.53
-
b-After tax credits of $21,000 for the quarter and $162,000 for the 6 months.


Advertising; Real Estate Quarterly For Japan
LEAD: A CLEVER Tokyo advertising man, well aware of the dynamic impact Japanese money is having on the New York real estate market, is starting a quarterly magazine back home intended to attract eager Japanese investors and American advertisers.


STANDARD COMMERCIAL TABBACO CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD COMMERCIAL TABBACO CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
178,516,000
125,122,000
Net inc
b4,264,000
c2,946,000
Share earns
.78
.62
6mo sales
311,691,000
253,500,000
Net inc
b6,306,000
c5,178,000
Share earns
1.15
1.13
Shares outst
5,478,000
4,581,000


AIDS Memo Stirs Both Parties
LEAD: Democrats today released a memorandum purportedly from a Republican consultant, saying Republicans should exploit public fears to help their party in 1988.
The purported author, Charles Rund, a poll taker, vigorously denied that he had written it.


Army Defector Arrives in U.S.
LEAD: Pvt.
Wade E. Roberts, an American soldier who defected to the Soviet Union last April, arrived early today in the United States, where he faces charges of desertion, officials said.


Film: 'Slamdance,' With Tom Hulce
LEAD: WAYNE WANG, the gifted Chinese-American film maker (''Chan Is Missing,'' ''Dim Sum''), goes straight if quite gracefully to the bottom with his first mainstream movie, ''Slamdance,'' a Los Angeles-based tale of corruption and cover-up that's less interesting for its characters than for its fancy decor and images.


Rabid Calf Causes Shortage Of Vaccine in El Paso, Tex.
LEAD: Health officials said Wednesday that they used up the city's supply of rabies vaccine to inoculate more than 100 people who might have come in contact with a school farm's rabid calf.


Prison Term for Biaggi
LEAD: Representative Mario Biaggi was sentenced to 30 months in prison for taking an unlawful gratuity and obstructing justice.
Page B1. (NYT/John Sotomayor)


NEW PLAN REALTY TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW PLAN REALTY TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,194,000
8,889,000
Net inc
4,216,000
3,485,000
Share earns
.15
.17
Yr rev
35,859,375
32,282,927
Net inc
b17,965,599
15,618,419
Share earns
.80
.78
Shares outst
22,585,332
20,032,649


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
9.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.50
5.69
6.07
3-MO. TRCAS. BILLS
5.60
5.58
5.28
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.02
6.08
5.39
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.53
8.69
7.16
30-YR.


Lebanese Begin a General Strike
LEAD: Lebanese began a general strike today to protest the 12-year-old civil war and the nation's economic crisis.


Deaver Hired to Influence Dole, Witness Says
LEAD: A former vice president of Trans World Airlines testified today that a few weeks after Michael K. Deaver left his top White House post in 1985, T.W.A. hired him as a lobbyist to ''make direct contact'' with Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Hanford Dole.
Mr.
Deaver was a former White House deputy chief of staff.


Elsa de Brun Is Dead; Signed Art as Nuala
LEAD: Elsa de Brun, who painted under the Gaelic name of Nuala, died last night at her home in Manhattan.
She was 91 years old and had suffered from Alzheimer's disease.


Sports of The Times; WHERE FLUTIE BELONGS
LEAD: IN the fourth quarter of last Monday night's game, Ed (Too Tall) Jones deflected two of Phil Simms's passes as the Dallas Cowboys rallied for a 33-24 victory.
Too Tall was too much for the Giants' quarterback.
But as Doug Flutie watched television in his Natick, Mass. home, he shook his head.


Sports People; Slaney Set to Go
LEAD: When Mary Slaney begins her attempt to come back from an injury next Jan. 23 in the 2,000-meter run at the Pacific Northwest Bell indoor track meet in Portland, Ore., it will mark her first competitive race in more than two years.


Soybeans Up Sharply; Soviet Rumor a Factor
LEAD: Soybean oil and soybean meal futures soared at the Chicago Board of Trade today on rumors that the Soviet Union had bought a large quantity of American soybean meal.
Meal for December delivery jumped $6, to $183.60 a ton, off its high for the session of $186.50.





AIR WISCONSIN SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIR WISCONSIN SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
39,781,000
30,629,000
Net inc
2,309,000
793,000
Share earns
.31
.11
9mo rev
104,140,000
89,689,000
Net inc
3,552,000
2,507,000
Share earns
.48
.34


Kasparov and Karpov End 10th Match Game in Draw
LEAD: The 10th game of the world chess championship was drawn today after only 20 moves, at the suggestion of the champion, Gary Kasparov, who was playing White.


PANNILL KNITTING CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PANNILL KNITTING CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
73,184,000
58,914,000
Net inc
6,328,000
4,951,000
Share earns
.42
.33
9mo sales
161,624,000
166,853,000
Net inc
8,868,000
14,366,000
Share earns
.59
.96


ADAGE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADAGE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,775,000
10,429,000
Net loss
3,102,000
3,308,000
6mo rev
21,878,000
19,877,000
Net loss
4,213,000
6,661,000
The latest quarter and 6-month includes a charge of $2.1 million for separation costs related to employment reduction, facility closing and an inventory reserve related to settlement of litigation.


UNITED BANKERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED BANKERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b11,234,262
c5,196,295
9mo net loss
b13,875,319
c4,573,234
b-Includes provisions of $11,057,000 for the quarter and $16,084,000 for the 9 months for loan and other real estate losses.


STARPOINTE SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STARPOINTE SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,070,000
934,000
Per share
.41
-
9mo net inc
3,019,000
b2,951,000
Per share
1.15
-
b-After a $525,000 tax credit.
The bank converted to stock ownership in October 1986.


A COUP IS REPORTED IN TUNISIA
LEAD: President Habib Bourguibia was deposed today by his Prime Minister, Zine el Abidine Ben Ali, who named himself President of the North African nation of 7.4 million, the Tunis radio reported.


More Saurian Than Simian
LEAD: Another strange clue has been added to the mystery of what killed off the dinosaurs.
It seems that the air in Cretaceous times was 32 percent oxygen, half as much again as air today.
If the ponderous beasts were accustomed to inhaling such rich stuff, no wonder they perished when the air grew more rarefied.


NORTHERN AIR FREIGHT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHERN AIR FREIGHT (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,618,119
15,169,951
Net inc
391,807
307,485
Share earns
.21
.17
9mo rev
51,745,784
42,614,291
Net inc
860,825
287,709
Share earns
.46
.16


Gore Steps Up Bid for Center in Race
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr. is intensifying his efforts to cast the 1988 Democratic Presidential race as a contest between one moderate in the center of the party spectrum, himself, and five other candidates on the left.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Red Wings 3, Whalers 1: Brent Ashton scored the go-ahead goal midway through the second period and Joe Kocur added a goal in the third last night as Detroit defeated Hartford, 3-1.
Greg Stefan turned back 28 shots for the Red Wings, who broke a four-game streak without a victory and moved to 6-5-2.


Director Is Named For Holocaust Museum
LEAD: Dr.
David Altshuler, formerly a professor of Judaic studies at George Washington University, has been named director of A Living Memorial to the Holocaust - Museum of Jewish Heritage, which is to be built in Battery Park City in 1990, it was announced this week.


TRENWICK GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRENWICK GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,737,000
922,000
Share earns
.27
.09
9mo net inc
7,636,000
1,415,000
Share earns
.76
.18
Both the latest third quarter and 9 months include a writeoff of a security deposit of $500,000 by the company's Trenwick Syndicate Corp.


MARKEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARKEL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,173,000
8,352,000
Net inc
1,724,000
831,000
Share earns
.47
.27
9mo rev
28,836,000
25,113,000
Net inc
5,156,000
3,772,000
Share earns
1.41
1.23


MERRIMACK BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERRIMACK BANCORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
838,000
1,004,000
Per share
.18
.22
9mo net inc
2,493,000
2,982,000
Per share
.54
-
The bank converted to stock form in May 1986.


Senator Helms's Callousness Toward AIDS Victims
LEAD: ''We have got to call a spade a spade,'' said Senator Jesse Helms in offering an amendment to the fiscal 1988 appropriations bill for the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, ''and a perverted human being a perverted human being.'' Ironic comments, indeed, given the profound perversity of the policy his amendment advances.


WARREN FIVE CENTS SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARREN FIVE CENTS SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
790,000
663,000
Per share
.23
-
9mo net inc
2,587,000
2,045,000
Per share
.75
-
The year-ago per share earnings are not available because the bank converted to stock ownership in July 1986.


New York City's Jobless Rate Rises While Jersey's Declines
LEAD: Unemployment in New York City rose to 5.8 percent in October, the regional office of the Federal Labor Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday.


Pension Ruling In Texaco Case
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge ruled today that state employee pension boards holding Texaco stock could represent the company's equity shareholders committee as nonvoting, ex-officio members of the board.


N.I.T. Shifts To the Garden
LEAD: The Big Apple National Invitation Tournament's semifinal round, originally scheduled for Nassau Coliseum Nov. 27, has been shifted back to Madison Square Garden that night.
The move to Long Island originally was made because the Garden was holding the date for a possible rock concert, but the event did not materialize.


NEWPORT NEWS SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWPORT NEWS SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
433,000
850,000
Per share
.31
.62


INTER FEDERAL SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTER FEDERAL SAVINGS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b590,182
c758,535
9mo net inc
b1,676,359
c2,035,814
b-After tax credits of $231,027 for the quarter and $660,067 for the 9 months.
c-After tax credits of $205,579 for the quarter and $541,854 for the 9 months.


Bonn Urges U.S. to Cut Its Deficit To Help Stabilize World Markets
LEAD: A day after West Germany's central bank succumbed to international pressures and lowered interest rates, German and other European officials challenged Washington to make the next move to stabilize world financial markets.


Heroism Runs in the Family
LEAD: Marty Lyons, the Jets' veteran defensive end, rejoined his teammates this afternoon after a weeklong stay in Alabama and told reporters of the harrowing early morning accident that his wife, Kelly, and their son, Marty Jr., survived last Saturday.


Dow Drops By 26.36, To 1,959.05
LEAD: After being higher throughout most of the day, stock prices closed lower yesterday on a late wave of selling that analysts attributed to concern over program trading and anxiety over how the market might perform next week.


UNIVERSITY NATIONAL BANK &amp; TRUST CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSITY NATIONAL BANK &amp; TRUST CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
440,135
376,732
Per share
.84
.78
9mo net inc
1,097,886
924,404
Per share
2.10
1.91


CAMBRIDGE BIOSCIENCE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAMBRIDGE BIOSCIENCE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,488,729
609,851
Net loss
742,714
408,637
9mo rev
2,739,612
1,613,944
Net loss
2,885,725
1,388,310


WESTERN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
5,484,000
10,282,000
Per share
.31
.67
9mo net inc
28,765,000
34,094,000
Per share
1.93
2.26
Western S &amp; L said its loan loss provisions for the latest periods totaled $13.7 million for the quarter and $41 million for the 9 months, compared with the year-ago quarter of $6.2 million and for the 9 months, $11.8 million.


MOORE PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOORE PRODUCTS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
21,045,000
19,896,000
Net inc
b1,221,000
1,198,000
Share earns
.59
.58
9mo sales
62,677,000
59,258,000
Net inc
b3,525,000
3,421,000
Share earns
1.69
1.65


LAUREL SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAUREL SAVINGS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
246,000
b246,000
Per share
.50
-
b-After an extraordinary gain of $6,000.
The company went public in April.


How Colleges Handle S.A.T.
LEAD: Is it advantageous for a college applicant to take the Scholastic Aptitude Test more than once?


BT FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BT FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,336,000
1,366,000
Share earns
.43
.53
Shares outst
3,087,488
2,569,008
9mo net inc
4,080,000
3,823,000
Share earns
1.32
1.51
Shares outst
3,087,488
2,532,169


Capezio Scholarships To Help Ballet Students
LEAD: Ten ballet schools will receive the first Salvatore Capezio Scholarships, established to commemorate the founder of Capezio/Ballet Makers Inc.


LAWRENCE SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAWRENCE SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
425,000
b1,557,000
Per share
-
.36
9mo net inc
892,000
3,715,000
Per share
.21
-
b-Net income  There was no per share earnings presented for the year-ago 9 months because the bank converted to stock form in May 1986.


REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: PANDAS, POLITICS AND POETRY
LEAD: Chang Basong figures she has the best spot on the west side, right outside the entrance to the zoo.
There, off to the side a bit but on the edge of the current of parents being dragged by children desperately eager to see the animals, Mrs.
Chang parks her cart.


ATLAS CONSOLIDATED MINING &amp; DEVELOPMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLAS CONSOLIDATED MINING &amp; DEVELOPMENT CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
46,194,000
30,746,000
Net loss
1,014,000
8,639,000
9mo rev
119,377,000
84,437,000
Net loss
15,106,000
33,756,000
Year-ago results have been restated to reflect gains of $427,000 in the third quarter and $1,291,000 in the 9 months from adjustments of depreciation charges based on revised estimated service lives of property of the Masbate Gold operations.


Student Credit Unions Change the Loan Picture
LEAD: To the Editor:


G.M. Solar Car Winner in Race
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation's experimental solar-powered car, the Sunraycer, has won the World Solar Challenge, a 1,950-mile race across the Australian continent.
The company said the Sunraycer averaged about 40 miles an hour for the five-and-a-half-day event and finished 600 miles in front of its nearest competitor.


FIRST AMERICAN SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMERICAN SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
774,000
1,060,000
Per share
.35
-
The bank converted to stock form in July 1987.


FIRSTFED FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRSTFED FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,822,000
4,213,000
Per share
.53
.59
9mo net inc
12,188,000
11,385,000
Per share
1.70
1.60
The per share earnings reflect a 3-for-2 stock split to be paid on Oct.


HOMETOWN BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOMETOWN BANCORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
59,000
39,000
Per share
.05
.07
9mo net inc
92,000
b20,000
Per share
.12
-
b-Net loss


WILAND SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILAND SERVICES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,890,227
4,688,561
Net inc
85,019
222,510
Share earns
.03
.06
9mo rev
10,509,654
13,706,345
Net loss
295,154
b106,095
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Baseball, Si
LEAD: To the Editor:


REPUBLIC SAVINGS FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REPUBLIC SAVINGS FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
55,000
48,000
Per share
.05
.04
6mo net inc
96,000
82,000
Per share
.08
.07


Maxwell Plan on Bell &amp; Howell
LEAD: The Bell &amp; Howell Company, a publishing and information services concern, disclosed yesterday that it had received an unsolicited letter from the British publisher Robert Maxwell that said he would seek permission from the Federal Government to buy more than 50 percent of the company.


Exchanges Seek Ways to Heal Split
LEAD: The top executives of the New York Stock Exchange, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the Chicago Board of Trade held an unannounced breakfast meeting at the Big Board's Wall Street headquarters on Thursday to iron out the increasingly bitter differences over responsibility for the stock market crash two and a half weeks ago.


HOME SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
6,889,000
b10,662,000
Per share
.57
-
9mo net inc
20,054,000
b22,998,000
Per share
1.67
-
b-After tax credits of $1,466,000 for the quarter and $3,186,000 for the 9 months; the quarter also includes a pre-tax gain of $5,642,000 from the sale of branches.


New Faces and New Places
LEAD: Key new players on N.B.A. teams, and how they were obtained.
$
Team
Draft
Trade
Free Agent
Boston
Reggie Lewis
Brad Lohaus
Mark Acres
Celtics
Chicago
Scottie Pippen
Artis Gilmore
Bulls
Horace Grant
Rickie Winslow
Tony White
Cleveland
Kevin Johnson
Kent Benson
Cavaliers
Kennard Johnson
Dell Curry
Dallas
Steve Alford
Mavericks
Jim Farmer
Denver
Andre Moore
Jay Vincent
Nuggets
Michael Adams
Detroit
William Bedford
Ralph Lewis
Pistons
Ron Moore
Golden State
Tellis Frank
Kermit Washington
Warriors
Dave


ATLANTA GAS LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTA GAS LIGHT CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
78,573,000
143,679,000
Net loss
514,000
1,521,000
Yr rev
983,471,000
1,008,298,000
Net inc
39,386,000
29,219,000
Share earns
2.04
1.66


PLANT GENETICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLANT GENETICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
752,159
272,242
Net loss
603,089
864,935


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Tin Pan Alley Cats


SOCIETY FOR SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOCIETY FOR SAVINGS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
8,031,000
c5,819,000
Per share
.75
.55
9mo net inc
b23,245,000
c15,099,000
Per share
2.16
1.42
b-After a tax credit of $1,008,000.
c-After tax credits of $2,281,000 for the quarter and $6,393,000 for the 9 months.


BABY BELLS MAY BID AGAINST A.T.&amp; T.
LEAD: Federal District Judge Harold H. Greene today allowed regional telephone companies to bid against the American Telephone and Telegraph Company on a $25 billion Government telecommunications contract.


Inside
LEAD:  New Albany Indictments  A State Senator from Rochester and a former Senator from Brooklyn have been indicted in connection with legislative payroll abuse.
Page 29.
Jobless Rate Up Slightly  The nation's unemployment rate edged up to 5.9 percent in October, but manufacturing jobs surged, reflecting a resilient economy.


INSITUFORM SOUTHEAST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSITUFORM SOUTHEAST
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,133,573
2,197,588
Net loss
95,718
b156,101
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
4,969,263
4,350,243
Net inc
170,848
13,958
Share earns
.04
.13
Shares outst
3,915,000
3,130,082


Reducing, Increasing and Obfuscating by Percent
LEAD: To the Editor:


Amnesty Law Is Slowly Attracting Illegal Aliens
LEAD: Louis Velkovski and his father, Peter, with their new immigration cards.
The number of aliens taking advantage of the amnesty law provisions have been fewer than expected.
Page 30. (The New York Times/Edward Hausner)


A Way Is Reported Found To Activate the AIDS Virus
LEAD: Scientists for the first time have demonstrated a mechanism that can activate the dormant AIDS virus in human cells placed in a test tube.


3 Sought in Robberies Of Korean Groceries
LEAD: Detectives believe that a team of three men is responsible for at least 29 robberies of Korean grocery and produce stores, primarily on the Upper East Side, in the last three months, officials said this week.


SUBURBAN BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUBURBAN BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,929,000
1,353,000
Per share
.50
.39
Shares outst
3,861,163
3,477,272
9mo net inc
5,665,000
3,894,000
Per share
1.47
1.39
Shares outst
3,857,251
2,796,443


SYRIA IS SAID TO REBUFF NEW EFFORT TO EXTRADITE NAZI
LEAD: West Germany and Austria plan new attempts to extradite the Nazi fugitive Alois Brunner from Syria, a leading Nazi-hunter said today.
But a report from Vienna said Damascus had rejected Austria's latest request.


Pact on Milk Prices Is Termed Illegal
LEAD: A recent price-setting agreement between a major Northeast dairy farmers' cooperative and a New York area milk dealers' group violates Federal antitrust laws and must be voided, the New York State Attorney General said yesterday.


INTERMET CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERMET CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
73,536,000
67,044,000
Net inc
3,990,000
3,735,000
Share earns
.19
.17
9mo sales
231,909,000
224,189,000
Net inc
16,266,000
14,925,000
Share earns
.76
.70


Clean Up Your Building Code Act, New York
LEAD: To the Editor:


Indicted In Inquiry Of Legislature
LEAD: A Democratic State Senator from Rochester and a former State Senator from Brooklyn have been indicted in connection with an investigation of legislative payroll abuses, people familiar with the investigation said yesterday.


TAKE A CHICKEN TO LUNCH
LEAD: An art teacher at Harvard assigned her students to adopt a live chicken for a day, then take it to a slaughterhouse, watch it be processed, and cook and eat it before making a sculpture from the bones.


A FESTIVAL OF BOOKS BY OR ABOUT JEWS OPENS TOMORROW
LEAD: The Jewish Heritage Book Festival - the largest literary bazaar devoted to books by Jews, or about Judaism or Jewish culture - comes to the Seventh Regiment Armory, on Park Avenue and 67th Street, tomorrow and Monday.
More than a hundred publishers and booksellers are expected to be joined by scores of authors and performers.


CITIZENS FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
307,000
310,000
Share earns
.15
.15
9mo net inc
1,033,000
929,000
Share earns
.52
.46


New Exxon Wells
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation said it planned to increase its drilling activity in West Texas, with 350 new wells over two years.
Randall Meyer, the president of the nation's largest oil company, said Exxon was trying to gradually rebuild its drilling program after the 1986 price collapse.
While prices have ranged between $18 and $20 per 42-gallon barrel in recent weeks, they dipped below $10 a barrel last year.


CONSECO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSECO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b6,236,000
c1,454,000
Share earns
.81
.34
Shares outst
6,665,667
4,515,734
9mo net inc
b12,779,000
c3,305,000
Share earns
2.13
.84
Shares outst
5,596,029
3,957,249


Harmon Will Play
LEAD: While an investigation continues into whether Kevin Harmon received payments from Norby Walters, the New York sports agent, the Iowa running back yesterday received permission from the National Collegiate Athletic Association and officials of the Big Ten Conference to play for the Hawkeyes today against


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
9.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.69
6.57
5.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.88
5.60
5.31
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.37
6.02
5.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.58
8.53
7.19
30-YR.


Probation Employee Accused Of Housing Dozens of Aliens
LEAD: A probationary investigator for the Brooklyn District Attorney's office was charged yesterday with harboring dozens of Mexican nationals who are in this country illegally in two houses he owns in the Greenpoint section of the borough.


Edward Scheer Frese
LEAD: Edward Scheer Frese, a former vice president of the Marine Midland Bank, died of a heart attack Tuesday at Phelps Memorial Hospital in North Tarrytown.
He was 77 years old and lived in Briarcliff Manor.


OGLEBAY NORTON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OGLEBAY NORTON CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
37,689,000
41,105,000
Net loss
77,000
1,547,000
9mo rev
96,869,000
100,203,000
Net loss
1,730,000
373,000


Meese's Wife Wins Backing
LEAD: The chief White House spokesman said today that the wife of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d had ''every right'' to write a letter to a Federal judge in which she used her husband's name in seeking leniency for a Congressman's son convicted of tax fraud.


BURGER KING INVESTORS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURGER KING INVESTORS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,712,000
2,752,000
Net inc
1,871,000
1,807,000
Share earns
.40
.38
9mo rev
7,590,000
6,218,000
Net inc
4,813,000
3,987,000
Share earns
1.02
.84


Eamonn Andrews, 64; British TV Personality
LEAD: Eamonn Andrews, an Irish-born British television personality who was the host of the British version of ''This Is Your Life,'' died Thursday after a long illness.
He was 64 years old.


TELESPHERE INTERNATINAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELESPHERE INTERNATINAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,987,000
20,802,000
Net inc
550,000
b6,900,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
53,775,000
63,274,000
Net inc
1,883,000
b15,571,000
Share earns
.19
-


Film: 'Blind Trust,' A Canadian Thriller
LEAD: In the men's room of a small coffee shop, a mannish-looking woman peeks from inside a stall and sees a burly security guard nuzzling a young blond waiter.
These three will become central to the action of ''Blind Trust,'' an intelligent thriller by Yves Simoneau, a Canadian director, and the confusions of gender in the men's room give a clue that the story will resonate with tangled relationships and thwarted plans.


About New York; Family Violence: Seeking Answers By Sharing Pain
LEAD: ''For me, it was a beautiful, beautiful day,'' one man recalled, ''the first time I've seen my daughter in eight months.''


CANADIAN TIRE CORP reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANADIAN TIRE CORP
13wks to Oct 3
1987
1986
Revenue
616,347,000
553,568,000
Net inc
b27,439,000
c23,891,000
Share earns
.30
.27
39wk rev
1,830,000,000
1,700,000,000
Net inc
b76,055,000
c67,968,000
Share earns
.85
.78


The Economic Challenges Facing China's New Leaders
LEAD: The 13th Congress of the Chinese Communist Party ended the other day with a large-scale overhaul of the Central Committee, the Politburo and its Standing Committee.
But, on the surface at least, there were none of the battles between ''conservatives'' and ''reformers'' predicted by Western observers just a few weeks ago.


PACIFIC FIRST FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFIC FIRST FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
6,515,000
6,187,000
Per share
.87
.83
9mo net inc
20,253,000
15,587,000
Per share
2.70
2.08
The latest 9 months include an extraordinary loss of $3,758,000.


SOUTHERN INDIANA GAS &amp; ELECRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN INDIANA GAS &amp; ELECRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
74,087,286
67,335,894
Net inc
11,369,914
8,915,969
Share earns
1.18
.90
9mo rev
211,957,145
207,836,239
Net inc
30,209,312
27,428,491
Share earns
3.11
2.76


Lobbying For Safer Bunk Beds
LEAD: IN Dayton, Ohio, Drew Harbur, 3 years old, was playing on the top of a bunk bed when he slipped between the slats designed to support the mattress.
His body went through the space, but his head did not.
A tragedy was averted only because his older brother was there and called for their mother.


WEAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEAN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
17,872,000
29,279,000
Net loss
1,701,000
c3,377,000
9mo sales
68,520,000
104,696,000
Net loss
b416,000
c5,422,000
b-After a gain of $523,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


SHONEY'S SOUTH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHONEY'S SOUTH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
53,675,000
48,684,000
Net inc
1,175,000
2,073,000
Share earns
.16
.30
9mo rev
166,331,000
153,261,000
Net inc
3,076,000
5,727,000
Share earns
.42
.91
Shares outst
7,263,272
6,282,881


Abused Girl's Neighbors Held Back by Fears
LEAD: In the last days of Elizabeth Steinberg's life, Fayette Dunn was troubled by a festering suspicion that the little girl who lived in the apartment just above hers was being abused.


Yankee Staff Seems in Unison
LEAD: The three of them sat together in a Manhattan restaurant yesterday, wearing smiles and offering the appearance of an operation that was working smoothly despite another upheaval by the owner.


TURNER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TURNER CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
25,348,000
b2,014,000
Share earns
-
.49
9mo net loss
23,033,000
b5,821,000
Share earns
-
1.39
b-Net income  The latest third quarter loss was attributed principally to a writedown of certain real estate in connection with a reduction in the activities of Turner Development Corp.


LINEAR INSTRUMENTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINEAR INSTRUMENTS CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,528,409
1,260,929
Net inc
b23,287
c74,350
Share earns
.01
-
Yr sales
5,368,280
4,336,458
Net inc
b178,808
c329,222
Share earns
.05
-
b-Includes tax credits of $8,613 and $66,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Young Mariner Is Home From the Sea After 2-Year Global Voyage
LEAD: Tania Aebi as she arrived in New York Harbor yesterday after her 27,000-mile odyssey around the world aboard her 26-foot sloop, Varuna.
She began her solo trip May 28, 1985, when she was 18 years old.
Page 29. (NYT/John Sotomayor)


Private Pilots to Get Freedoms at Los Angeles
LEAD: An agreement in principle that would again guarantee that private pilots could make flights in good weather through a restricted zone in the Los Angeles area was reached yesterday by the Federal Aviation Administration and private pilot groups.


3:30 P.M. Close On Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that it would operate on reduced trading hours next week but that it was eliminating all restrictions on program trading.


BROTHERS GUILTY IN WEDTECH CASE
LEAD: A Federal jury today found State Senator Michael Mitchell and his brother, former State Senator Clarence Mitchell 3d, guilty of trying to obstruct a Congressional investigation of the Wedtech Corporation.


Argentina Gets Waiver For Emergency Loan
LEAD: Argentina yesterday was granted a a waiver from meeting economic performance targets set by the International Monetary Fund, Treasury and international monetary officials said. , The waiver would allow Argentina to receive a $500 million emergency loan from governments around the world.
The loan had been contingent upon continued compliance with the I.M.F.


Jack L. Boulton, Buyer Of Art for Chase Bank
LEAD: Jack L. Boulton, an arts adviser to the Chase Manhattan Bank, was found dead in his Chelsea apartment on Thursday by the police, who had been summoned by associates concerned about Mr.
Boulton's absence from his office.
Mr.
Boulton was 43 years old and had been suffering from AIDS, according to colleagues.


MERCANTILE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCANTILE BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
10,591,000
b14,345,000
Per share
.66
.90
9mo net loss
15,332,000
bc41,795,000
Per share
-
2.63
b-Includes after-tax gains of $2,914,000, or 18 cents a share, for the quarter and $8,040,000, or 51 cents a share, for the 9 months from the purchase of annuity contracts.


MANGOOD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANGOOD CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
19,877,000
18,347,000
Net inc
b760,000
d2,623,000
Share earns
.38
2.78
Shares outst
1,904,480
945,181
9mo sales
56,836,000
50,414,000
Net inc
b1,173,000
cd3,018,000
Share earns
.56
-


CABINET OFFICIAL BIDS GINSBURG END HIGH COURT QUEST
LEAD: With President Reagan's consent, Education Secretary William J. Bennett telephoned Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg today to urge him to withdraw from consideration for the Supreme Court, Administration officials said.


Consumer Debt Spurts
LEAD: Americans, borrowing heavily to purchase new cars, took out $6.06 billion in credit in September, the biggest increase in a year, the Government said today.


Nets Lack a Finishing Touch
LEAD: With six new players, two of whom became Nets only two days ago, and 10 players available for tonight's season opener, Coach Dave Wohl did not know what to expect So when the Nets were beaten by the Cleveland Cavaliers, 114-108, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, Wohl did not express disappointment.
Instead, he called the game ''another learning process.


Stocks Down in Tokyo
LEAD: Tokyo share prices fell slightly in the half-day session today, reflecting Wall Street's lower close on Friday, dealers said.


FAIRCHILD INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAIRCHILD INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
113,792,000
108,566,000
Net inc
b463,000
c7,674,000
Share earns
-
.32
9mo sales
330,584,000
337,363,000
Net inc
b22,584,000
c63,681,000
Share earns
.94
3.28
Shares outst
14,842,000
19,406,000


AMBASSADOR FINCL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMBASSADOR FINCL GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
79,846
960,110
9mo net inc
b63,691
c603,887
Share earns
.03
-
b-After a tax credit of $35,690.
c-Net loss


FRANKLIN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRANKLIN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
287,000
339,000
Share earns
.30
.58
Shares outst
947,561
588,436


Dance: Warsaw Ballet in 'Giselle'
LEAD: It may be true that the Warsaw Ballet from Poland was seen for the first time in New York when it performed ''Giselle'' on Thursday night at the Lehman Center for the Performing Arts at Lehman College.


Bridge:; Von Zedtwitz Knockout Play Lasted More Than One Year
LEAD: An event that lasts more than a year is a great rarity, but one such was the 1986-87 Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship, which ended Thursday night.


Syracuse Receiver: New Start in Life
LEAD: HOCKEY was Tommy Kane's favorite sport, but it was football in the United States that provided his avenue of escape from trouble on the streets of Montreal and what he said was probably a future in jail.


CONTROL RESOURCES INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTROL RESOURCES INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,843,000
8,646,000
Net loss
72,000
b487,000
Share earns
-
.13
9mo rev
30,797,000
16,158,000
Net loss
636,000
b961,000
Share earns
-
.27


CORRECTION
LEAD: A report in the Business People column of Business Day on Thursday, about General Electric's sale of assets of its venture capital operation, misidentified the company that arranged the financing.
It was the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company.


Ross Barnett, Segregationist, Dies; Governor of Mississippi in 1960's
LEAD: Former Gov.
Ross Robert Barnett, whose advocacy of segregation helped make Mississippi a civil rights battlefield 25 years ago, died today, his son said.
He was 89 years old.


SUMMCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUMMCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,183,000
b4,145,000
Per share
.47
.47
9mo net inc
11,522,000
b11,150,000
Per share
1.25
1.32
b-Includes the recognition of $929,000 of investment tax credit carryforwards for the quarter and a $950,000 tax credit for the 9 months.


After Circling Globe, Home Is the Sailor
LEAD: For Tania Aebi, the young solo sailor from New York, yesterday was a time for exchanging the harsh realities of a global voyage for the make-believe world of a heroine.


CENTRUST SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRUST SAVINGS BANK (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,350,000
623,000
Share earns
-
.05
Yr net inc
b61,506,000
c55,906,000
Share earns
4.70
6.98
Shares outst
8,898,000
7,985,000
b-Includes gains of $142,000 and $27,746,000 for the quarter and year, resepectively, on sales of investments.


Fed Unit Voted Tighter Credit
LEAD: Federal Reserve policy makers were tightening credit conditions in the weeks before last month's stock market plunge, according to minutes released today.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Thursday about the International Business Machines Corporation's profit expectations incorrectly described the company's estimated relationship between revenue growth and earnings growth.
Revenues would need to grow 4 to 6 percent next year before each dollar of revenue would result in an additional dollar of profit, the company said.


With Prague, Glasnost Comes in a Fainter Echo
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev's advocacy of extensive change in the Soviet Union is finding an echo even in Czechoslovakia, where until recently the very word ''reform'' had been under unofficial but rigorous ban.


Persian Gulf Attack
LEAD: Damaged hull of the Panama-registered tanker Grand Wisdom after an Iranian rocket-grenade attack off Dubai.
No casualties were reported and a resulting fire was put out.
In an attempt to put new life into his peace mission, Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations has sent messages to Iran and Iraq asking them to send emissaries to New York to begin peace negotiations with him immediately.


U.S. Court Dismisses Charge On Iran-Contra Arms Dealer
LEAD: A Federal appeals court set aside a contempt citation today against an arms dealer who refused to give the special counsel, Lawrence E. Walsh, records of eight foreign companies involved in the Iran-contra affair.


IVACO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IVACO INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
527,800,000
494,800,000
Net inc
10,470,000
10,308,000
Share earns
.25
.24
9mo sales
1,540,000,000
1,430,000,000
Net inc
25,191,000
b33,179,000
Share earns
.42
.84
Shares outst
18,300,000
17,800,000


Student Credit Unions Change the Loan Picture; Suffering From Success
LEAD: To the Editor:


INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONIC HARDARE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONIC HARDARE CORP
Qtr to Sept 25
1987
1986
Revenue
2,788,000
2,226,000
Net inc
b166,000
c120,000
Share earns
.07
.05
Shares outst
2,304,000
2,663,000
6mo rev
5,728,000
4,866,000
Net inc
b382,000
c327,000
Share earns
.16
.12


Cuba Still Broadcasting Radio Shows to Iowa
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gephardt Trying to Jump-Start Stalled Campaign
LEAD: Representative Richard A. Gephardt is confronting one of the iron laws of politics: A candidate who is not going up is in grave danger of coming down.


SANDINISTAS NAME CLERIC TO MEDIATE CEASE-FIRE TALKS
LEAD: The Government today appointed Miguel Cardinal Obando y Bravo, the Roman Catholic Primate of Nicaragua and a strong critic of Sandinista rule, to mediate in cease-fire talks between the Government and American-backed guerrillas.


Adoption of Slain Girl, 6, May Not Have Occurred
LEAD: The Greenwich Village couple accused of beating Elizabeth Steinberg to death and neglecting their 16-month-old boy may not have adopted the two children, child welfare and law-enforcement authorities said yesterday.


FRAMINGHAM SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRAMINGHAM SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,213,000
1,700,000
Per share
.30
-
9mo net inc
5,057,000
4,450,000
Per share
1.24
-
The bank converted to stock form in October 1986.


Gay Culture Seminar
LEAD: A symposium on New York City gay and lesbian history and culture will be held Nov. 17 at the City University Graduate Center auditorium (lower level) at 33 West 42d Street.
The symposium is sponsored by the faculty Committee for Lesbian and Gay Studies at the school and will include a lecture on ''Creating Cultural Legacies'' and talks on the history of lesbians in Cherry Grove, Fire Island, and of relations between the state and New York City gay bars.


Billy Williams Says No
LEAD: A FIRST-BASE coach in baseball must know how to blink not only with one eye, but with two.
These are among his essential functions, along with being nimble enough to dodge foul balls.


On Supreme Court Hearings; Unfair Code Words Against Judge Bork
LEAD: To the Editor:


G.O.P. Proposes Tax Rise in Plan To Trim Deficit
LEAD: House Republicans today proposed a $30 billion deficit-reducing plan with the general backing of the White House, the first sign of significant progress in the bipartisan budget negotiations between Congress and the Administration.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Testimony On Robins Continues
LEAD: Witnesses testified today in the second day of a crucial showdown in the Dalkon Shield suits against the A. H. Robins Company.


PROVIDENT LIFE &amp; ACCIDENT INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROVIDENT LIFE &amp; ACCIDENT INSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b13,086,000
c27,571,000
Share earns
.35
.74
9mo net inc
b75,992,000
c90,368,000
Share earns
2.03
2.42
b-After capital gains of $24,462,000 for the quarter and $75,424,000 for the 9 months.


PRUDENTIAL FINANCIAL SERVICES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRUDENTIAL FINANCIAL SERVICES CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
182,987
683,140
Per share
.07
.27
9mo net inc
1,461,145
3,691,426
Per share
.57
1.45
The latest 9 months is after a charge of about $724,000 from the establishment in the second quarter of a loss reserve covering Prudential's FSLIC secondary reserve.


AT&amp;E CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AT&amp;E CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
962,856
137,462
Net loss
2,047,243
2,808,760
9mo rev
2,548,459
657,613
Net loss
6,051,004
6,705,512


FIRST FEDERAL OF THE CAROLINAS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL OF THE CAROLINAS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
837,000
839,000
Per share
.50
.84
Shares outst
1,683,000
810,000
Yr net inc
3,618,000
3,039,000
Per share
2.86
3.11
Shares outst
1,147,000
803,000


SCANA CORP reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCANA CORP (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,126,871,000
1,100,936,000
Net inc
134,345,000
117,761,000
Share earns
3.33
2.92


Anti-Boesky Lawsuit Loses
LEAD: A Federal judge dismissed a lawsuit today that contended the arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky was liable for investment losses suffered by two people because of his illegal insider trading.


Royals and Reds Trade
LEAD: The Kansas City Royals and the Cincinnati Reds yesterday swapped starting pitchers and shortstops, all of whom had disappointing 1987 seasons.


Lebanon Strike Vow Issued
LEAD: Labor leaders vowed today to step up a two-day-old nationwide strike to protest runaway inflation, but some merchants and enterprises defied the stoppage, saying it was harmful to an already crippled economy.
Some grocers, butchers, vegetable vendors and larger businesses resumed work in Beirut and other cities.


Student Credit Unions Change the Loan Picture; Income Tax Mechanism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prison Term for Mother
LEAD: A woman was sentenced here today to four years in prison for leaving her 3-month-old twins unattended in a car where they died of heat stroke on a summer day in 1986.
The 26-year-old mother, Beverly Jean Ernst, was convicted of child endangerment in April.
According to testimony at the trial, Ms.
Ernst left Adam and Ashley in her car on the morning of July 20, 1986, when she went into a shop where her boyfriend lived and fell asleep with him.


FIRSTFED AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRSTFED AMERICA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,853,000
1,367,000
Per share
.73
-
Yr net inc
10,462,000
5,229,000
Per share
2.67
-
The year-ago per share earnings not available; the company converted to stock ownership on Dec.


J A M INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*J A M INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
660,935
547,236
Net inc
80,447
86,647
9mo sales
1,844,729
1,244,387
Net inc
226,506
9,219
Share earns
.02
-


OSMONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OSMONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,803,000
3,745,000
Net loss
27,000
b268,000
Share earns
-
.08
9mo sales
13,519,000
11,163,000
Net inc
585,000
442,000
Share earns
.17
.14
Shares outst
3,496,000
3,091,000


SOUTH CAROLINA NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTH CAROLINA NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
13,951,000
11,779,000
Per share
.64
.55
9mo net inc
39,721,000
32,683,000
Per share
1.83
1.53


USX Considering Dividend Increase
LEAD: The USX Corporation said it was studying possible uses for the $2 billion in cash it expected to generate over the next two years.
Its chairman, David M. Roderick, said the company was considering raising its dividend and making acquisitions.
USX has announced a stock repurchase program and the acquisition of Michigan oil and gas properties from PPG Industries Inc.


NEW JERSEY RESOURCES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW JERSEY RESOURCES CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
41,047,000
32,637,000
Net loss
2,486,000
2,454,000
Yr rev
269,183,000
253,149,000
Net inc
10,308,000
4,946,000
Share earns
1.27
.69
Shares outst
8,094,000
7,150,000


Lincoln Center Plans A Ground-Breaking
LEAD: A ground-breaking ceremony for a two-tower building at Lincoln Center is planned on Tuesday morning on Amsterdam Avenue between 65th and 66th Streets.


DANAHER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DANAHER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
207,598,000
143,417,000
Net inc
b5,860,000
c3,381,000
Share earns
.26
.17
Shares outst
22,827,442
20,419,510
9mo rev
588,468,000
292,414,000
Net inc
b19,214,000
c8,127,000
Share earns
.86
.40
Shares outst
22,257,215
20,419,510


Mill Pearl Is Gambler's Choice
LEAD: Joe Fargis guiding the United States Equestrian Team's Mill Pearl over a hurdle in the International and Open Jumpers, $10,000 Gambler's Choice competititon last night at the National Horse Show at Madison Square Garden.
Page 53. (The New York Times/Peter Freed)


IE INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IE INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
418,521,000
441,525,000
Net inc
b37,275,000
23,656,000
Share earns
2.73
1.78
b-Includes a gain from an accounting change of $45,547,000.


WASHINGTON SCIENTIFIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON SCIENTIFIC CO (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,561,000
6,668,000
Net inc
534,000
b46,000
Share earns
.22
-
Yr sales
35,442,000
31,008,000
Net inc
1,698,000
376,000
Share earns
.69
.15


DOUGLAS &amp; LOMASON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOUGLAS &amp; LOMASON CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
62,364,706
66,552,313
Net inc
240,800
70,841
Share earns
.07
.04
9mo sales
213,563,555
213,637,165
Net inc
3,563,880
3,004,410
Share earns
1.78
1.57


David Starobin
LEAD: David Starobin, a guitarist and composer, is to present works by Michael Starobin, Schubert, Lukas Foss, Norma Beecroft and others tomorrow at 3 P.M. at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
He is to be joined by Patrick Mason, a baritone; Susan Palma, a flutist; Linda Moss Eddy, a violist, and Timothy Eddy, a cellist.


Dead Sturgeon Puts an End to Monster Tales in Washington State
LEAD: A 900-pound sturgeon in Bellevue after it was pulled from Lake Washington.
The 11-foot-long fish was found floating Thursday.
State officials estimated it was born sometime around the turn of the century and may have died of old age.
Tales have persisted of a monster in the lake that sometimes eats ducks.


Johnson Powers Lakers in Stretch
LEAD: Magic Johnson scored 10 of his 26 points in the fourth quarter, and A. C. Green added 21 tonight as the Los Angeles Lakers opened the defense of their championship with a 113-109 victory over the Seattle SuperSonics.


Bottleneck for Foreign Stocks
LEAD: As trading surged wildly in stock markets around the world in late October, American investment firms found that the already formidable job of settling trades in foreign stocks had become even more difficult.


Santiago Journal; Chile's Press Wonders: Just How Free Is Free?
LEAD: In a recent interview, a freelance magazine writer asked a leading member of Chile's political opposition what he thought of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, the President.


Trump Casinos' Design For New Housing Gains
LEAD: Donald J. Trump, the casino owner and developer, received preliminary approval today to build a 1,200-unit housing project on the Boardwalk.


Reagan Meeting Cited as Example of Deaver Access
LEAD: The prosecution in the perjury trial of Michael K. Deaver introduced into evidence today an official White House photograph of President Reagan receiving a letter from a South Korean trade envoy in the Oval Office.


PAR TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAR TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,077,000
22,211,000
Net loss
1,257,000
b2,850,000
Share earns
-
.37
9mo rev
41,283,000
53,886,000
Net loss
639,000
b4,915,000
Share earns
-
.64


NATIONAL CITY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL CITY BANCORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
588,000
592,000
Per share
.16
.17
9mo net inc
2,230,000
1,716,000
Per share
.62
.48


Books of The Times; Hapless Writer
LEAD:  CUTS.
By Malcolm Bradbury.
Illustrated by Tom Phillips. 143 pages.
Harper &amp; Row. $10.95.


FIRST FINCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FINCORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
676,456
671,713
Per share
.27
.27
9mo net inc
1,909,787
1,337,386
Per share
.77
.54


HAITIAN SPEAKS LITTLE OF VIOLENCE
LEAD: Lieut.
Gen.
Henri Namphy, the head of Haiti's provisional Government, addressed the nation on radio and television today, but referred only obliquely to the wave of violence that has been threatening the country's first elections in 30 years.


Japan's New Cabinet Gets Old Face
LEAD: Noboru Takeshita was elected Japan's 17th postwar Prime Minister today, and he immediately formed a Government bearing the stamp of his predecessor in top positions.


GREATER NEW YORK SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREATER NEW YORK SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,222,000
c6,959,000
Per share
.57
-
9mo net inc
b17,597,000
c24,844,000
b-Includes tax loss carryforwards of $2,890,000 for the quarter and $7,378,000 for the 9 months; the 9 months also includes an after-tax loss of $4.4 million on sales of portfolio securities and loans.


WESTMARK INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTMARK INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
70,638,000
64,814,000
Net inc
b859,000
c9,663,000
Share earns
.08
-
9mo rev
214,057,000
179,541,000
Net inc
b4,645,000
c9,624,000
Share earns
.43
-


PORTA SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PORTA SYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,448,000
9,904,000
Net inc
895,000
432,000
Share earns
.16
.08
9mo sales
37,523,000
29,666,000
Net inc
2,572,000
1,953,000
Share earns
.47
.36


PREMIER BANKSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PREMIER BANKSHARES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,201,000
841,000
Per share
.76
.71
9mo net inc
2,931,000
2,426,000
Per share
2.21
2.04


Rhetoric vs. Reality In the Ginsburg Case
LEAD: The disclosure by President Reagan's nominee for the Supreme Court, Douglas H. Ginsburg, that he smoked marijuana in the 1960's and the 1970's has caught the President in one of the most difficult of political snares: the conflict between rhetoric and reality.


Cram Courses for S.A.T. Are a Booming Business
LEAD: The Scholastic Aptitude Test, designed as the test that could not be studied for, is increasingly becoming the object of expensive coaching courses, high school cram sessions and private tutoring.


Robinson Signs
LEAD: David Robinson, the top pick in the 1987 National Basketball Association draft, signed a contract with the San Antonio Spurs yesterday that reportedly will pay him at least $24 million in eight years.


Analysts Differ On Gold Safety
LEAD: OCTOBER'S stock market plunge brought gold to center stage once more as individual investors and their advisers argue for and against it as an investment medium.
Gold has traditionally been considered a safe haven when there is turmoil in the financial world and expectations of rising inflation - and some advisers therefore believe that this is the time for investors to begin or augment a gold buying program.


CITIZENS BANK-NORTH CAROINA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS BANK-NORTH CAROINA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
85,659
69,540
Per share
.09
.07
9mo net inc
397,315
300,872
Per share
.43
.41


TRUSTCOMPANY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRUSTCOMPANY BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,459,000
2,467,000
Per share
2.81
2.05
9mo net inc
9,975,000
7,121,000
Per share
8.11
5.91


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS-GEORGIA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS-GEORGIA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
411,000
418,000
Per share
.43
.45
6mo net inc
852,000
830,000
Per share
.88
.89


VOLUNTEER BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VOLUNTEER BANCSHARES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
701,000
537,000
Per share
.32
.30
Shares outst
2,139,964
1,480,278
9mo net inc
1,859,000
1,869,000
Per share
1.08
1.28
Shares outst
1,731,040
1,459,079


Walcott Recovering
LEAD: Jersey Joe Walcott, the former heavyweight champion, was reported to be in stable condition with a favorable prognosis yesterday at Howard University Hospital in Washington, after undergoing surgery Tuesday night to relieve pressure on his spinal cord.


Healthier Chinese Food
LEAD: Ask someone to mention healthy cuisines, and Chinese is always near the top of the list because of its emphasis on vegetables and rice.


Sergeant Is Suspended Over Report of Beating
LEAD: A Bronx police sergeant was suspended Thursday night for ''failure to supervise and control'' an incident in September in which officers under his command were accused of beating a grocery store owner and a deliverer.


REGIONAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REGIONAL BANCORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,708,000
1,732,000
Per share
.46
.46
9mo net inc
5,426,000
3,973,000
Per share
1.46
-
The per share earnings for the year- ago 9 months was unavailable because the bank company converted to stock ownership in March 1986.


BETZ LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BETZ LABORATORIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
100,067,894
87,977,945
Net inc
10,759,992
9,647,345
Share earns
.68
.60
9mo sales
286,135,429
259,140,375
Net inc
30,593,236
28,361,077
Share earns
1.94
1.78


STAGE: 'OIL CITY SYMPHONY,' THE ETERNALLY STAGESTRUCK
LEAD: For ''Oil City Symphony,'' Circle in the Square (Downtown) has been transformed into a high school gymnasium, complete with basketball hoops and hardwood floor.
Bathed in the soft glow of nostalgia, this could be the setting for the senior prom scene in the movie, ''Peggy Sue Got Married.'' As the show begins, four musically inclined graduates of the 1960's have reunited to give a recital in honor of a favorite teacher.


BEL FUSE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEL FUSE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
24,786,000
15,832,000
Net inc
3,084,000
1,570,000
Share earns
.66
.33
9mo sales
9,019,000
6,124,000
Net inc
1,019,000
646,000
Share earns
.23
.14


Four Women Reach Out To Their Homeless Sister
LEAD: The four sisters of Joyce Brown, the homeless woman at the center of a court hearing over Mayor Koch's latest effort to help the homeless, said she had been a bright, attractive and happy-go-lucky child.


NORWICH SAVINGS SOCIETY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORWICH SAVINGS SOCIETY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,704,000
859,000
Per share
.30
-
9mo net inc
4,572,000
2,740,000
Per share
.80
-
The year-ago periods' per share earnings are unavailable.
The bank converted from mutual to stock form of ownership in November 1986.


NEW ENGLAND CRITICAL CARE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW ENGLAND CRITICAL CARE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,149,000
5,548,000
Net inc
945,000
b842,000
Share earns
.18
.24
Shares outst
5,389,000
3,429,000
9mo rev
21,204,000
14,880,000
Net inc
2,333,000
b2,118,000
Share earns
.48
.63
Shares outst
4,898,000
3,348,000


U.S. Says Contra Aid Could Come If Sandinistas Don't Meet Accord
LEAD: Reagan Administration officials said today that they were pleased by Nicaragua's willingness to negotiate a cease-fire because it enhanced the political stature of the American-backed rebels.


Rutledge Likely to Be on Run
LEAD: The Giants' line that could not protect Phil Simms from pass-rushers or open holes for Joe Morris to scoot through now is attempting to band together for Jeff Rutledge at quarterback.


For Queens Rabbi, a Special Honor
LEAD: Governor Cuomo calls him ''my rabbi.''


NORTON ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTON ENTERPRISES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,094,128
13,059,976
Net inc
561,264
b529,367
Share earns
.35
.33
9mo rev
46,879,648
37,819,981
Net inc
1,314,731
b849,433
Share earns
.82
.52


ARIZONA COMMERCE BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARIZONA COMMERCE BANK (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,687
b6,410
9mo net inc
104,781
43,799
Per share
.05
.04
b-Net loss


MUNSINGWEAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MUNSINGWEAR INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
53,167,000
44,215,000
Net loss
3,179,000
b719,000
Share earns
-
.15
9mo sales
157,325,000
108,474,000
Net loss
13,326,000
b5,217,000
Share earns
-
1.14


WELLMAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WELLMAN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
63,000,000
46,700,000
Net inc
5,700,000
2,800,000
Share earns
.39
-
9mo sales
189,800,000
140,400,000
Net inc
b6,000,000
9,000,000
b-After a $9.3 million charge from the prepayment of debt.


Dismissal of Federal Agency Staff Protested
LEAD: Three heads of House committees protested today that the dismissal of the entire seven-member staff of a small Federal agency was ''unjustified, wasteful and inhumane.''


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK OF ALABAMA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK OF ALABAMA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b674,000
c435,000
Per share
.61
-
Yr net inc
b2,741,000
c2,646,000
Per share
2.47
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $144,000 for the both periods.


JORDAN REJECTING A U.S. PEACE PLAN
LEAD: Jordan has turned down an American proposal that the United States and the Soviet Union co-sponsor direct peace talks between Israel and a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation, a very senior Jordanian official said today.


ASTREX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASTREX INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,702,000
6,002,000
Net loss
b145,000
c1,224,000
6mo rev
11,856,000
12,309,000
Net loss
b17,000
c1,956,000
After a loss of $14,000 and a gain of $52,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, on the sale and valuation of marketable securities.


Dr. Henry Young
LEAD: Dr.
Henry Young, a physician who practiced in Manhattan for more than 50 years and was an assistant professor of medicine at New York Medical College, died of a heart attack Monday at his home in Bloomingburg, N.Y.
He was 74 years old.


Sakharov Emerges, Freer but Still in Limbo
LEAD: On a typical day, two or three supplicants find their way to the unmarked apartment of Andrei D. Sakharov.


Dollar Narrowly Mixed To End a Frantic Week
LEAD: The dollar turned in a mixed performance yesterday in thin trading as world currency markets were buffeted by conflicting rumors about the amounts that Democrats and Republicans expect to slice from the Federal budget deficit.


'88 Growth Forecasts Cut
LEAD: The 49 economists surveyed monthly by Blue Chip Economic Indicators have lowered their consensus forecast for 1988 economic growth to 1.9 percent, from 2.8 percent in early October, Blue Chip said yesterday.


KENAN TRANSPORT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENAN TRANSPORT CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,713,000
9,861,000
Net inc
665,000
632,000
Share earns
.28
.27
9mo rev
37,421,000
30,005,000
Net inc
2,107,000
1,840,000
Share earns
.90
.79


Myrna Loy Receives A Tribute
LEAD: During the many years Myrna Loy reigned as one of America's leading movie stars, millions of fans idolized her as ''the perfect wife,'' a paragon of charm, sophistication and intelligence whose sly sense of humor never deserted her no matter how outrageous the circumstances - or her husband's behavior.


National Horse Show; Fargis Is the Best 'Gambler'
LEAD: The most frenzied jumping event at the National Horse Show, last night's Gambler's Choice, came down to a flash finish as the last horse of the 27 entrants, Mill Pearl, was guided to victory by Joe Fargis of Southampton, L.I.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The German Government expects an even stronger effort by the United States to reduce its budget deficits.
The faster that happens, the better.'' - Friedhelm Ost, the West German Government spokesman.  [ 1:3. ]


Iceland Power Link Plan
LEAD: North Venture Shipping Agencies Ltd., of Britain, today proposed to import electricity from Iceland through what would be the world's longest undersea transmission cable.


SHIFT HELD SLIGHT
LEAD: The economy created new jobs at a rapid pace in October, but an exceptionally large increase in the number of people seeking them nudged the nation's unemployment rate up to 5.9 percent.


ZIEGLER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZIEGLER CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
995,000
2,012,000
Share earns
.30
.59
9mo net inc
3,318,000
3,701,000
Share earns
1.00
1.09


UNION NATIONAL BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION NATIONAL BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
7,879,000
7,007,000
Per share
.80
.70
9mo net inc
23,042,000
20,020,000
Per share
2.33
2.01


GALACTIC RESOURCES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GALACTIC RESOURCES LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,200,000
8,100,000
Net inc
2,571,827
b10,101,185
Share earns
.10
-
9mo rev
26,400,000
9,700,000
Net inc
371,728
b11,507,800
Share earns
.02
-


Judging the Judge, and the President
LEAD: By acknowledging that he has smoked marijuana, Douglas Ginsburg neither adds to nor subtracts from his qualifications for the Supreme Court.
Whether or not he now withdraws from consideration, the episode tells a great deal about the President.
Mr.
Reagan has been more interested in pushing politics and punishing opponents than in appointing judges of compelling merit.


In the Surreal World, Fashion Imitates Art
LEAD: Like Montague and Capulet, high art and fashion are not supposed to keep company.
Among people who see themselves as the guardians of high art, ''fashionable'' is the universal, boilerplated, multipurpose insult. ''Unfashionable,'' by contrast, is a brevet of integrity and can be conferred upon enterprises no matter how dingy.


AMERICAN CAPITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CAPITAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
137,668,000
118,568000
Net loss
1,930,000
b1,716,000
Share earns
-
.11
9mo rev
404,137,000
341,074,000
Net inc
650,000
c6,240,000
Share earns
-
.41


Recital: Elly Ameling in Works of 18 Composers
LEAD: Elly Ameling is that certified rarity, a singer who knows what she does best and spends virtually an entire career refining a special talent.
Although the Dutch soprano has occasionally ventured afield (Ilia in Mozart's ''Idomeneo'' in the 1970's, programs of concert arias and, more recently, a misguided recording of American popular tunes), her gifts have been mostly spent on the song recital.


The Right Way to Teach Children to Read
LEAD: The education reform movement is dying.


WASHINGTON ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON ENERGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
48,109,000
46,849,000
Net loss
2,129,000
1,236,000
Yr rev
305,484,000
374,907,000
Net inc
b14,728,000
18,891,000
Share earns
1.08
1.34
b-After a credit of $3,215,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


LEAR PETROLEUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEAR PETROLEUM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
51,589,398
84,145,236
Net loss
4,933,198
c6,929,723
9mo rev
164,460,749
287,342,833
Net loss
b11,768,014
c82,273,202
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $1,120,606.


Wildfires Consume Large Areas in the South
LEAD: A firefighter at the scene of a brush fire yesterday in Jackson, Miss.
It was one of more than 8,000 blazes that have blackened about 121,000 thousand acres in 13 southern states in the past 11 days. (AP)


LANDMARK SAVINGS ASSOCIATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANDMARK SAVINGS ASSOCIATION
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,549,000
c1,359,000
Per share
.63
.55
9mo net inc
b4,552,000
c3,842,000
Per share
1.85
1.72
b-After tax credits of $1,093,000, or 45 cents a share, for the quarter and $3,064,000, or $1.25 a share, for the 9 months.


Tipper Gore Denies Reports Of Shift on Lewd Rock Issue
LEAD: Tipper Gore, the wife of Senator Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee, a candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination, denies that she is backing down from her campaign against obscene rock lyrics and movies.


Group Buys Stake In Standard Brands
LEAD: Investors led by Sid R. Bass and Lee M. Bass, two members of the wealthy Bass family of Texas, have purchased a 7.2 percent stake in the Standard Brands Paint Company.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the Bass group said it had paid $16.7 million for its 806,000 Standard Brands' shares, or an average of $20.17 a share.


MIDFED SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDFED SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
608,000
216,000
Per share
.88
.31


New-Look Knicks Open With Same Old Result
LEAD: The new-look Knicks delivered everything they promised tonight in the much-awaited debut of the Rick Pitino regime.
Relying largely on Pitino's pressure-defense style, they kept in check the likes of Isiah Thomas, Adrian Dantley and Bill Laimbeer, the all-star trio of the Detroit Pistons.
And they found themselves on the verge of achieving a surprise in their season opener.


Illegal Aliens Slowly Finding Path to Citizenship
LEAD: At the immigration office on Mill Street here, about 50 people gathered today to receive their temporary-residency cards, the first step in achieving citizenship under the amnesty law for illegal aliens.


'Death Wish 4'
There is oddly enough, a philosoph ical premise to ''Death Wish 4.'' ''Anyone connected to drugs deserves to die,'' says a rich man who wants Charles Bronson to wipe out all the drug lords in Los Angeles. ''I need a few days to think about it,'' Mr.
Bronson replies, as if he's a coy job applicant holding out for more money.


WASHINGTON NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON NATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b202,000
c8,824,000
Per share
-
.77
9mo net inc
b20,155,000
c29,402,000
Per share
1.75
2.59
b-After gains on investments of $449,000 for the quarter and $11,339,000 for the 9 months.


EMPIRE OF CAROLINA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMPIRE OF CAROLINA INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,647,000
14,784,000
Net loss
1,400,000
b2,451,000
Share earns
-
.94
9mo rev
29,836,000
28,931,000
Net loss
74,000
b3,065,000
Share earns
-
1.05


Salvadoran Guerrillas Attack, Rejecting Truce
LEAD: Salvadoran guerrillas rejected a Government cease-fire offer Thursday night and carried out one of their most extensive sabotage attacks in the civil war.


Let Us Celebrate Martha Graham Worthily
LEAD: To the Editor:


VALLEY BANCORP-WISCONSIN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VALLEY BANCORP-WISCONSIN (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,687,865
4,903,681
Per share
.47
.50
9mo net inc
15,557,360
15,138,205
Per share
1.57
1.57
The year-ago earnings are restated to reflect the August 1987 acquisition of Community Banks Inc., accounted for as a pooling of interests.


WEBB, DEL E CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEBB, DEL E CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
83,941,000
85,100,000
Net loss
b65,655,000
c7,036,000
Share earns
-
.86
9mo rev
205,121,000
210,421,000
Net loss
b55,783,000
c16,258,000
Share earns
-
1.97


UNITED SAVERS BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED SAVERS BANCORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,851,000
2,702,000
Per share
.58
.77
Shares outst
4,882,746
3,501,000
9mo net inc
8,195,000
7,046,000
Per share
1.68
2.01
Shares outst
4,888,633
3,501,000


Arnold Markle Is Dead; New Haven Prosecutor
LEAD: Arnold Markle, the State's Attorney for New Haven since 1968 and the prosecutor of several members of the Black Panthers in the 1970's, died Thursday, apparently of a heart attack.
He was 60 years old and lived in Woodbridge, Conn.


Georges Franju, a Film Director
LEAD: Georges Franju, a French film director and co-founder of the Cinematheque Francaise, died on Thursday in Paris.
He was 75 years old.


A Show for Well-Bred 2-Leggers, Too
LEAD: For most people, horses are animals.
But for the people at the National Horse Show, they are an unbridled passion.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 35.


Interest Rates Increase a Bit
LEAD: Short- and long-term interest rates rose modestly yesterday as a larger-than-expected rise in employment during October cast doubt on expectations that weak economic activity would lead to lower interest rates later this year.


PAXAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAXAR CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,142,000
7,167,000
Net inc
b357,000
c215,000
Share earns
.13
.08
9mo sales
30,145,000
22,831,000
Net inc
b1,500,000
c1,396,000
Share earns
.54
.50


Bail in Guinness Case
LEAD: The British financier Gerald Ronson was allowed today to remain free on bail of $:500,000, or $892,000, after being charged in a case arising from Guinness P.L.C.'s takeover of Distillers P.L.C., the police said.
Mr.
Ronson, one of Britain's wealthiest men, has been accused of the theft of $:6 million, or $10.7 million, from the Irish brewing giant.


Copper Up on Shortage; Precious Metals Rally
LEAD: Copper futures soared at the Comex in New York today as a shortage of the commodity was reported, and precious metals prices recovered some of their sharp losses experienced earlier in the week.


JACO ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACO ELECTRONICS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,679,718
7,891,677
Net inc
294,874
172,729
Share earns
.25
.15


HEALTHDYNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTHDYNE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,909,000
27,895,000
Net loss
1,604,000
11,469,000
9mo rev
50,176,000
84,516,000
Net loss
b366,000
12,766,000
b-After a tax loss carryforward of $135,000.


Even on a Cloudy Day, You Can See Forever
LEAD: Clouds scudding by over Central Park yesterday, driven by winds of more than 40 miles per hour.
The cold, blustery weather, however, left the air clear for a rare, almost limitless view. (The New York Times/Neal Boenzi)


The Philippines Without Fantasies
LEAD: Is President Corazon Aquino of the Philippines up to her job?
That question comes a short year after she was hailed as a political messiah.
The Reagan Administration recognizes that one extreme is as invalid as the other.
Mrs.
Aquino remains one of Asia's more attractive political leaders.


GAMMA BIOLOGICALS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GAMMA BIOLOGICALS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,534,000
4,434,000
Net inc
122,000
b232,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
9,121,000
9,104,000
Net inc
70,000
b387,000
Share earns
.02
-
b


A Twice-Dead Man, Alive, Faces Charges
LEAD: A Brooklyn man who died twice - first of hepatitis, then of an accidental gunshot wound - has been arrested, very much alive, outside his Sheepshead Bay home and indicted by a Manhattan grand jury on insurance fraud charges.


Correction
LEAD: A brief report in Business Day on Oct. 19 about plans to build a $100 million refinery in Utah described the product line incorrectly.
The U.S.
Petroleum Corporation plans to make wax products there, not oil products.


BROADVIEW SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROADVIEW SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
694,000
b4,368,000
Per share
-
.85
9mo net inc
911,000
c16,934,000
b-Net income  c-Net loss  The company in the year-ago quarter had a gain of $26,073,000 from the sale of 18 branch offices.


UNIONFED FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIONFED FINANCIAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,349,000
4,384,000
Per share
.66
.87


COHASSET SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COHASSET SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
197,000
159,000
Per share
.20
-
9mo net inc
422,000
550,000
The thrift converted from mutual to stock form in May.


GERMANTOWN SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GERMANTOWN SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,237,000
c2,584,000
Per share
.56
-
9mo net inc
b6,236,000
c5,306,000
Per share
1.55
-
b-After tax credits of $654,000 for the quarter and $2,676,000 for the 9 months.


PITTWAY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PITTWAY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
159,936,000
142,030,000
Net inc
6,784,000
5,958,000
Share earns
1.48
1.30
9mo sales
470,701,000
428,161,000
Net inc
22,988,000
21,413,000
Share earns
5.01
4.67


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 13.


Debt Plan Allowed In Placid Oil Case
LEAD: A Federal Bankruptcy Court judge has allowed the bank creditors of the Placid Oil Company, the Hunt brothers' company that owes $803 million, to file their own debt reorganization plan for the company.
But Judge Harold Abramson said the banks could not solicit bids without Placid Oil's support because it would drive down the bid price.


WAINOCO OIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WAINOCO OIL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,273,000
8,269,000
Net inc
b1,507,000
530,000
Share earns
.08
.05
Shares outs
18,245,000
12,264,000
9mo rev
25,435,000
29,972,000
Net inc
4,256,000
c15,716,000
Share earns
.28
-


Lawyer Indicted In the Slaying Of His Daughter
LEAD: A Manhattan grand jury indicted a Greenwich Village lawyer yesterday in the murder of his 6-year-old adopted daughter, who died Thursday of a brain hemorrhage and other injuries suffered last weekend in what authorities called a savage beating.


MASSBANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MASSBANK CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,310,000
1,380,000
Per share
.42
.40
Shares outst
3,149,226
3,450,000
9mo net inc
4,217,000
2,906,000
Per share
1.28
-
The year-ago 9 months' per share earnings was not available; the bank converted to stock form of ownership in May 1986.


MEDICARE-GLASER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDICARE-GLASER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
25,727,000
21,769,000
Net inc
b196,000
128,000
Share earns
.06
.04
6mo sales
51,530,000
43,431,000
Net inc
b223,000
132,000
Share earns
.07
-


ONE VALLEY BANCORP-WEST VIRGINIA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONE VALLEY BANCORP-WEST VIRGINIA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,536,000
3,120,000
Per share
.58
.53
9mo net inc
10,239,000
9,441,000
Per share
1.71
1.59


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA WATER CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA WATER CO (OTC)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
78,294,000
73,191,000
Net inc
b10,059,000
6,642,000
Share earns
3.23
2.40
b-After a gain of $1,833,000 from an accounting change.


GOLDEN NUGGET INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOLDEN NUGGET INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
39,388,000
102,938,000
Net inc
3,458,000
c13,830,000
Share earns
.10
-
9mo rev
156,555,000
288,704,000
Net inc
b138,461,000
c7,483,000
Share earns
3.87
-


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


NEWS SUMMARY SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 1987
LEAD:  International 2-6


49ers Say No
LEAD: A trade last Tuesday between the San Francisco 49ers and the Seattle Seahawks has been voided because Dave Wyman, a linebacker who had been sent to the 49ers, was suffering from a chronic shoulder injury that prevented him from passing San Francisco's physical examination.


Financial Corporation Draws a Citicorp Offer
LEAD: Citicorp, the nation's largest bank holding company, has submitted an offer to acquire the Financial Corporation of America, the troubled operator of the nation's largest savings and loan institution, a spokesman for the Federal Home Loan Bank Board said today.


Mbeki Renews Old Friendships
LEAD: Govan Mbeki, a leading figure in the African National Congress, reaching to accept the hand of a supporter yesterday in Port Elizabeth, South Africa.


New Stock Strategies Abroad
LEAD: In the wake of the October stock plunge that had a shattering effect on markets around the world, global money managers have been devising new strategies.


Obstacles to Budget Compromise: the Case of the Harrier Jet
LEAD: The word swept a Capitol Hill party Thursday celebrating the Marine Corps' birthday: Democratic and Republican leaders of the Armed Services Committees in both houses of Congress, meeting privately, were planning to end production of the corps' primary attack plane.


NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL BANORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL BANORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
101,380
-
Per share
.07
-
9mo net inc
185,847
-
Per share
.12
-
The year-ago figures are not available because the company's wholly owned subsidiary and only operating entity, National Industrial Bank, was not acquired until May 8, 1986.


'Don Pasquale' in English
LEAD: The San Francisco Western Opera Theater, the touring company of the San Francisco Opera, is to perform Donizetti's ''Don Pasquale,'' in English, tonight at 8 o'clock in Whitman Hall at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College, near the intersection of Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues.


DIAMOND SHAMROCK OFFSHORE PARTNERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAMOND SHAMROCK OFFSHORE PARTNERS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,161,000
23,251,000
Net loss
8,830,000
42,460,000
9mo rev
84,943,000
73,847,000
Net loss
731,000
46,245,000


CBI INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CBI INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
292,011,000
297,848,000
Net inc
3,119,000
2,371,000
Share earns
.07
.11
9mo rev
841,639,000
840,658,000
Net inc
8,065,000
b17,254,000
Share earns
.17
.80


Hooker Gets Rest of Altman
LEAD: The Hooker Corporation, the Australian real estate developer that earlier this month bought a controlling interest in B. Altman &amp; Company, said yesterday that it had acquired the remaining equity.


Beene and Karan End Shows on High Note
LEAD: In a dazzling display of the art of dressmaking, Geoffrey Beene made the jump suit the newest fashion look.
Immediately after the Beene show at the Pierre, Donna Karan presented an ultra-feminine version of her sexy separates look in her Seventh Avenue showroom.
Her plunging neckline jackets, lace skirts and stretch fabric evening dresses give a new slant on provocative dressing.


TV: 'Kids Like These,' About Down's Syndrome
LEAD: The parents are told their newborn child is mentally retarded.
The signs include slanted eyes, simian skin creases, flabby muscle tone.
Using the term mongoloid, the doctor urges immediate institutionalization of the baby.
Later, a specialized nurse describes an ''early intervention'' program intended to help victims of Down's syndrome, a chromosomal accident that occurs in one out of 800 births.


SOUTHSTATE BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHSTATE BANK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
353,000
755,000
Per share
.15
-
9mo net inc
1,058,000
1,214,000
The thrift, which converted to stock form April 21, said the latest third quarter includes a $133,000 provision for possible loan losses and a $243,000 income tax provision, while the year- ago quarter had no provision for loan losses and an $8,000 income tax provision.


SOFTWARE PUBLISHING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOFTWARE PUBLISHING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,692,000
6,428,000
Net inc
1,492,000
454,000
Share earns
.20
.06
Yr rev
38,576,000
23,662,000
Net inc
5,193,000
699,000
Share earns
.69
.10


BIG BEAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIG BEAR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 29
1987
1986
Sales
213,625,000
212,899,000
Net inc
b3,071,000
c4,830,000
Share earns
.39
.62
Yr sales
871,156,000
861,630,000
Net inc
13,468,000
13,220,000
Share earns
1.72
1.69


TRAVELERS REALTY INCOME INESTORS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRAVELERS REALTY INCOME INESTORS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
504,808
1,281,781
Per share
.22
.57
9mo net inc
1,959,385
2,986,379
Per share
.87
1.32


MICKELBERRY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICKELBERRY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
19,226,000
31,130,000
Net loss
352,000
d765,000
9mo rev
76,015,000
97,448,000
Net inc
b4,126,000
cd194,000
Share earns
.69
-
b-Includes a pre-tax gain of $4,756,000 representing that portion of the gain on the sale of the C&amp;W Group that is allocable to 1987.


LAC MINERALS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAC MINERALS LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
49,700,000
43,200,000
Net inc
10,200,000
9,700,000
Share earns
.12
.11
9mo rev
148,300,000
111,300,000
Net inc
28,700,000
b21,000,000
Share earns
.33
-


Aides Say Reagan's Stance on Ginsburg Contradicts Policy on Drug Use
LEAD: President Reagan's stated willingness to overlook Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg's use of marijuana as ''experimentation'' contradicts what some Justice Department officials said today was the Administration's virtual ban against hiring law-enforcement officials who acknowledge prior drug use in law school or afterward.


MID-HUDSON SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MID-HUDSON SAVINGS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
702,000
569,000
Per share
.66
.54
9mo net inc
2,105,000
1,685,000
Per share
1.99
-
The year-ago per share earnings are not available; the bank converted to public ownership in June 1986.


PORTEC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PORTEC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
29,723,000
27,618,000
Net loss
908,000
b109,000
Share earns
-
.04
9mo sales
86,016,000
90,889,000
Net loss
4,799,000
b3,904,000
Share earns
-
1.43


Piano: Tcherepnin Program
LEAD: To commemorate the 10th anniversary of Alexander Tcherepnin's death, the Tcherepnin Society sponsored a program of the composer's piano music, performed by Bennett Lerner, Wednesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
Tcherepnin, born in St.
Petersburg in 1899, lived in Paris, Chicago and New York and spent time in the Far East, marrying a Chinese pianist, Lee Hsien Ming.


FULTON FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FULTON FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
263,000
252,000
Share earns
.06
-
9mo net inc
398,000
11,143,000
Share earns
.09
-
There were no year-ago share earnings available because the bank converted to public ownership in January 1987.


Is It Time To Open A Firm?
LEAD: Wall Street has always had its contrarians.


AUTO-TROL TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUTO-TROL TECHNOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,840,000
15,409,000
Net inc
375,000
b691,000
Share earns
.06
-
9mo rev
53,764,000
45,864,000
Net inc
1,162,000
b4,072,000
Share earns
.17
-


Broker Sues In Shootings
LEAD: A stockbroker who was wounded when an angry investor opened fire in a Merrill Lynch office has filed a $25 million suit against the gunman's widow and the company that sold the gun.


NASTA INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NASTA INTERNATIONAL (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,261,000
12,952,000
Net inc
1,281,000
1,192,000
Share earns
.25
-
9mo sales
26,287,000
23,634,000
Net inc
2,403,000
1,956,000
Share earns
.53
-


Kirkland Graham Is Wed To Timothy F. DeLaney
LEAD: Kirkland Graham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome J. Graham Jr. of New Vernon, N.J., was married there yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of Christ the King to Timothy Frederick DeLaney, a son of Robert J. DeLaney of New York and the late Irene Dolbear DeLaney.
Msgr.
John F. Corr officiated.
The bride, a graduate of the Kent Place School and Lafayette College, is a researcher in the news archives department of NBC News.


'PUBLIC ART' FINDING A PLACE IN THE STATE
LEAD: IT WAS like a family celebration.


Tunisia's Premier Seizes Power, Declaring Bourguiba to Be Senile
LEAD: Prime Minister Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali took power in Tunisia today on grounds that Habib Bourguiba, its President for life, was too ill and senile to govern any longer.


Reserve Mobilization Begins
LEAD: About 34,000 members of the Army Reserve, National Guard and civilian employees were moving out this weekend for a two-week test of their ability to mobilize for war.
Mari M. Perrotti, spokeswoman for the 99th Army Reserve Command, based near Pittsburg, said the exercise would cover 12 states from Maine to Virginia.


A FEW IMPORTANT CHORES FOR THE SEASON
LEAD: LAST call to plant bulbs, especially tulips; use fertilizer at the base of planting holes and water bulbs if the ground seems dry.
Continue raking leaves and don't forget to use a bamboo rake or power blower to brush them off groundcovers such as myrtle and pachysandra; shake shrubs and young trees so leaves filter down to the ground; leave them there.


The Politician As Educator
LEAD: WHEN Robert F. Wagner Jr. was a young New York City Councilman at Large he suggested, only half jokingly, that a fire alarm be set off at 110 Livingston Street, the turn-of-the-century building in downtown Brooklyn that houses the city's Board of Education.
The offices would be emptied and the doors locked, and the school bureaucrats should never be allowed to return.


WILLIAMS'S 'STREETCAR' AT FESTIVAL IN MADISON
LEAD: BLANCHE DuBOIS is one of the most extraordinary creations of a playwright's art, and it is gratifying to report that Ellen Barry is offering an enlightening, lucid view of this most cherishable role.


NEW YORKERS, ETC.
LEAD: TRY to get Celso Gonzalez-Falla on a horse on Good Friday.
Try, but there's no way it's going to happen.
That's the one day of the year that the tax and securities lawyer, who commutes between New York and Texas, won't even consider riding.


ACTIVE BIDDING HIGHLIGHTED RECENT SALES
LEAD: THE rare stamp department of Christie's/Robson Lowe, international auctioneers, conducted three sales of stamps and covers last month.
The sales, dominated by hard-to-find material that collectors seek, drew active floor and mail bidding which resulted in a $2,484,454 total for the 1,500 lots.


Wisconsin's Proposed Student Regent Inspires Protest Set to Madonna's Music
LEAD: SONGS don't have to be number one on the charts to be hits in Wisconsin, as Gov.


Arab Summit Talks Opening Today
LEAD: The presidents, kings and emirs of the Arab world began to converge on this hilly capital today amid concern that failure to close ranks behind a united policy could polarize the Arab world into blocs of moderates and radicals for a long time to come.


BERGEN'S NEW SHERIFF HAS HIS WORK CUT OUT
LEAD: DETERMINATION and persistence are qualities that Capt.
Robert R. Herb says he has in abundance, and both his critics and backers say he will need them to correct problems in the Bergen County jail system.


Maine Hoping to Preserve the Good Life With the Good Earth
LEAD: The state of Maine is now in the real estate business, joining 17 other states in setting up an aggressive program to buy land before the crush of development takes away more scenic spots and wildlife areas.


CAN ARTS AND SCIENCE COMPETE WITH SPORTS AT SCHOOL?
LEAD: EVEN WITH all the funds that New Jersey provides for the arts, something's eating at me.
It has to do with how we regard the arts, particularly when it concerns young people.
Here in Sussex County, sports - especially high school sports - are a big deal.
There is wide coverage in the local newspapers, with feature articles, color photographs, all-county teams, athlete-scholar dinners, ''Athletes of the


Countless Copies of Choice Cattle
LEAD: IN the last decade, beef has steadily lost ground to chicken as a component of the American diet.
But University Genetics, in Westport, Conn., hopes to reverse the trend by using biotechnology to breed leaner beef cattle. ''We already have beef that's actually lower in cholesterol and fat than chicken,'' said Randal


A Conversion Plan Roils the Ansonia
LEAD: LIMESTONE demons with wicked smiles decorate the landmark Beaux-Arts facade of the Ansonia Hotel on Broadway at West 73d Street.
The faces are fitting symbols of discord for this building, which has been a battleground for tenants and landlords for several decades.
Squabbles have revolved around rents, services and repairs, and now a possible conversion to a condominium.


Sports of The Times; Czars Under Siege
LEAD: In the good old days when sports were sports, the czars were czars.
Watching the World Series with his chin on the box-seat rail, as Kenesaw Mountain Landis did.
Running the National Football League from his suburban Philadelphia home, as Bert Bell did.
Setting the 24-second clock, as Maurice Podoloff did.


THE PUMPKIN: NOT JUST A PRETTY FACE
LEAD: NOW that Halloween is over, most Americans look forward to only one more use for the abundant pumpkin crop: in the Thanksgiving pie.
That is a pity, because this estimable member of the squash family has a multitude of other delicious uses.


Last Week's Tally in Key Eastern States
LEAD:  SENATE


TAKING IT LIKE LITTLE TROOPERS
LEAD:  AN ACTOR  By Brooke Goffstein.
Illustrated by the author.
Unpaged.
New York: A Charlotte Zolotow Book/ Harper &amp; Row. $12.95. (Ages 5 to 8)  AN ACTOR'S LIFE FOR ME!
By Lillian Gish.
As told to Selma G. Lanes.
Illustrated by Patricia Henderson Lincoln. 80 pp.
New York: Viking Kestrel. $14.95.


Surprise! OS/2 Is Practically Here
LEAD: THE waiting for OS/2 is almost over.
The International Business Machines Corporation announced here on Tuesday that the first version of OS/2, the advanced operating system for the more powerful members of its personal computer family, will be in the stores Dec. 4.


GREAT NECK PLAZA SUES NASSAU RENT BOARD
LEAD: THE Village of Great Neck Plaza has filed suit against the Nassau County Rent Guidelines Board, accusing the board of discriminating against renters in a cooperative or condominium building.
The board has allowed owners of co-ops and condominiums who lease the apartment units to charge higher rents than landlords of other rental units.


Molly Fergusson Wed in Richmond
LEAD: Mary Spencer Fergusson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell G. Fergusson of Richmond, was married at St.
James's Episcopal Church there yesterday to Graham Yoshio Tanaka, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Y.
Clifford Tanaka of South Pasadena, Calif.
The Rev.
Frank F. Fagan, assisted by the Rev.
Thomas R. Smith, performed the ceremony.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 1987
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-29


MODERNIZING ELECTRICAL WALL OUTLETS
LEAD: IN many older homes, electrical wall receptacles possess only two slots per outlet.
Modern three-slot receptacles, which have a semicircular hole centered beneath each pair of slots, are more convenient.
And because they provide better grounding for plug-in appliances, they are safer.


Talking: Co-ops; Updating Clauses On Usage
LEAD: CONTROL of New York City co-ops -who lives in the apartments and how they are used - has long been a prime concern for tenant-shareholders.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:  IN CHAMBERS  Chamber music comes in many sizes and sounds, and those who like to sample a little of everything can go from big to small this week when two of the major professional Long Island-based groups take to the stage.
Today, the New York Virtuosi Chamber Symphony, under Kenneth Klein's baton, transports its audience from Brookville to the Mediterranean when it performs ''In the Gardens of Spain and Italy.


Can Steve Jobs Do It Again?
LEAD: GLIDING across the stage, a huge screen behind him, Steven P. Jobs has his audience mesmerized.
He is expounding on his vision of computerized education.
In the future, Mr.
Jobs says, sophisticated computer simulations will allow students to walk through Athens with Plato, experience life in 17th-century


Hollis Kegg Wed To Lewis C. Knox
LEAD: At the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York, Hollis Beaven Kitson Kegg, a daughter of Mrs.
J.
Michael Farrell of New York and Point o' Woods, L.I., and the late William Boyd Kegg Jr., was married yesterday to Lewis Cass Knox, a son of Mary Jane Walters Knox of Swarthmore, Pa., and the late Lewis Cass Knox.


BAR ASSOCIATION'S VIEW ON ENDORSEMENTS
LEAD: I was deeply disappointed by the Oct. 18 article  [ ''Democrats Face Loss of 6 More Judgeships'' ]  concerning the result of the Republican Party's refusal to grant cross-endorsements to qualified sitting Democratic judicial candidates in this area.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I have today asked President Reagan not to forward my nomination to the Supreme Court.''  - Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg.  [ 1:6. ]


THE VIEW FROM AXE CASTLE: OPTIMISTIC
LEAD: DESPITE the tumult on Wall Street, the Axe Castle in Tarrytown is not under seige.
In the Great Hall, beneath its beautiful rose window, the research department is quietly at work.
And it is business as usual in the formal ballroom below, now used by the Axe computer department.
The 18th-century Oak Room, unchanged since it was brought intact from a Paris mansion, is being readied for a meeting.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a lot of oil stains on my asphalt driveway.
What should I use on these stains before I apply a sealer?


Roommates 101: Course of Adjustment
LEAD: THIS FALL there is at least one pair of happy freshmen roommates at Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass. ''It was a perfect match,'' said Melissa Telzer, a New Yorker, about her roommate from Mount Vernon, N.Y. ''We were both assistant managers at Benetton stores.
We both enjoy going to parties and sleeping late.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An essay on the Opinion page on Oct. 25 about the radio drama ''War of the Worlds'' misstated the year it was first broadcast.
It was 1938.


Music: Leinsdorf Offers Britten and Debussy
LEAD: BOTH ends of the New York Philharmonic's Friday night concert at Avery Fisher Hall brought us to the edge of the sea.
But we were shown it from very different sides.
People share equal billing in Britten's ''Peter Grimes'' (we heard the Passacaglia and the four ''Sea Interludes'').
Debussy's ''La Mer'' rises beyond human passions and depicts the sea itself.


A SLATTERN AND A SCHOLAR
LEAD:  FELICITY  By Coral Lansbury. 189 pp. New York: E. P. Dutton. $16.95.


Guilt in the Lindbergh Case
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Canadian Wins Grand Prix
LEAD: The $50,000 Mercedes Grand Prix, the first of the two major jumping competitions at the National Horse Show this weekend, was captured by Ian Millar of the Canadian equestrian team last night on his towering 11-year-old Belgian-bred gelding, Big Ben.
The pair staged a repeat performance of their victory in this event here last year.


BISTRO MAESTROS
LEAD: THE FRENCH BISTRO - A small, traditional family restaurant - has become synonymous with hearty, no-nonsense food.
Celeri remoulade, giant bowls of herring in cream, terrines of gamey pates, french fries and grilled steak, hearty cassoulets, beef stewed in red wine, chocolate mousse and tarte Tatin are served in an equally unpretentious atmosphere.


The Paternal Pride Of Maurice Sendak
LEAD: MAURICE SENDAK ON children: ''I have none.


Rev. Orlando Costas, 45; Protestant Theologian
LEAD: The Rev.
Orlando Enrique Costas, dean of the Andover Newton Theological School and a prominent Hispanic Protestant theologian, died of stomach cancer Thursday night at his home in Newton Centre, Mass.
He was 45 years old.


GINSBURG EPISODE REVIVES DISCORD OF THE 60'S GENERATION
LEAD: IT was perhaps predictable that the members of the generation of the 60's and 70's would come to regret some of their youthful indulgences when they traded in their tie-dyed T-shirts and stashes of marijuana for gray suits and chardonnay.
But the Douglas H. Ginsburg episode has shown that generational bygones cannot be entirely forgotten.


Nouvelle New England
LEAD: THE land of boiled dinners, baked beans, codfish cakes and brown bread has undergone a metamorphosis so dramatic that gustatory adventurers will be delighted to find themselves in New England at mealtime.
Talented chefs in dozens of restaurants are making remarkable meals from local farmstead cheeses, free-range chickens, a variety of meticulously smoked fish and meats, game birds, shiitake mushrooms and, of course, the things for which New


Walter Jones Taylor Wed To Connie Elizabeth Dean
LEAD: At the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York yesterday Connie Elizabeth Dean, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jimmy Dean of Tenafly, N.J., was married to Walter Jones Taylor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Zachary Taylor Jr. of Jackson, Miss.
The Rev.
Carl Nelson performed the ceremony.


FROZEN MOMENTS IN A FOREST OF ICE
LEAD:  FOX'S DREAM  By Tejima.
Illustrated by the author.
Unpaged.
New York: Philomel Books. $13.95. (Ages 3 and up)


California Quake Smaller Than First Thought
LEAD: The earthquake in Southern California last month was smaller than first estimated, but it also showed that faults hidden by a fold in the earth's crust may make the city more quake-prone than once believed.


U.S. WELCOMES GORBACHEV HINTS AT A NEW ERA
LEAD: IF many in the West found Mikhail S. Gorbachev's keenly anticipated speech on Monday timorous in its reappraisal of the Soviet past, it also contained suggestions of flexibility in the Soviet future - suggestions that will further complicate the problems of Western policy makers who wish to exploit new opportunities while maintaining a healthy skepticism.


DISCOVERING THE OPPOSITE SEX
LEAD:  THE GOATS  By Brock Cole.
Illustrated by the author. 184 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $11.95. (Ages 12 and up)


Appeals Court Restricts Immunity For Congressmen on Defamation
LEAD: A Federal appeals court panel has ruled that a member of Congress may be sued for defamatory statements made in a letter to the executive branch even if considers the comments part of his official duties.


UPWARD PRESSURE ON THE U.S. MINIMUM WAGE
LEAD: SINCE 1981, the Federal minimum wage has been frozen at $3.35 an hour, which translates to an annual income of less than $7,000.
Fearing inflation and opposing Government encroachment on the marketplace, the Reagan Administration has been dead set against increasing the figure.


Alabama Upsets L.S.U.
LEAD: Bobby Humphrey ran for 161 yards and a touchdown to lead Alabama to a 22-10 upset of previously unbeaten Louisiana State tonight.


Science Writing
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Glittering Creatures Great and Small
LEAD: SNAKES, BUTTERFLIES and tigers - encrusted with jewels, carved of stone or crafted in gold - coexist handsomely in ''Antique Animal Jewelry: 1700-1940,'' at the gallery of J. Mavec, 52 East 76th Street.
The exhibition, which opens Wednesday, will be on view through Nov. 21.


A REPORTER'S REPORTER
LEAD: PIERRE-MARIE DOUTRELANT DIED earlier this year while jogging in the Bois de Boulogne, in Paris.
He was 46 years old, left a wife and a couple of kids, and may have been the best wine journalist of our time.


Broadcast TV
LEAD: A heady assortment of films awaits buffs this week - from more recent fare such as ''Altered States'' to long-absent classics like ''The Lost Weekend'' and ''La Dolce Vita.''


Q AND A
LEAD: Interhostel  Question: I understand there is an organization called Interhostel that is similar to Elderhostel but specializes in overseas programs.
How can I get its catalogue? - E. E. O., Chevy Chase, Md.
Answer: Both Interhostel and Elderhostel offer travel and educational programs for older adults.


Patricia Taylor Bride Of Antonio P. Salazar
LEAD: Patricia Taylor, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund R. Taylor Jr. of Pocantico Hills, N.Y., was married there yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Mary Magdalene to Antonio Patrick Salazar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Antonio Salazar of New Britain, Conn.
Msgr.
Stephen J. Fitzgerald, pastor of the church, officiated, assisted by the Rev.


A HOLE IN THE FAMILY
LEAD:  THE YEAR WITHOUT MICHAEL  By Susan Beth Pfeffer. 164 pp.
New York: Bantam Books. $13.95. (Ages 12 and up)


STATE AGENCY'S ROLE IN SOLID-WASTE DISPOSAL
LEAD: I hasten to respond to a quote by Suffolk County Legislator Ed Romaine  [ ''Suffolk Debates Toxic-Ash Bill,'' Oct. 4 ] .
In it, Mr.
Romaine says that the problem of solid-waste disposal ''is so large it requires a state or regional approach, and the fact is the state has miserably neglected its responsibilities.


Democrats Stress Differences in Final Push in Iowa
LEAD: Gathering here in the names of Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson, Iowa's Democrats today celebrated their party's six Presidential candidates and the happy news that in just 94 days, campaigning for one of democracy's most unusual exercises would be over.


The Streaks Are Over
LEAD: Bergen Catholic, which had been unbeaten and unscored upon in nine games since Thanksgiving Day last year, saw both streaks end yesterday in Ridgewood.


On the Streets Where We Live
LEAD:  SHAKER LANE  By Alice and Martin Provensen.
Illustrated by the authors.
Unpaged.
New York: Viking Kestrel. $14.95. (All ages)  NEW PROVIDENCE  A Changing Cityscape.
By Renata von Tscharner and Ronald Lee Fleming.
Illustrated by Denis Orloff.
San Diego: Gulliver Books/ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.


Gorbachev Speech: Playing to a Wary Public
LEAD: MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV gave a politician's speech last week on the troublesome topic of his country's history.
It did not play very well in the West, where many expected a historian's speech, but it was probably not intended to.
It was a speech for domestic consumption, crafted for a society with a willful reverence for its version of the past.


Ben Itkin
LEAD: Ben Itkin, a co-founder and past president of Itkin Brothers Inc., a distributor of office furniture, died Friday at the Miami Heart Institute after heart surgery.
He was 78 years old and lived in Palm Beach, Fla., and Hillsdale, N.Y.


MODERNIZING ELECTRICAL WALL OUTLETS
LEAD: IN many older homes, electrical wall receptacles possess only two slots per outlet.
Modern three-slot receptacles, which have a semicircular hole centered beneath each pair of slots, are more convenient.
And because they provide better grounding for plug-in appliances, they are safer.


CARLUCCI'S FIRST PROBLEM IS A PARALYZED MILITARY BUDGET
LEAD: WHEN Frank C. Carlucci succeeds Caspar W. Weinberger as Defense Secretary, his most pressing problem will be to untangle the budgetary gridlock that has practically immobilized the Pentagon's planning, say senior officials in the Administration and Congress.


A Fairer Tax
LEAD: To the Editor:


Susan Gayle Regine Wed
LEAD: The marriage of Susan Gayle Regine and Gregory Eugene Hagin, who both graduated with the class of '84 from Hofstra University, took place yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in New Brunswick, N.J.
The Rev.
William Arnold 3d performed the ceremony.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Regine of Ronkonkoma, L.I., and the bridegroom is a son of Mr.


Where to Watch the Great Whales
LEAD: In the mid-19th century, when the slaughter of the California gray whale was in full swing, whalers called them ''devil fish.'' Like monsters sent straight from hell, the 40-ton creatures would charge straight down the muzzle of a harpoon gun and, even mortally wounded from harpoons, defend their young until their last breath, holing many a stout whaling boat with their huge bodies.


Paving a Way for Train Tunnel Repairs
LEAD: Workers positioning metal plates at the intersection of Park Avenue and 57th Street.
The plates were being installed to allow repairs to be made on Metro-North train tunnel below, while still allowing traffic to use the avenue.
As each block is completed, repair crews will move one block further north, working their way to 96th Street.


SOVIET YOUTH UNIT SEEKS TO REIN IN POLITICAL GROUPS
LEAD: Officials of the Komsomol, the 40-million member youth arm of the Soviet Communist Party, have drafted a proposal to assert control over independent political groups that have sprung up in answer to Mikhail S. Gorbachev's call for a measure of democracy.


THE COMBUSTIBLE LAWRENCE, STILL SMOLDERING
LEAD: WHEN ''Women in Love'' was first published in 1920, it was the book of a man who had been burned. ''The Rainbow,'' Lawrence's previous novel, was suppressed by the Government in 1915 and his frightened publisher actually incinerated, or cremated it.
Lawrence chopped ''Women in Love'' in a last-minute attempt to make it less combustible and it was riddled with errors of transcription as well.


Architect's Response
LEAD:  To the Editor:


WHO SHOULD BE THE M.V.P.'S IN BASEBALL?
LEAD: Though the Cubs finished in last place, Andre Dawson deserves the National League m.v.p.


Violin: Grigory Zhislin
LEAD: THIS season, Town Hall and Classical Artists International have been co-sponsoring a series of concerts entitled Russian Nights, featuring prominent Soviet musicians unfamiliar to American audiences.
The first installment came last month with a recital by Vladimir Krainev, a pianist, and the second concert took place Friday evening with the debut of Grigory Zhislin, a violinist.


DECLARING WAR AT HOME
LEAD:  CHRISTINA KATERINA  And the Time She Quit the Family.
By Patricia Lee Gauch.
Illustrated by Elise Primavera.
Unpaged.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $12.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Another Face Of Argentina
LEAD: ARGENTINA is a lot more than Buenos Aires, its cosmopolitan capital.
Its million square miles stretch from the Tropic of Capricorn almost to the Antarctic, and from the Atlantic deep into the Andes.
The two-hour air journey from Buenos Aires to Salta, where the mountains meet the tropics, is a voyage into a different geography, climate and culture.


Dr. Leavitt to Wed A Navy Physician
LEAD: The engagement of Dr.
Jacqueline Anne Leavitt to Lieut.
Scott Latham Stafford, U.S.N., has been announced by Dr. and Mrs.
Frederick Carlton Leavitt of Washington and York Beach, Me., parents of the bride-to-be.
Her fiance is the son of Jim Stafford of Seattle and the late Alice Stafford.


Cutting At the Core
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Black Quarterbacks Find A Smoother Path to the Pros
LEAD: ONCE the effects of pro football's recent power struggle between the owners and the players subside and a new National Football League champion is crowned, the current season will most likely be remembered for strikeball, as well as the sudden demise of the Giants.
But in future years it might also be remembered as the season when pro football showed signs of overcoming its most lingering phobia: apprehension over the use of the black quarterback.


Schools in Chicago Are Called the Worst By Education Chief
LEAD: Education Secretary William J. Bennett says Chicago's public schools are the worst in the nation and parents should consider private schools for their children.


CRIME
LEAD: If THE BLACK DAHLIA by James Ellroy (Mysterious Press, $16.95) were a play, it would be reviewed as overwritten, overdirected, overproduced and overwrought.
It is a big, sprawling novel about the relationship of two cops - Bucky Bleichert and Lee Blanchard -in the 1940's.
Both were highly regarded professional boxers before entering the Los Angeles Police Department.


18-Year-Old Man Is Arrested In Slayings of Three in Bronx
LEAD: An 18-year-old man has been arrested and charged in the slayings of three men at a building in the South Bronx, the police said yesterday.


Dance: Lorn MacDougal
LEAD: ON Friday night at the Triplex Theater of Manhattan Community College, Lorn MacDougal danced the premiere of a solo about matters many people might prefer not to think about.
Choreographed by Lee Connor, her former partner, ''Daily Living: A Tribute, a Transfiguration'' was based upon Mr.
Connor's own battle against AI


Sands Is to Build a 2d Casino Hotel in Atlantic City
LEAD: The owner of the Sands Hotel and Casino has announced that it will build a second casino hotel here, saying the 1990's will bring ''exploding'' growth in Atlantic City.


THANK GOD FOR RASHES AND TOOTHBRUSHES
LEAD:  THE RABBI OF LUD  By Stanley Elkin. 277 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $17.95.


After the Fall
LEAD: To the Editor:


COMPUTER FALLOUT
LEAD: I laughed until I had tears in my eyes when I read Russell Baker's column ''Computer Fallout'' (Sunday Observer, Oct. 11).
The word processor reigns supreme in my house, and many's the time that writing a brief paragraph stretches into two hours of painstaking adding, deleting and. . . .


P. R. Williams Jr. Weds Susan Fiske
LEAD: Susan S. Fiske, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Fiske Jr. of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to P. Russell Williams Jr., a son of Mrs.
Eugene Stringham of Newtown, Conn., and Peter R. Williams of Fairfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Anne Kimball performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Lyme,


Reagan Asks Filipino Military To Back Aquino Government
LEAD: President Reagan today appealed to the Philippine military to support President Corazon C. Aquino.


Alvin Dewey Dies; Investigated Killings Depicted by Capote
LEAD: Alvin A. Dewey, chief investigator of the 1959 killings chronicled in the book and movie ''In Cold Blood,'' died Friday at a hospital here after suffering a stroke at his home.
He was 75 years old.


Midwood Rallies, 20-19
LEAD: Chris Davila scored two of his three touchdowns in the fourth quarter as Midwood rallied yesterday to beat South Shore, 20-19, in a game that broke a first-place tie in the Public School Athletic League's Brooklyn A Division I. Midwood's record is now 7-1, and it has a berth in the playoffs that start in two weeks.


What Happened to The Market?
LEAD: ON BLACK MONDAY, crash was the word most frequently used at first to describe the 508-point drop in the Dow Jones industrial average that occurred Oct. 19, 1987, a day that many investors think will live in infirmity.
Donald T. Regan, former Treasury Secretary, called C-Day ''black and blue Monday,'' a nice play on the battered image of ''black and blue'' with the traditional bad-news sense of ''black  [ whatever ]  day'' and the don't-want-to-go-back-to-work sense of ''blue Monday.


Williams's 'Milk Train' Stops Here Once Again
LEAD: ''I NOW FIND MYSELF DOING THE most demanding, difficult, massive, Gothic role that even I have ever attempted,'' says the actress whom Tennessee Williams called ''the great Elizabeth Ashley.'' Ms.
Ashley is speaking of one of the least famous and most ferocious of the Williams heroines - and one of the only fantastically wealthy women he wrote - Flora Goforth, known as Sissy, whom Ms.


Jet Hijacking Suspect Said He Feared Mafia
LEAD: A man who took control of an Air Canada jetliner here for three and a half hours Friday before surrendering to the authorities is being held at the city jail on charges of attempted hijacking, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation said today.


Spain
LEAD: To the Editor: According to the letter about Spain on Aug. 30, there is ''nothing'' doing in Madrid, Cordoba, Granada, Seville or the Costa del Sol.
The writer compiled a long list of grievances during a short stay.
Not only did the Spaniards speak Spanish, they closed a national monument on the flimsy pretext that a national election was being held that day.


Army Worker's $8.70 Gadget Could Save $6.3 Million a Year
LEAD: A civilian who works at a National Guard base has created a device that could save the Army more than $6 million a year, military officials say.


College Students Take Up Cause of Homeless
LEAD: College students across the country are attending forums, signing petitions and staying outside in sleeping bags in an effort to focus college campuses on the plight of the homeless.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  GREAT AND DESPERATE CURES: The Rise and Decline of Psychosurgery and Other Radical Treatments for Mental Illness, by Elliot S. Valenstein. (Basic Books, $10.95.) In 1949, Egas Moniz, a Portuguese neurology professor, won the Nobel Prize for helping to invent the prefrontal lobotomy, an operation that became so popular as a treament for mental illness that it was sometimes performed as an office procedure, using an ice pick thrust through the bony socket behind the eyeball.


STUFF AS DREAMS ARE MADE ON
LEAD: GUESTS at the recent opening of the ''Fashion and Surrealism'' show at the Fashion Institute of Technology really dressed for the occasion.
Forget Fendi.
Never mind Lagerfeld.
Lacroix?
No way.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  WHITTLE: The True Story.
By John Golley with Sir Frank Whittle. (Smithsonian Institution, $24.95.) Frank Whittle, the Englishman who fathered the jet engine, is to airplanes as Robert Fulton was to ships: he made them less glamorous but a lot faster and more reliable.
Born in Coventry in 1907 to a working-class family, he joined the Royal Air Force at the age of 16 in the hope of bettering his prospects.


Japanese Leader Urges U.S. to Reduce Deficit
LEAD: Noboru Takeshita, Japan's new Prime Minister, urged the Reagan Administration and Congress today to move quickly to reduce the United States budget deficit.


FROM BRITAIN, A 'NO-HOLDS-BARRED' APPROACH TO MUSIC
LEAD: WHEN THE LUMBERING figures of Maurice Sendak's ''wild things'' stagger to life to the music of the 35-year-old Oliver Knussen at the New York City Opera Thursday night, it will signal a week in which contemporary British music will be unusually prominent in New York.
The same night that Mr.
Knussen's one-act opera, ''Where the Wild Things Are,'' is receiving its New York stage premiere (it has previously been heard in concert at the New York Philharmonic, conducted by Zubin Mehta), the Philharmonic will be introducing ''Ringed by the Flat Horizon,'' the first orchestral work by George


SINGLES HAVE 2 ROLES
LEAD: I KNEW that becoming single midway through my life would change my economic and social status, but I was not prepared for the root-deep shake-up it would be to my gender identification.


MEDICINE IS SUFFERING FROM CHANGES
LEAD: I am writing to comment on the article ''Decline in Students at Medical Schools'' that appeared Oct. 4.
As a board-certified family practice physician of 25 years, I have seen the changes occurring in medicine that are deterring the best students of the best colleges from choosing medicine as a lifelong profession.


Protecting Plants from the Inside Out
LEAD: THE appearance of such desirable crop traits as disease resistance was once a very gradual process, governed by the laws of natural selection and aided, perhaps, by tedious selective breeding by farmers.
Now agricultural scientists are doing in the laboratory in a matter of days or weeks, what once took years.


Patricia A. Kriger Wed To Michael G. Schaffer
LEAD: Patricia Ann Kriger and Michael Glenn Schaffer were married last evening at the Elmwood Country Club in White Plains by Rabbi Jacob Sodden.


LIFE GOES ON, AND DON'T YOU FORGET IT!
LEAD:  SOME SOUL TO KEEP  By J. California Cooper. 211 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $14.95.


Giant Lobster Is Liberated
LEAD: A 22-pound lobster escaped the fate of many lobsters when an Alaskan doctor paid to have it taken from Anchorage to Maine and set free in the Atlantic.


Korean Reportedly Saw Waite
LEAD: A Moslem militia representative said today that Terry Waite, the kidnapped British church envoy, was apparently seen by a freed South Korean diplomat while the diplomat was a hostage in Lebanon.


A Redevelopment Rescue
LEAD: The Brooklyn Army Terminal, completed as World War I drew to an end, served the Army in World War II and the Korean War.
Then the waterfront facility fell into decay as goods and manpower began to move by air.


WHO SHOULD BE THE M.V.P.'S IN BASEBALL?
LEAD: Although the m.v.p. award usually goes to a member of a division champion, I feel that Andre Dawson was such a dominant force in the National League (almost 50 home runs, more than 130 runs batted in) that he deserves to win it.


Geese Dyed to See Where They Fly
LEAD: More than the foliage is changing color in Delaware this autumn.


VOTE RESULTS FORCE 5 SPECIAL ELECTIONS
LEAD: AS Democratic and Republican leaders differed over the significance of the municipal elections across the state last week, both parties began preparing for a round of special elections spawned by the Election Day results.


World Bank Giving New Drought Aid to India
LEAD: The World Bank announced today that it was giving drought-related assistance of more than $500 million to India, saying it was seeking to ease this nation's growing balance-of-payments squeeze.


A VETERAN OF VIETNAM IS WELCOMED HOME
LEAD: VETERANS DAY marks the culmination of the period preceding Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's that I have come to think of as Minor Holiday Season I. Before our older child, Elizabeth, entered public kindergarten five years ago, Columbus Day and Veterans Day had been seen by my husband, Tom, and


DATA BANK: November 8, 1987
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,831.2
$3,795.3
$3,683.3
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
3.8
2.5
2.4
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'87
I Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$134.5
$136.6
$138.0


RAIDING THE TITANIC
LEAD: Senator William Alden Smith may not have known that a ship's ''bow'' is different from a ship's ''head,'' but William F. Buckley Jr. apparently does not know that a ship's bulkheads are different from a ship's watertight doors.


James Evans Is to Marry Barbara Jean Bellantoni
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Bellantoni of Monroe Township, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Barbara Jean Bellantoni to James Evans, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Evans of Washington Township, N.J.


Next Week; Will Free Agents Be Signed in Baseball?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


ALCOHOLISM COURSE FOCUSES ON PARENTS
LEAD: ''A LOT of parents don't know what to tell their kids about using alcohol, except to 'be responsible,' '' said Deirdre M. Breen, a community-education specialist with the Westchester chapter of the National Council on Alcoholism and Other Drug Addictions. ''They believe that they are good kids, and then cross their fingers when they go out to a party.


A Victim, First of Nazi Anger, Now of Time
LEAD: Forty-five years ago, right after the destruction of this village 15 miles west of Prague, great homage was paid to its martyred people.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Tai-Pan  Starring Bryan Brown, Joan Chen, John Stanton. 1986.
Vestron Video. 127 minutes. $79.98. ''Tai-Pan,'' a misguided film epic set in the early 19th century, attempts to recount British maneuverings in the China trade and the seizure of Hong Kong.
Based on James Clavell's best-selling novel, the movie offers a somnolent story notable only for its lethal concentration of swaggering merchants and sniveling ingenues.


The Litigious Groves of Academe
LEAD: AT THE TRIAL, Shyamala Rajender had to endure what she calls ''a pack of lies'' hurled at her by the University of Minnesota, where she used to teach chemistry. ''They said I was not a good teacher, that I was not a good researcher, that I didn't compare with any of the bright stars in the department,'' she recalled, the anger barely veiled in her voice after more than a decade of grievance procedures and litigation that finally forced the university to grant her tenure.


Postings: East Bronx Colony; 11 Single-Family Homes
LEAD: A new development of 11 single-family homes, called the Estates at Country Club, has just been opened near Eastchester Bay in the East Bronx by Ruffalo Associates.
The homes are along Country Club Road north of the Throgs Neck Bridge.


Signs of Child Abuse, and How to Get Aid
LEAD: State and city officials urge anyone who suspects that a child has been abused or neglected, or is in risk of such mistreatment, to report the suspicions immediately to one of three special telephone hot lines that have been set up specifically to respond to child-abuse reports.


WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO BEST FRIENDS?
LEAD: RECENTLY I was invited to lunch by a new friend, Fran.
The invitation was for the same day I planned to visit my best friend, Judy.
Judy lives in a fourth-floor walk-up in the Bronx.
She had had surgery a few weeks ago, and needed help with shopping.
When I declined the invitation, and told Fran why, she stared at me, surprised.


THE DARK PLAYGROUND
LEAD: By surrendering - even for one dark hour - to the powerlessness from which his maleness is likely to protect him, Daniel Voll has shown unusual sensitivity.
Willingly descending into his friend's pain, humiliation and vulnerability to understand it from within is an act of profound caring that indeed surpasses 1980's rhetoric.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''This is a country where people think 2 percent inflation is already too high.''


CHESAPEAKE LIVES
LEAD:  BAY COUNTRY  By Tom Horton.
Illustrated by Charles R. Hazard. 223 pp.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. $16.95.


A Widening Pattern of Abuse Exemplified in Steinberg Case
LEAD: For more than a decade, friends and police investigators say, Joel B. Steinberg physically and emotionally abused his lover, Hedda Nussbaum.
And in that time, they say, a woman who once was an intelligent and effective editor and author seemed to lose all self-respect and become unable to extricate or defend herself.


MOVIES
LEAD:  The Left-Handed Gun  With Paul Newman, directed by Arthur Penn. 1958.
Warner Home Video. 102 minutes. $19.98.
If you think a movie starring Paul Newman and directed by Arthur Penn can't be all bad, you don't remember ''The Left-Handed Gun,'' which came and went in 1958 and, like the bad guys in westerns, now returns to put a new generation to sleep.


Dr. W. H. Montgomery 3d Is Married to Cynthia Hart
LEAD: Cynthia Ruffner Hart, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alden S. Hart of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., was married yesterday at the Congregational Church in Short Hills, N.J., to Dr.
William Harland Montgomery 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Montgomery Jr. of Mendham, N.J.
The Rev.
Gregory Schmidt officiated.


GULF PEACE HOPES ARE CALLED BLEAK
LEAD: In light of tougher positions by Iran and Iraq on how to end their war, the chances for an American-led initiative to impose a global arms embargo against Iran seem increasingly bleak, according to White House and State Department officials.


PIANISTS TO OFFER PIECES KNOWN AND NEGLECTED
LEAD: FOUR masters of the keyboard are to perform in the state this week, including Karl Haas, who is far better known for his national radio broadcasts than for his infrequent recitals.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Cromwell  Starring Richard Harris and Alec Guinness.
Directed and written by Ken Hughes. 1970.
RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video. 139 minutes. $69.95.
This is a large-scale movie that a critic called ''shapeless'' in 1970 when it came to theater screens.
It is a truncated biography of Oliver Cromwell, who is portrayed as a last, if not only, angry man by Richard


'My Husband, Ed, and I . . .'
LEAD: The defendant before Federal Judge R. Allan Edgar was the son of a Congressman, so pleas for leniency from influential quarters could be expected.
But the Judge still must have been startled by a letter from Ursula Meese urging ''very favorable consideration'' for Joe Duncan, who stood convicted of tax fraud.


Malaysian Leader Won't Lift Shutdown of a Popular Daily
LEAD: The Government of Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad has rejected an appeal by The Star against the shutdown of the popular English-language daily on Oct. 28.


MODERNIZING ELECTRICAL WALL OUTLETS
LEAD: IN many older homes, electrical wall receptacles possess only two slots per outlet.
Modern three-slot receptacles, which have a semicircular hole centered beneath each pair of slots, are more convenient.
And because they provide better grounding for plug-in appliances, they are safer.


Nervous Allies Fear a Leadership Gap in America
LEAD: IT often falls to the British to say most forthrightly what is on the minds of Europeans when they worry about the United States.
Last week in London, Nigel Lawson, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, said it was imperative for the health of the world economy that America slash its huge budget deficit and raise taxes.


Not a Departure
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lauren Rachel Shapiro Is Wed to Steven Paul Beck
LEAD: Lauren Rachel Shapiro, a daughter of Susan B. Braver of New York and Michael D. Shapiro of Northport, L.I., and Steven Paul Beck, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Felix Beck of Livingston, N.J., were married last evening.
Rabbi Azriel Fellner and Cantor Henry Butensky officiated at the Pierre in New York.


Returned From the Brink of Extinction
LEAD: By the time large-scale commercial whaling ended in the early part of this century, gray whales had been hunted almost out of existence. ''Twice, the population was thought to be extinct,'' said Don Wilkie, director of the aquarium-museum at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at La Jolla, Calif.


Jazz/Pop
LEAD: Henry Butler, a pianist from New Orleans, will be reunited with one of his teachers and inspirations this week at Sweet Basil.
The teacher is Alvin Batiste, one of the most distinctive and virtuosic modern jazz clarinetists.
Mr.
Batiste, an early associate of Ornette Coleman, is a player who has been heard too infrequently in New York.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: Pan Am, Aeroflot To Fly Jointly To Soviet Union


Ellen O'Boyle Marries William C. McCahill Jr.
LEAD: At St.
Thomas the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in Bloomfield, N.J., Ellen Teresa O'Boyle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. O'Boyle of Glen Ridge, N.J., was married yesterday to William C. McCahill Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
McCahill of Huntington, L.I.
Msgr.
Vincent P. Coburn performed the ceremony.


SHE RUNS TO CONQUER
LEAD:  A WHITE ROMANCE  By Virginia Hamilton. 191 pp.
New York: Philomel Books. $14.95. (Ages 12 and up)


Political Notes; Balancing Act In Replacing Mario Merola
LEAD: As he considers candidates to succeed Mario Merola as interim Bronx District Attorney, Governor Cuomo is confronted with a politically sensitive decision.


Rangers Are Striving To Get Much Tougher
LEAD: Have the slumping Rangers, weary of having sand kicked in their faces, decided to get even instead of getting mad?


Lions Miss by A Yard
LEAD: They have been ridiculed, laughed at and branded losers, but yesterday, the long blue line of Columbia Lions was given a respectful round of applause as the players trudged quietly from the field to the locker room after the game.
The Lions, though, did not acknowledge the fans.
Some, like Matt Sodl, the senior defensive end, were crying.


MODERNIZING ELECTRICAL WALL OUTLETS
LEAD: IN many older homes, electrical wall receptacles possess only two slots per outlet.
Modern three-slot receptacles, which have a semicircular hole centered beneath each pair of slots, are more convenient.
And because they provide better grounding for plug-in appliances, they are safer.


GIULIANI: THE PUBLIC RECORD OF A HIGHLY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
LEAD: WHETHER it's the nature of the job or of the people who fill it, a United States Attorney is typically on the quiet side.
Because Rudolph W. Giuliani is not, the Federal prosecutor's office in Manhattan is probably more in the public mind than ever before.
Mr.
Giuliani's own image has been well-exposed, too, which should not hurt if he decides, as is widely speculated, to seek the Republican nomination for the


FAT, 13 AND BASICALLY O.K.
LEAD:  JUST AS LONG AS WE'RE TOGETHER  By Judy Blume. 296 pp.
New York: Orchard Books/Franklin Watts. $12.95. (Ages 10 to 13)


William B. Beam
LEAD: William B. Beam, a retired executive vice president of the American Express International Banking Corporation, died of kidney failure Tuesday at Baylor Hospital in Dallas.
He was 62 years old and lived in Dallas and Swiftwater, Pa.
Until 1985, he also lived in Manhattan.


DEMOCRATS SCORE UPSETS
LEAD: SOMETIMES it is the winners who proclaim, ''Wait till next year.'' Certainly that was the underlying gleeful tone of New York State Democratic leaders last week as they savored upset victories in important city and county elections and declared that the results boded well for Democrats nationally in the 1988 elections.


Pro Hockey; Devils Go to 8-0 At Home
LEAD: The Byrne Meadowlands Arena is turning out to be a truly sweet home for the Devils this season.
Tonight, they beat the Washington Capitals, 4-1, to remain undefeated after eight games here.


'New York Intellect'
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Perils of Following the Electronic Lieder
LEAD: SOME PRESS RELEASES FLY almost unaided into the wastebasket.
Others stick to the fingers, and sometimes in the throat.
Consider one in behalf of the Milwaukee Symphony, which this weekend is taking part in ''an innovative and revolutionary idea-come-to-life that could change the face of all symphonic concerts to come.


A DANCER'S NIGHTMARE
LEAD: DURING THE PERFORMANCE of Balanchine's ''Who Cares?'' on Nov. 18, 1986, the opening night of the New York City Ballet's season, Sean Lavery took an uncertain step.


ANSWER TO QUIZ
LEAD:  1. e  2. m  3. l  4. p  5. o  6. h  7. a  8. r  9. i  10. n  11. w  12. b  13. q  14. j  15. t  16. v  17. g  18. d  19. x  20. k  21. f  22. y  23. s  24. c  25. u


Arrest in Killing of Father
LEAD: The police arrested a 27-year-old Brooklyn man Friday on charges he stabbed his parents, killing his father.
The suspect, Thomas Coker Jr., surrendered to the police at the 81st Precinct station house at 7:50 A.M. and was arrested on charges of murder, assault and possession of a weapon, said a police spokesman, Sgt.


A Neighborhood
LEAD: A COMMON QUESTION among many women, I'm told, is ''Where are all the single men?''


Spot Checks For Components
LEAD: ALARMED BY THE present perturbation of the economy, many circumspect audiophiles have postponed planned purchases.
To be sure, the more passionate music lovers usually manage to persuade themselves that buying stereo equipment falls into the same budgetary bracket as rent and groceries.
But some who have toyed with the notion of revamping their entire sound system are now more likely to think in terms of selective updating -changing only those components that have clearly outlived their allotted span.


DRUG USE EMERGES AS CAMPAIGN ISSUE
LEAD: Saying that he would ''much rather be here talking about arms control or the stock market crash,'' Senator Albert Gore Jr. volunteered at a state convention in Miami yesterday that he had occasionally smoked marijuana as a student and as a soldier in Vietnam.


WHERE THE REAGAN REVOLUTION WENT AWRY
LEAD: PRESIDENT Reagan's reconstructed tax system is intact; he has won his big budgets for the Pentagon, although they are subject to raid; all his inveighing against other Government spending has paid off in the sense that even liberal Democrats advocate restraint.
Last week, West Germany buckled to American pressure and cut interest rates, helping American banks to cut theirs.


France's Past Cast in Wax
LEAD: AMID the impatient traffic, waves of pedestrians, overflowing cafes, multi-screen cinemas and pasta and pizza parlors of the Boulevard Montmartre in Paris lies a tiny building of rococo splendor that is one of the oldest wax museums in Europe.
Since its founding in 1882, the museum has closed its doors just once - on the day the Germans occupied Paris.


Melissa B. Rutkin Plans To Wed Michael Kaplitt
LEAD: The engagement of Melissa Beth Rutkin to Michael Gordon Kaplitt, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Kaplitt of Kings Point, L.I., and North Miami Beach, Fla., has been announced by Dr. and Mrs.
Philip Rutkin of Kings Point, parents of the bride-to-be.


FICTION
LEAD:  BLACK SWAN.
By Christopher Hope.
Illustrated by Gillian Barlow. (Harper &amp; Row, $10.95.) This moving, lyrical novel, the author's fourth, is set in South Africa in 1965.
Its hero, 17-year-old Lucky, is an idiot savant who lives with his adoptive grandmother in a black township.
The boy is able to mimic perfectly the voices and manners of movie and radio personalities, but defies all outside attempts to pull him out of his dream world.


DEFENDANT BACKED BY 500 WITNESSES
LEAD: The lawyer for a union leader charged with 12 others in a bribery case faced the problem of countering secretly recorded tapes portraying the defendants as thugs.
The answer was nearly 500 character witnesses, many testifying in groups.


ISRAELIS SEEM AMBIVALENT ON VILENCE IN DOMESTIC WAR
LEAD: THERE is a war going on here.
It is an intercommunal war between Israelis and Palestinians.
In Lebanon a similar war between ethnic communities has resulted in the destruction of buildings and whole cities, which makes it easy to detect.
But in Israel the Government and its security force are strong, the lid is more tightly sealed, and so, day to day, the war is harder to see.


GRADUATION DATE CHALLENGED
LEAD: A DECISION by a Federal District Court judge that the North Babylon School District must reschedule its annual date of graduation is being appealed by the district, which wants to maintain the tradition of holding graduation exercises on Saturday morning.


After the Fall
LEAD: To the Editor:


Julie J. Shemitz Wed to J. B. LeBow in Connecticut
LEAD: The marriage of Julie Jane Shemitz, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, to James Brian LeBow, an associate in the New York law firm of Grutman Miller Greenspoon &amp; Hendler, took place last night at the Quinnipiack Club in New Haven.
Judge Alan H. W. Shiff of the United States Bankruptcy Court in Bridgeport, Conn., the uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony.


RUNNING AFTER RAINBOWS ON THE FRINGES OF FAME
LEAD: WHEN I was 13 years old, I took tap-dancing lessons from Gene Kelly's sister Louise at her studio in Johnstown, Pa.


Correction
LEAD: A front-page picture caption last Sunday about budget negotiations between Congress and the White House incorrectly stated the place of the meeting.
It was at the Capitol.


GEORGE RICKEYAT THE NEUBERGER: MOVEMENT AND BALANCE
LEAD: IT would seem that all is law and order in George Rickey's art, with the law that of gravity and the order the way in which the sculptor uses it.
Confirming this up to a point is the Neuberger Museum's ''George Rickey: Projects for Public Sculpture,'' a show that examines nine major works by way of models, drawings and photographs.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 8, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Avon, $5.95.)
Iran during the month following the Shah's
departure.
2
5
THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $4.95.)
Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New
York family begun in ''Evergreen.


A Newsman In Divinity School
LEAD: IN THE first days of the 1985-86 school year at Harvard, the course called ''World Religions, Diversity and Dialogue'' was so popular that all the seats were taken and some students were sitting cross-legged on the floor of a great lecture hall.
With two hands, the professor pushed her blonde hair behind her ears and made a statement that was to reverberate in my mind for the rest of the school year.


BEYOND THE MALL: SUBURBS EVOLVING INTO 'OUTER CITIES'
LEAD: IT happened incrementally, and for a long time few realized the magnitude and import of what was going on.
But over the last quarter-century and especially in the last decade, the American metropolis has been transformed into something new and different.
Suburbs, once dependent on the central city, have metamorphosed into vast, glittering, independent ''outer cities'' that rival and often surpass the traditional big-city downtowns as centers of economic power and vitality.


Dance: A Joffrey Bill Of Three by Diaghilev
LEAD: THE Joffrey Ballet's treasure house of 20th-century classics is often opened up in ''theme'' programs, and the most popular of these have been the revivals from Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes.


ARREST ALL MIMES!
LEAD:  IF YOU CAN'T SAY SOMETHING NICE  By Calvin Trillin. 257 pp.
New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $16.95.


Skepticism Is as Deep as Any Tunnel
LEAD: In East Boston, opposing major public construction projects is an avocation for some and a spectator sport for others.


3 Indicted on Bomb Charges
LEAD: A Federal grand jury has indicted three Lebanese-born Canadians for trying to smuggle a bomb into the United States, the authorities said.
The three men, Walid Nicolas Kabbani, 30 years old, Walid Majiv Mourad, 39, and Georges Fouad Nicolas Younan, 44, were arrested Oct. 24, a short time after they crossed the border at Richford.


A Falling Dollar Can Only Help
LEAD: LAST weekend, 32 economists from around the country and from Europe gathered at the Jerome Levy Economics Institute at Bard College to discuss the work of the late British economist Nicholas Kaldor.
Much of the discussion was concerned with the more esoteric aspects of Lord Kaldor's work - his theories about money and economic growth.


Halpin, Gulotta: The Torch Passes
LEAD: THE election of Patrick G. Halpin and Thomas S. Gulotta as the County Executives of Suffolk and Nassau Counties signals the emergence of a new generation of politicians on Long Island.


L. I. Laughlin 3d Weds Ms. Clifford
LEAD: At St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Middlebury, Vt., Sarah Clifford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas R. Clifford of Cornwall, Vt., was married yesterday to Ledlie Irwin Laughlin 3d, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Laughlin Jr. of New York and South Woodstock, Vt.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Bruins 4, Penguins 1: Rick Middleton scored two goals, one on a short-handed breakaway, as Boston snapped a six-game streak without a victory last night in Boston.
The Bruins limited the Penguins to two shots in the first period and 17 in the game.
The Penguins were without Mario Lemieux, their top scorer, who had returned to Pittsburgh with a bruised shoulder and back.(AP)


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a lot of oil stains on my asphalt driveway.
What should I use on these stains before I apply a sealer?


Perspectives: Waterfront Development; Green Light for Condos on Gravesend Bay
LEAD: SOMETIME next year, probably in the summer, condominiums at a new waterfront development called Jonathan's Landing are to go on sale.
To find them, prospective buyers will drive along a new road on a sliver of landfill that juts into Gravesend Bay on the South Brooklyn shore.


THE MARSHALL LODE STILL YIELDS TREASURES
LEAD: MOST openings go through cycles of rise and decline whose duration cannot be concretely predicted, but the Marshall Gambit accelerates the process to roller-coaster speed.


Rising Prices Hit Library Shelves
LEAD: THE QUALITY of library services at the nation's major universities is being threatened by recent steep rises in subscription prices of research journals and periodicals, according to reports by the Association of Research Libraries.


President of Israel to Make First Visit to U.S.
LEAD: President Chaim Herzog of Israel will meet President Reagan at the White House Tuesday at the start of the first state visit by an Israeli President to the United States.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Burglars Coveting Rhinestones


A BETTER LIFE WHEN THE LIGHTS GO OUT
LEAD: I MUST be the only person who loves it when the power fails.


In Search of a Lightweight Tomato
LEAD: POPCORN is a favorite low-calorie snack - but many people sneak a little butter on for flavor.
Soon it may be possible to have buttery tasting popcorn without the calories or the guilt.


Data Update
LEAD:  BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED/(Housing units)
$
Sept. 87
Aug. 87
Sept 86
New York
&gt;5,345
5,029
6,515
New Jersey
4.668
4,287
6,639
Connecticut
2,379
2,067
2,525
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES/(Averages)
$
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
11.33
11.59
10.00
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
8.15
&gt;8.36
7.85


Recession Is Unlikely, Top Economists Agree
LEAD: Three weeks after the stock market collapse, most corporate economists are firmly optimistic that consumers will recover their confidence and spend enough to avoid a recession next year.


THE PUMPKIN: NOT JUST A PRETTY FACE
LEAD: NOW that Halloween is over, most Americans look forward to only one more use for the abundant pumpkin crop: in the Thanksgiving pie.
That is a pity, because this estimable member of the squash family has a multitude of other delicious uses.


Judge Ginsburg's Statement
LEAD: Following is a statement by Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg yesterday afternoon in Washington as recorded by The New York Times.


Soviet's East: New Window On the Pacific
LEAD: Visitors from Moscow, a city that gravitates west toward Europe and the Atlantic, find the eastward inclination of this Pacific port disorienting at first.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.90
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.68
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.84
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
9.67
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


A CIVILIAN RECALLS HIS 'GOOD WAR'
LEAD: IT was my examination for the draft in 1940 that saved my life - just as that ceremony led to the opposite outcome for so many of my generation.
My chest X-ray revealed advanced tuberculosis, and the news that there were to be more germs than Germans in my future.
Being infected in both lungs I was considered unlikely to recover -a bit of trivia not revealed to me at the time.


Savoring the Distinctiveness of Korean Art
LEAD: THE WEST HAS LONG been familiar with the art of China and Japan, but Korean art remained relatively unknown until the mid-1970's.
Viewed as a mere imitation of its two neighbors, the culture was generally overlooked.
One effort to correct this situation is an exhibition of 100 works - ''From the Land of Morning Calm: Korean Art at the Brooklyn Museum.


WHAT'S NEW IN AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY
LEAD: THE first wave of products stemming from the biotechnology revolution focused mainly on human health care.
But now agricultural biotechnology - the genetic manipulation of crop plants and farm animals - is blossoming as never before.
True, only a few products of genetic engineering are on the market, including vaccines to prevent diseases in calves and piglets.


On a Gulf Tanker: Waiting for the Worst
LEAD: ''All ahead full,'' the command was given quietly.
A button was pushed.
A bell rang.
The big oil tanker headed for the Strait of Hormuz, and at that moment it became a strategic target in the Persian Gulf war.


After the Fall
LEAD: To the Editor:


RECENT SALES
LEAD:  Bay Shore; $152,000 1502 St.


Verbatim; Cheering Others On
LEAD: 'Today, probably for the first time ever, there are about as many people, women, prepared to vote for you because you are a qualified woman as there are people, meaning men, ready to vote against you because you are a woman.
Sex prejudice, you might say, the proclivity to either accept or reject you as a woman, is more closely balanced today than it has ever been - which is to say that being a woman is less of a disadvantage now than it has ever been.


A Free Mandela Could Aid Peace, Nationalist Tells South Africans
LEAD: Nelson R. Mandela, the 69-year-old jailed leader of the outlawed African National Congress, would ''bend all his efforts'' toward a peaceful solution in South Africa if he were freed, his colleague Govan A. Mbeki said today.


Administration Renews Struggle To Agree on an Acceptable Choice
LEAD: After the successive failures of two nominations to fill the vacancy on the Supreme Court, the White House and the Justice Department must again search for a nominee whose ideological credentials can satisfy Republican conservatives and still permit confirmation in a Democratic-controlled Senate.


It Should Be a Wand, Not a Weapon
LEAD: A hockey stick, like a surgeon's scalpel, can provide great satisfaction when used skillfully.
Yet for a player the stick also carries with it a tremendous responsibility.


Got Ten Dollars for a Cup of Coffee?
LEAD: If push comes to shove, says Treasury Secretary Baker, Washington won't raise interest rates to protect the value of the dollar.
Mr.
Baker has his priorities right: The risk of high interest rates causing recession exceed the risk of a falling dollar leading to a punishing inflation.


Deco and Decadence
LEAD: Today, the stylized, sleekly androgynous Art Deco portraits that the Polish-born artist Tamara de Lempicka painted and exhibited in Paris during the 1920's and 30's exist primarily as period pieces.
They don't hold a candle to the era's great paintings nor to Art Deco's major achievement - which occurred largely in the area of design.


Through Socialist Woods in Gorbachev's Troika
LEAD: To the Editor:


FOOD INSPECTION RESULTS
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 25 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


Pop: An English Band, The Jesus and Mary Chain
LEAD: THE Jesus and Mary Chain keeps simple pop pleasure and simple emotions at a distance.
At the Ritz on Thursday, opening a two-night stand, the English band had catchy tunes, long-suffering lyrics and alienation strategies aplenty.


Chinese Professors Inspect Criminal Justice in U.S.
LEAD: When the four professors from Beijing arrived at Logan Airport in Boston for a flight to New York, they found themselves faced with a travelers' quandary: flight attendants told them that unless they left behind dozens of criminology textbooks, gifts from an American colleague, they would be over the weight allowance.


WHO SHOULD BE THE M.V.P.'S IN BASEBALL?
LEAD: The m.v.p. doesn't just mean the best player, but the man who did the most to help his team win.
In the National League, I think Will Clark should win the trophy.
In the American League, I think George Bell should win because he was the best offensive and defensive producer in the league.
EVAN KANTOR


The Beauty Of Baseball
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Carolyn Pharr Vinson Weds
LEAD: Carolyn Pharr Vinson and Stephen Alfred Bou, lawyers in Washington, were married at the Washington Cathedral yesterday by the Rev.
Henry Harris, associate rector of All Saints Episcopal Church in Chevy Chase, Md.


By Boat Up the Bosporus
LEAD: THE day dawned dull and chill, summoned to a kind of life by the muezzin's call.


Feminism vs. Civil Liberties
LEAD: Karen Straw killed her husband, but in September a Queens jury acquitted her of murder after hearing defense evidence that she was a battered wife.
Soon, a Manhattan jury is to begin to hear testimony in the trial of Robert Chambers for the murder of Jennifer Levin in Central Park.
Mr.
Chambers claims Ms.


TROTSKY STILL SHROUDED IN NON-PERSONALITY CULT
LEAD: HE was guardian of the Bolshevik Revolution, defender of its faith, a disciple whose oratory enthralled the masses.


Ailing Illinois Congressman Announces His Retirement
LEAD: Representative Kenneth J. Gray, a 12-term Democrat, said today he will not seek re-election next year in his Southern Illinois district because of health problems and political opposition.


THE CONTRADICTIONS OF BOB DOLE
LEAD: BOB DOLE WAS adamant.
The budget deficit, he had said since the beginning of the Reagan Presidency, was ''the nation's No. 1 priority.'' Now, standing on the floor of the United States Senate, the tall, crisply tailored Kansan was elaborating on that theme.
Health programs, he said, were ''just another instance of how Congress puts spending on automatic pilot.


Commercial Property: Office Space; Stock Market Turmoil Scares Prospective Tenants
LEAD: UNTIL the stock market plunge three weeks ago, banks and stock brokers consumed Manhattan office space like hungry boys at a Sunday morning buffet.
But now they are running scared, seeking to slim down.


G.O.P. IN TRENTON FACING NEED FOR MORE CONCILIATION
LEAD: THE results of New Jersey's record $12 million legislative elections held few surprises: Voters rejected a proposal to build a $185 million baseball stadium backed by state tax revenues and left the State Senate under Democratic control and the Assembly in Republican hands.


Learning The Facts of Life
LEAD: RON MOGLIA wants every 5-year-old in America to play the ''birthing game.'' It goes like this: A kindergarten class chooses a girl to be the ''adult mommy'' and a boy to be the ''adult daddy.'' The teacher asks the ''adult mommy'' when she wants to have her baby - before lunch, before recess or before going home.


Follow-Up On the News; Another Shooting In the Subway
LEAD: IT was, in some respects, a New York City subway shooting with similarities to the Goetz case.
But it has a different ending.
Like Bernhard H. Goetz, James Grimes, a subway token clerk in Brooklyn, carried an unlicensed pistol because he said he had been mugged before.
And like Mr.
Goetz, Mr.
Grimes fired the weapon at four men he said were trying to rob him.


'OUR DEMOCRACY IS DIFFERENT'
LEAD:  CONDEMNED TO REPETITION  The United States and Nicaragua.
By Robert A. Pastor.
Illustrated. 392 pp.
New Jersey: Princeton University Press. $24.95.


A VOODOO GUIDE TO THE MARGINAL
LEAD:  REUBEN  By John Edgar Wideman. 215 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $16.95.


Running on Empty
LEAD: WHAT WE NEED is a candidate for the Presidency of the United States who doesn't want the job.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bay Shore  $152,000
1502 St. Louis Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; den, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $2,400.
Freeport  $110,000
204 East Seaman Avenue
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; finished basement with bar, 1-car garage; taxes $2,300.


Shortstop Costs Yankees Salary Title in Battle Against Mets
LEAD: Imagine that someday the Mets and the Yankees really do play a Subway World Series.
Could the Series actually be decided by Randy Velarde?


Music
LEAD: Small-orchestra concerts at the beginning and the end of this week catch the critic's eye.
Monday night the Jupiter Symphony, directed by Jens Nygaard, plays one of its expected programs of the unexpected at Alice Tully Hall.
Strauss's Horn Concerto will show up, the Bach Double Concerto, here in its oboe-violin version, also out-of-the-way pieces by Dvorak, Tchaikovsky and Weber.


THE LOS ANGELES CLUB SCENE
LEAD: Angst and anomie appear to permeate late-night adolescence and early adulthood, at least in the narrow band represented by the Los Angeles club scene.


Japan Asks Why Scientists Go West to Thrive
LEAD: National pride was ample and undisguised last month when Susumu Tonegawa became the first Japanese to win the Nobel Prize in medicine.


THEATER 'THE SOUND OF MUSIC' IS IN EAST WINDSOR
LEAD: TRANSFUSING ''The Sound of Music'' with a fresh, youthful renewed point of view doesn't seem easy, or even essential, since the last of the Rodgers and Hammerstein collaborations has been doing just fine, pleasing audiences in its own staid, old-fashioned style for almost 30 years.


A NEW PLAY EXPLORES FANTASIES OF A MAN AT 60
LEAD: AT 60, a man's thoughts turn to what might have been, and he fantasizes about second chances.
It is on that premise that Elliott Caplin of Mamaroneck has based his play, ''One Way to Ulan Bator,'' which is being performed on Off Off Broadway (at the Riverwest Theater at 155 Bank Street in Manhattan) through


UNFOLDING HORROR
LEAD:  A STATE OF FEAR  By Menan du Plessis. 190 pp.
New York: Pandora Press/Methuen.
Cloth, $25.
Paper, $7.95.


Dr. Elliot Regenbogen Weds Melissa Epstein
LEAD: At the Beth El Synagogue Center in New Rochelle, N.Y., Melissa Epstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Epstein of Yonkers, was married last evening to Dr.
Elliot Regenbogen, the son of of Helen Regenbogen of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Irving Regenbogen.
Rabbi Melvin Serner officiated.


RENTER LAW ROILS GARDEN CITY
LEAD: LEGISLATION to protect tenants has recently been a source of controversy in Garden City.


A SUMMER HOUSE WAITS FOR ITS TURN
LEAD: THE sun was gradually losing its summer strength, its warmth was diminishing and it seemed to know it had lost its importance.
The flowers didn't seem to care about it as much.
There were no beachgoers who cared, no worshipers.


A Return To Elegance
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Jersey Agency Seeks New Laws to Deal With Incompetent Doctors
LEAD: Calling incompetent and impaired physicians ''a potentially lethal minority,'' the State Commission of Investigation has recommended new laws and regulations intended to bring them to the attention of the State Board of Medical Examiners.


5 Held in Jerusalem Clash
LEAD: Five militantly Orthodox Jewish youths were arrested today after a policeman was wounded in violent demonstrations in Jerusalem against what the Orthodox regard as desecration of the Jewish sabbath.
Protesters at a busy intersection threw stones and bottles at drivers who were violating religious law by driving on the holy day, and the policeman was struck on the head by a stone.


What Survives in History
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Santos Passes to Record
LEAD: Todd Santos became the National Collegiate Athletic Association career passing leader in Division I-A today, but his San Diego State team lost to Brigham Young, 38-21, in a Western Athletic Conference game.


THE PUMPKIN: NOT JUST A PRETTY FACE
LEAD: NOW that Halloween is over, most Americans look forward to only one more use for the abundant pumpkin crop: in the Thanksgiving pie.
That is a pity, because this estimable member of the squash family has a multitude of other delicious uses.


Nancy Perry Marries Lieut. R. T. Webster
LEAD: Nancy Elizabeth Perry and Lieut.
Russell Todd Webster, U.S.A., were married last evening at the Unitarian Church in Westport, Conn., by the Rev.
Harris Riordon.


Maria T. Mariaca Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Maria Teresa Mariaca, the daughter of Janette Kling Mariaca and Alberto C. Mariaca, both of New York, was married yesterday at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York to William Kinne Barnett, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis B. Barnett of Blacksburg, Va.
The Rev.
William D. Roberts officiated.


DINING OUT
LEAD: DINING out in Wilton presents a challenge, and the paucity of restaurant choices is usually blamed on the town's prohibition of liquor sales in public places.


Holiday Gifts For the Thinker
LEAD: IF THERE IS an ideal time to buy a gift for Christmas or Hanukkah, it is undoubtedly before Thanksgiving.
Stores and mail-order-catalogue houses are fully stocked with merchandise, salespeople are relaxed and the throngs of holiday shoppers are still a gleam in a shopkeeper's eye.
For the student or educator in the family, gifts this year can be both fun and educational.


FACULTY POSITION RESCINDED FOR C.I.A. AGENT IN CALIFORNIA
LEAD: University of California officials have reversed their decision to appoint a Central Intelligence Agency agent as a political science lecturer, ending two weeks of faculty and student protest.


THE DARK PLAYGROUND
LEAD: It's not that I doubt Daniel Voll's sincere intentions in trying to understand what his female friend suffered from being raped (About Men, ''The Dark Playground,'' Oct. 4).
However, I fail to see the ''shared vulnerability'' he speaks of, after his experience of lying on the very spot, tasting the dirt and recalling his own anxious fear at the idea of homosexual prison rape, after he was almost busted for drugs in college.


Arms Scandal Puts Mitterrand on Defensive
LEAD: An Iran arms scandal that has exploded on the French political scene has thrown President Francois Mitterrand and his Socialist Party on the defensive just as he is deciding on whether to run for a second term.


VERIFICATION: WILL IT WORK?
LEAD: Verification of the absence of mobile missiles such as the SS-20 is impossible (''Verification: Will It Work?'' by David Aaron, Oct. 11).
Not just difficult - impossible.
The reason is simple.
No one in the West knows how many were produced or are being produced or how many assembly points and subcontractors are involved.


The N.H.L.'s Indifference
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


New York Ski Trails to Be Widened
LEAD: By a narrow margin, New York voters have approved extending and widening trails at three state-operated ski centers in the Adirondack and Catskill Mountains.


A WOMAN AT OLD EXETER
LEAD: It is no doubt a tribute to ''Old Exeter'' that they have chosen an obviously qualified woman to lead them (''A Woman at Old Exeter,'' by Fran R. Schumer, Oct. 11).
But what a sad commentary on the process of evaluating and choosing a woman principal that one of the women on the search committee felt compelled to justify the choice by stating that Kendra Stearns O'Donnell was not ''some ditz who was going to throw her hands up and say, 'I don't know 'bout nothing but babies and birds.


Don't Alter The Flow
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Tunisia At a Glance
LEAD:  Geography


Attack Kills One at Meeting Of Opposition in Bangladesh
LEAD: Attackers threw bombs and sprayed gunfire at members of an opposition party who were meeting today, killing one person and wounding more than a dozen, the police and witnesses said.


Amherst Helps Salamanders
LEAD: Workers have begun installing tiny tunnels on a street to protect migrating salamanders from cars.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A map of Mystic on Oct. 25 showed incorrect locations for Mystic Seaport and the Mystic Marinelife Aquarium.
They are on the east bank of the Mystic River, south of Interstate 95; the aquarium is almost a mile north of the seaport.


Molly Heminway Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Reid Heminway of Middlebury, Conn., of the engagement of their daughter Molly Lewis Heminway to Charles Edward Keeble Moseley, the son of Mrs.
Richard Curtis Miles of New York and Greenwich, Conn., and the late Charles Guy Moseley.


Mixing Liquids and Illiquids for Stability
LEAD: IN recent years, individuals have been pouring liquid assets into their portfolios.
Their emphasis has been on stocks, bonds and mutual funds, all of which are easily converted to cash.


Listen to Workers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Old Masters Offer Fresh Lessons at Yale
LEAD: FIRST LOVE IS THE REAL THING, tradition says.
But looking at works of art is also a form of love, and we never forget the moment at which we first found out how much can come of it.
For this reason, every university museum should be designated as a sacred place - one in which the guards go disguised and can reveal themselves when we least expect them.


Music: Recent Pieces by Steve Reich
LEAD: ANYONE interested in understanding the importance of Steve Reich's music had only to look around at Thursday night's audience in the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The people were there to hear three of Mr.
Reich's newer pieces, played by the guitarist Pat Metheny with a conglomeration of Brooklyn Philharmonic musicians and the composer's own corps of percussion players.


A SHIFT TO CHANGE IS SEEN IN CHINA
LEAD: Advocates of change in China won a solid victory at its 13th Congress of the Communist Party, but the balance between them and more cautious leaders has been carefully preserved, according to a number of academic specialists on China.


Spain
LEAD: To the Editor: I go to Spain - and only to Spain - three times a year.
And I do so because I love the Spanish people and their culture.


About Cars; Mazda Adds Zip With GTX
LEAD: THE letters about what is right and wrong with today's automobile continue to flow in.
It has been a month since that column ran, and the torrent has slowed to a trickle, two to three letters a day now.
But it is obvious that people across the country have some definite ideas about what they are not getting in the way of dandy transportation.


Koreans View Their Election With Hope - and Cynicism
LEAD: SOUTH KOREANS are enjoying a novel sensation: being courted by politicians eager for their votes.
As campaigning accelerates for next month's election, their first chance in 16 years to vote directly for a president, hundreds of thousands of Koreans are turning out at the candidates' rallies.


In Orange County, a Plan to Build $22,800 Houses
LEAD: In an area where new homes sell for more than $136,000, a rural housing agency says it will build 200 condominiums costing as little as $22,800 each for Orange County residents.


BRODSKY'S NOBEL: WHAT THE APPLAUSE WAS ABOUT
LEAD: THERE was applause in Stockholm when Joseph Brodsky was named the winner of this year's Nobel Prize in Literature.
There probably always is at these occasions, since applause is what they are all about, but this particular outbreak of handclaps was reported to have been more animated and partisan than usual.


Stay Out of My Head
LEAD: Two million times a year, American citizens are subjected to ''lie-detector'' tests.
This explosion of the use of machines that measure nervousness (and that fail to catch the cool, practiced liar) is the most blatant intrusion into personal freedom in this country today.


PENN STATE WINS, 21-16
LEAD: Dwayne Downing returned an interception 38 yards for a touchdown and Blair Thomas ran 58 yards for another score today as Penn State defeated Maryland for the 23d consecutive season, 21-16.


Shoppers Shrug Off Market Turmoil
LEAD: Consumers don't seem too worried about the general state of the economy, to judge from the first indicators of their sentiments since the stock market collapse.
Polls produced mixed, somewhat puzzling responses, but none of them seemed to portend a widespread movement to swear off spending.
A similar reading emerged from the sales indicators.


Correction
LEAD: An article Oct. 11 about a forum involving several possible candidates for New York City schools chancellor incorrectly described one of the participants, Dr.
Peter Negroni.
Dr.
Negroni had previously stepped down as Superintendent of Community School District 12 in the Bronx.


WHERE TO BUY BOOKS
LEAD: IT'S the time of year when I start feeling sorry for the man from United Parcel Service.
Almost daily he has to lug an armload of coffee-table sized photography books, still warm from the presses, into my apartment.
It's getting close to Christmas, which means (to book publishers, at least) that it is a grand time for luxurious, eye-catching books.


WHO SHOULD BE THE M.V.P.'S IN BASEBALL?
LEAD: Year after year the selection of baseball's most valuable players is an almost arbitrary choice between two players equally worthy of the award - one seemingly deserving on the basis of statistical achievement, the other for leadership of a pennant winning ball club.
Why not establish a new annual award to honor the ''Slugger of the Year'' in each league?


Karen Donfried to Wed Alan Untereiner
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
Karl P. Donfried of Amherst, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Erika Donfried, to Alan Edward Untereiner, the son of Dr.
Wayne Whitlock Untereiner of Rancho California, Calif., and the late Ann Yeomans Abbott.
A June wedding is planned.


Roosevelt Rallies to Top White Plains in Showdown
LEAD: In a battle between two undefeated teams in Westchester County, Roosevelt High School of Yonkers roared back from a 17-0 first-period deficit yesterday to defeat White Plains, 26-23, at the losers' field.


Tiffany Bluemle Wed to Todd Purdum
LEAD: The Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Tiffany Windsor Bluemle, the director of development for the National Civic League in Manhattan, and Todd Stanley Purdum, a reporter on the metropolitan staff of The New York Times.
The Rev.
Sue Anne Steffey


HIS DREADFULNESS, THE CZAR
LEAD:  FEARFUL MAJESTY  The Life and Reign of Ivan the Terrible.
By Benson Bobrick.
Illustrated. 398 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


Liver and Cabbage, With Chicken Soup
LEAD:  BRIGHTON BEACH MEMOIRS  Written by Neil Simon.
Starring Blythe Danner, Bob Dishy, Judith Ivey, Jonathan Silverman (in photo).
Produced by Ray Stark.
Directed by Gene Saks. 1986.
MCA Home Video. 110 minutes. $79.95.


Haste and Ideological Fights Set Nomination on Course Ending in Its Doom
LEAD: The complete account of how and why President Reagan surprised many in the Senate and the Administration nine days ago by choosing for the Supreme Court a little-known 41-year-old judge championed by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d is not yet known.


HEARTLAND FOOD IN HICKSVILLE
LEAD: HICKSVILLE is Long Island's middle ground.
Similarly, Wickers, a restaurant in a Hicksville shopping center, is close to the center of Long Island's restaurant spectrum.
It's not a fancy place offering haute cuisine at haute prices, nor is it a fast-food spot with a tab to match.
Wickers is the kind of place that most Long


Larger Collapse Inquiry Urged
LEAD: An engineering consultant who helped Federal agencies investigating the collapse of L'Ambiance Plaza in Bridgeport says the investigation should be expanded.


Dawkins Suspended
LEAD: THE Utah Jazz have indefinitely suspended Darryl Dawkins in a move that the team president, Dave Checketts, said was not disciplinary in nature.
Checketts, in announcing the suspension of the center last night, said Dawkins was upset over the death of his estranged wife, Kelly Barnes Dawkins, on Nov.


HOW MUSIC PAINTS CHARACTER
LEAD: OPERA IS DRAMA, AND, AS JOSEPH KER-man argued more than 30 years ago in his provocative ''Opera as Drama,'' the composer is the dramatist.
That is still one of the trickiest truths of opera to understand.
Misunderstanding it can skew performance priorities, and often does.
What does it mean that the composer is the dramatist?


Elmont Pulls Upset, 10-6
LEAD: Elmont (2-5) upset New Hyde Park (5-2) by 10-6 in a Nassau County Conference III game yesterday.
With six minutes remaining, a running back, John Michel, scored the winning touchdown on a 12-yard run.
For the Spartans, the conference champions the past three years, the victory is the highlight of their most dismal season in several years.


Caroline Starr Weds
LEAD: At St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York, Caroline Hopping Starr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herald B. Starr of Orange, N.J., and Thomas William Boylan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew M. Boylan of Westfield, N.J., were married yesterday by the Rev.
Robert T. Sheeran, the assistant provost of Seton Hall University.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Half Moon Street  Starring Michael Caine and Sigourney Weaver.
Directed by Bob Swaim. 1987.
Embassy Home Entertainment. 90 minutes. $79.95.
To supplement her paltry earnings at a foreign-policy think tank in London, Lauren Slaughter hires herself out to an escort service.
Lauren is a young American Ph.D., beautiful and witty.


ORPHEUS AT THE WORD PROCESSOR
LEAD:  THE MEDUSA FREQUENCY  By Russell Hoban. 143 pp.
New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press. $16.95.


Gentle Strength of Horses Heals Children's Spirits
LEAD: Sherry is an 8-year-old for whom it is an achievement to sit upright, strapped into her wheelchair.
She has profound mental and physical disabilities.
She cannot feed or dress herself.
She cannot talk.
She cannot walk.


Nancy Garfinkel Married To Martin S. Eller on L.I.
LEAD: At Congregation Beth Sholom in Lawrence, L.I., Nancy Ellen Garfinkel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Garfinkel of Plainview, L.I., was married last evening to Martin Scott Eller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Eller of Morganville, N.J.
Rabbi Gilbert Klaperman officiated.


POLITICS AS SPETTACOLO
LEAD:  DEMOCRACY, ITALIAN STYLE  By Joseph LaPalombara. 308 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $25.


Deborah O'Connell Marries
LEAD: Deborah Ann O'Connell, the daughter of Paulette Leclair O'Connell of San Francisco and Philip Joseph O'Connell of St.
Petersburg, Fla., was married yesterday to Tyler Roberts Carder, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roberts George Carder of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Wayne Lavender performed the ceremony at the Rowayton (Conn.) United Methodist


FULFILLMENT IN AUTUMN OF HER LIFE FOR WRITER
LEAD: At the age of 90, Dorothy O. White is the author of a book, her first.


American Autos
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fieldston Comes Back
LEAD: Fieldston came from behind yesterday to snap Brunswick's winning streak and capture the Southern Division title of the Fairchester League with a 24-13 victory.
Fieldston meets Hopkins-Grammar next Saturday for the championship.


Corrections
LEAD: A map of Chicago on Sept. 27 misidentified a road south of Congress Parkway; it is Balbo Drive, not Balboa Drive.


True Price Comparison
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Women Are Reshaping The Field of Public Art
LEAD: CINCINNATI, Nov. 7 - When residents and merchants in this city's Hyde Park neighborhood decided that a small piece of roadside parkland known as the Mudhole needed a better image, they set out to dress it up with a piece of public sculpture.


Follow-Up On the News; As the End Nears For Noted Hotel
LEAD: THE Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles, host to vivacious movie stars and ambitious politicians in a glittering era now gone, prepared its last rites.


Constance Schlitz Plans April Wedding
LEAD: Warren J. Schlitz of Shaker Heights, Ohio, has announced the engagement of his daughter, Constance Ann Schlitz, to Worth Daniels MacMurray, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Frank G. MacMurray of McLean and Madison, Va.
An April wedding is planned.


Bing Quon Chu Dies; Leader in Chinatown
LEAD: Bing Quon Chu, a businessman and leader of Chinese-American organizations, died of a heart attack Tuesday in Booth Memorial Hospital in Flushing, Queens.
He was 65 years old and a resident of Flushing.


Echoes of Revolution and New Change in Red Square
LEAD: The Soviet Union celebrated its 70th anniversary today with a martial parade of the old trappings of the Bolshevik Revolution and the new watchwords of the Revolution's latest leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Fear of AIDS Surfaces in Permissive Bangkok
LEAD: In Bangkok, where by conservative estimates several hundred thousand people make their living in the sex industry, fears of AIDS have been slow to surface.
But the complacency may soon be over.


An Optimistic Forecast for Bonds
LEAD: THE stock market has been the chief object of investor attention for the last two weeks.
But investors in the fixed-income securities market, which is larger than the equity market by at least a trillion dollars, have enjoyed a monthlong rally that propelled bond prices up as much as 12 percent.
The rally continued into last week.


SCHOOL BANDS LOSING VOLUME
LEAD: WITHOUT a single tuba, trombone or saxophone, Meredith Gilfeather admits that the Stamford High School marching band does not exactly strike up a rousing rendition of the National Anthem before the fans at home football games.


KOCH WILL SOFTEN LINE ON MANAGUA
LEAD: Mayor Koch is not preparing to join the Sandinista Front, but his three-day visit to Nicaragua clearly softened his perception of the Sandinistas.


THE LOS ANGELES CLUB SCENE
LEAD: Where were all those insouciant, club-crazed Angelenos last year, when several hundred other people were beginning their march of over 3,000 miles across the United States in the cause of peace?


THE SOUND OF MUSIC
LEAD:  HANDEL'S OPERAS  1704-1726.
By Winton Dean and John Merrill Knapp.
Illustrated. 751 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $59.95.


HOMOSEXUALS AND THE CHURCHES
LEAD: In his article ''Homosexuals and the Churches'' (Oct. 11), Edward Tivnan writes that ''research seems now to indicate  [ that ]  one has no choice in being homosexual.'' The premise is an astonishingly broad one and cannot be allowed to pass unconsidered.


BARE KNUCKLES ON MADISON AVENUE
LEAD: IT WAS THE LAST OF THE BIG killings in advertising,'' says Robert E. Jacoby.
He sits in the brightly lit living room of his sprawling ranch home in Saddle River, N.J., puffing on one of the large cigars he habitually smokes.


HORSES BACKSTAGE
LEAD:  WHEN THE FAT MAN SINGS  By William Murray. 216 pp.
New York: Bantam Books. $14.95.


TAKE POWER LINES OUT OF NATURE'S WAY
LEAD: On Oct. 11 you printed an article entitled ''Criticism for Utility Follows Snowfall.'' Year after year, the lives of thousands of Connecticut residents are disrupted when storms result in the loss of electric power.
These incidents are not ''acts of God.'' They are exacerbated by the failure of the utility companies to bury power and telephone lines.


Bigger Than Perry?
LEAD: THE Chicago Bears, leading the Central Division with a 6-1 record, are favored to win their game against the 3-3-1 Packers in Green Bay today, but, win or lose, one cherished Chicago record is likely to fall.


Ovid's Best Sellers
LEAD:  To the Editor:


WHAT'S DOING IN AUSTIN
LEAD: Like an oasis in Texas, Austin rises green and lush between the swamps of Houston and dusty plains of West Texas.
Its hills and mesas buck and ripple along the Balcones geologic fault, which rises from the south near San Antonio and reaches heights of 300 feet or more just north of Austin.
From the cliffs and upper slopes of the hills, with hawks wheeling high overhead, one can look down on two major lakes created from the Colorado River as it snakes its way through the city and countryside.


John Francis English, 61, Is Dead; Top Political Adviser to Kennedys
LEAD: John F. English, a national, state and Long Island Democratic leader for many years, died yesterday of liver cancer at Mercy Hospital in Rockville Centre, L.I.
He was 61 years old and lived in Muttontown, L.I., and on Fire Island.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Chicago; River North Is Taking Off
LEAD: PLANS are taking shape for new headquarters for the American Medical Association west of Michigan Avenue and north of the Loop, signaling the long-awaited, full-scale redevelopment of the River North district into a mixed-use adjunct to the rapidly expanding downtown.


In Praise of A Nature Series
LEAD:  To the Editor:


PLENTY OF BLAME TO GO AROUND
LEAD:  AND THE BAND PLAYED ON  Politics, People, and the AIDS Epidemic.
By Randy Shilts. 630 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $24.95.


New Hampshire in Motion to Revive Moose Season
LEAD: NEW HAMPSHIRE'S Fish and Game Department is planning a moose season - the state's first since 1901 - for next year, and it appears as if the event will take place on schedule.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  PRINTMAKING IN FRANCE


THE WORD FOR CHILDREN
LEAD:  THE BOOK OF ADAM TO MOSES  By Lore Segal.
Illustrated by Leonard Baskin. 115 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $13.95. (All ages)  ADAM AND EVE  The Bible Story.
Adapted and illustrated by Warwick Hutton.
Unpaged.
New York: Margaret K. McElderry Books. $13.95. (All ages)


Melissa I. Althoff Wed To Jonathan A. Schein
LEAD: The marriage of Melissa I. Althoff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Althoff of Maytown, Pa., to Jonathan A. Schein took place last evening at the Carlyle Hotel in New York.
Rabbi Joel Goor performed the ceremony.
The bridegroom is a son of Barbara R. Herman of Westport, Conn., and Gerald D. Schein of New


A LA CARTE
LEAD: WITH winter's icy blasts just weeks away, the fickle sun-and-fun crowds have retreated.
Restaurants at ferries and on the East End have battened their hatches.
Some hope to weather winter storms by enticing the boys and girls of summer back to their warm-weather haunts by offering meals and prices difficult to resist.


LOTS OF PACHYDERMS
LEAD:  17 KINGS AND 42 ELEPHANTS  By Margaret Mahy.
Illustrated by Patricia MacCarthy.
Unpaged.
New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. $10.95. (Ages 4 to 8)


MOZAMBIQUE IS OFFERED HELP AGAINST REBELS
LEAD: Britain and other Commonwealth nations are offering military and economic assistance to Mozambique to protect railways, ports and other development projects against attack by South African-backed guerillas.


NEW RULE SOUGHT ON CONTRIBUTIONS
LEAD: The Federal Election Commission has been asked to condone a practice used by political action committees that has been criticized as a way to circumvent Federal limits on campaign contributions.


WHO SHOULD BE THE M.V.P.'S IN BASEBALL?
LEAD: Who should be the m.v.p.'s in baseball?
Tony Gwynn and Dwight Evans.
GREG GOLDSTEIN
Fresh Meadows


Chamber Concert
LEAD: Judith Pearce, a flutist, Elizabeth DeFelice, a pianist, and Donald Palma, a double-bassist, will play works by J.S.
Bach, Vaughan Williams, Varese, Ives, Wallingford Riegger and Carl Reinecke tomorrow at 8 in Weill Recital Hall.
Tickets at $10, or $5 for students and the elderly, are available at the box office or through Carnegie Charge, 247-7800.


Rock Grows Up, Gracefully And Otherwise
LEAD: SEVEN YEARS AGO I ATTENDED a concert by the late blues giant Muddy Waters that forever changed my assumption that rock music made by musicians over 50 could only look foolish.
Mr.
Waters, then 66, looked every day of his age.
But when he barked out such bump-and-grind blues classics as ''I'm Your Hoochie Coochie Man'' and ''Got My Mojo Working,'' the singer-guitarist exuded a gruff charisma that was commandingly ferocious.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Consumer Confidence Seen  Economists are optimistic that consumers will recover confidence and spend enough to avoid a recession next year, a survey found.
Page 30.
A Breakthrough on Arms  White House officials and Congressional leaders have reportedly worked out basic elements of a compromise on arms issues.


Who Will Lead New York Schools?
LEAD: Should New York City's Board of Education be expanded, replaced or abolished altogether?
Such questions are properly raised as the board struggles to find a successor to Chancellor Nathan Quinones, who retires on Jan. 1.
The stumbling search exemplifies a crisis of competence for the nation's largest school system, a crisis that begins with the board president, Robert Wagner Jr.


Postings: Watch the Clock; Coming Attraction
LEAD: Site clearance is under way in preparation for the construction of a $10 million shopping center on the site of an old drive-in theater in the Village of Fishkill in Dutchess County.
The site is at the intersection of Routes 9 and 52, one mile north of Interstate 84.


The Teen Years: Time of Mixed Messages
LEAD: THEY ARE the children of the children of the 60's, growing up in an age when much of what seemed outrageous then is commonplace.
Yet in many ways, today's teen-agers are having to sort through an ambiguous and contested legacy.
The sexual revolution in America bequeathed them a social code that is explicit yet no longer liberated, and an atmosphere in which adolescents are scrutinized more publicly than ever before, yet given little guidance by the adults they must answer to.


A ONCE-UPON-A-TIME QUIZ
LEAD: THE opening sentence of a novel is always important, but perhaps never more so than in novels for young readers.
A novel that gets off to a slow start can get off to no start for people with homework to do, television to watch, rock groups to follow, parents to please, chums to phone, places to go, chores to be done.


NEW EFFORTS SEEK TO TAP COUNTY'S POTENTIAL FOR TOURISM
LEAD: HISTORIC Hudson Valley, the new name of the historic preservation group better known to county residents as Sleepy Hollow Restorations, celebrated its expanding role last week with a festive dinner dance in Manhattan.
But it promised that Westchester's historic sites will not be ignored as the organization sets out on its mission to encourage tourism throughout the region.


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
LEAD: INCIDENTS IN THE LIFE OF A SLAVE GIRL, Written by Herself, Harriet A. Jacobs.
Edited by Jean Fagan Yellin.
Harvard University Press. 306 pages.
Hardcover $37.50, paperback $9.95.


Practical Traveler; Club Discounts From Eastern
LEAD: THE woods are filled with clubs for discount travel.


Bear Seized at Private Club
LEAD: The police seized a 400-pound bear after learning that customers at a private club were being encouraged to pay $5 to wrestle with the bear.
The police intervened Thursday night at Ms.
Kitty's after Toby, a defanged brown bear, had wrestled his first match, officials said.
No one was hurt.
The bear's owner, Burlie Webb of Hot Springs, Ark., was charged with one count of illegal exhibition of a wild or exotic animal.


Two 13-Year-Olds Accused of Setting Man on Fire
LEAD: Two 13-year-old boys who had a brief argument with a man in an abandoned car in a Brooklyn lot Thursday night returned moments later with a container of gasoline and set the car on fire, fatally burning him, the police said yesterday.


ONE OF THE ALL-TIME BEST
LEAD: IF one polled the bridge cognoscenti and asked them to identify the best player of all time the result would be in doubt.
But there is no doubt at all that B. Jay Becker, who died last month at his home in Flushing, Queens, at age 83 would be on every short list.


A Refreshing Breeze of Wind Music on Disks
LEAD: COMPARED WITH VIOLINISTS, cellists or pianists, players of wind instruments have a paucity of music to choose from when they seek solo materials.
Although there are a number of masterly works by great composers, most music for winds has been written by players who regarded themselves primarily as performers and composed only to provide themselves with something to play.


U.N. Food Agency Convenes For the Election of Director
LEAD: The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization began a three-week conference today that will vote whether to give its Director General an unprecedented third term in office.


FICTION
LEAD:  OCCUPATION.
By John Toland. (Doubleday, $19.95.) ''In war,'' Omar Bradley wrote, ''there is no second prize for the runner-up.'' But what about Japan?
Maybe the American occupation at the end of World War II wasn't a prize.
But it began a political and social revolution that made Japan the economic power it is today.


What Do People Want, Anyway?
LEAD: THE Campbell Soup Company, like most consumer products companies, has always asked its customers lots of questions.
Last year alone, its field researchers contacted close to 110,000 people to talk about food - taste, preparation, nutritional value, the works.
On the basis of what they said, Campbell changed the seasonings in five Le Menu dinners and introduced a line of low-salt soups called, appropriately enough, Special Request.


New Unesco Chief Wants the U.S. to Rejoin
LEAD: Unesco's General Conference voted overwhelmingly today to elect Federico Mayor Zaragoza, a former Spanish Education Minister, as its next Director General.


DAY-CARE PROVIDERS STRIVE TO MEET NEEDS
LEAD: FOR thousands of Long Island women, the business day begins with a stop at a baby sitter's house, or a day-care center, or a reminder to a school-age child not to miss the bus.
Many more women who would join the Long Island work force cannot because there is no one to care for their children.


A WOMAN AT OLD EXETER
LEAD: It was with great interest that I read Fran Schumer's article.
As a young faculty member during the early days of coeducation, I can recall many incidents in which male chauvinism, either intentional or unintentional, prevailed.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  The Relativity of Saints  Einstein was a reluctant culture hero - yet he saw that he could be a useful symbol as well as a famous scientist.
This is from ''Dreams and Delusions: The Drama of German History'' by Fritz Stern (Knopf).


TEARS AND RIOTS, LOVE AND REGRETS
LEAD:  THE SIXTIES  Years of Hope, Days of Rage.
By Todd Gitlin. 513 pp.
New York: Bantam Books. $19.95.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Dover  $167,500
44 Daniel Street
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; full carpeting, eat-in kitchen; taxes $2,678.
Mantoloking Shores  $380,000
333 Barkentine Lane
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 15-year-old ranch; fireplace, C/A, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.


No Parliament Role in Peace Prize Choice
LEAD: To the Editor:


MOVIES
LEAD:  The Bedroom Window  Starring Steve Guttenberg, Elizabeth McGovern, Isabelle Huppert. 1987.
Vestron Video. 113 mins. $79.98.
You can give ''The Bedroom Window'' points for bravery; here's a romantic-suspense story that plunges into Hitchcock territory, where shrewder, more stylish films fear to go.


Cynthia Hawkins And John Guarino Engaged to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic Hyde Hawkins of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cynthia Cleveland Hawkins to John Mitchell Guarino of Lausanne, Switzerland, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Francis Guarino of Fairless Hills, Pa.


VERIFICATION: WILL IT WORK?
LEAD: David Aaron misstates both the Administration's motives in raising the problem of Soviet noncompliance as well as my own reasons for choosing to leave Government service.


JURY TOLD OF PLAN TO KILL RADIO HOST
LEAD: The former mistress of a neo-Nazi gang leader has told a jury her lover confided to her that his gang planned the killing of a Denver radio talk show host.


Trail Purchase Is Set
LEAD: The Green Mountain Club will make its first major land purchase along the Long Trail, thanks to a $120,000 state grant awarded this week.
The purchase of three miles of trail in Lowell also will be made with a $120,000 loan from the Vermont chapter of the Nature Conservancy.
About 35 miles of the 265-mile trail is up for sale, jeopardizing the continuity and integrity of the foot path.


U.C.L.A. a 52-17 Winner
LEAD: Eric Ball, playing in place of injured Gaston Green, rushed for 128 yards and three touchdowns today as U.C.L.A. routed Oregon State, 52-17, in a Pacific-10 Conference game.


Diane E. Hutchinson, a Bank Officer, Is Married to Paul Christopher Reilly
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York, Diane Elizabeth Hutchinson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Ashton Hutchinson Jr. of Wilton, Conn., and Vineyard Haven, Mass., was married yesterday to Paul Christopher Reilly, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul W. Reilly of Locust, N.J., and Kiawah, S.C.


Thievery
LEAD: To the Editor: I am writing in the hope that what happened to me won't happen to someone else.


SCHOOLS' AIDS BAN IS FACING ATTACK
LEAD: New Haven's policy of excluding children with AIDS from public school classes has come under attack from the Connecticut Civil Liberties Union, which says it will use every legal remedy available to halt the practice.


H. E. Knoblock 3d, Lawyer, Is Married to Ellen Harris
LEAD: Ellen DaCosta Harris, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth A. Harris of Winnetka, Ill., and Henry E. Knoblock 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Knoblock Jr. of Duxbury, Mass., were married last evening at St.
Paul's Roman Catholic Church in Cambridge, Mass., by the Rev.
Gerald P. Cohen.


Jenny Engles Is Wed
LEAD: Jenny Angela Engles, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Thomas Engles of Providence and Little Compton, R.I., was married yesterday to Charles William Anderson, a son of Mrs.
Randolph Erland Anderson of Peace Dale, R.I., and the late Mr.
Anderson.
The Rev.
Everett H. Greene performed the ceremony at Emmanuel Episcopal Church in Newport, R.I.


CAN THE MENNONITES SURVIVE SUCCESS?
LEAD: A HANDFUL OF MEN come coasting down the hill on gearless bicycles.
They are wearing dark wide-brimmed straw hats, plain blue workshirts and black pants held up by suspenders.
They round the corner at the end of the cornfield and pull up to a half-constructed church where 40 or so men, most of them farmers, are already at work.


FICTION
LEAD:  TALKING TO STRANGE MEN.
By Ruth Rendell. (Pantheon, $16.95.) ''They are just like schoolboys,'' observes Mungo Cameron's father as he watches a televised report on a spy trial. ''Like so many schoolchildren playing games.'' But what this staid English doctor doesn't know is that the youngest of his children, teen-aged Mungo, is busily proving the truth - and the dangerous consequences - of that statement.


Miss Kamen Wed To Dr. D. L. Siegel
LEAD: Leslie P. Kamen and Dr.
Donald L. Siegel were married last evening at the Copacabana in New York by Rabbi Stanley A. Dreyfus.


For Small Planes, More Buyers Think Brazil
LEAD: IN a cavernous hangar at the headquarters of Embraer, as the Brazilian Aerospace Corporation is known, work has begun on the first of 20 twin-prop Brasilia aircraft on order from Texas Air.
Near the plant's runway, technicians are testing five single-engine Tucano trainer planes, with the colors of the Peruvian Air Force.


BLUE MUSINGS AFTER BLACK MONDAY
LEAD: THE realization that I might not be coming back to that playground of the rich and famous, the Hamptons, much longer hit hard in, of all places, Ithaca, N.Y.


UNDEFEATED SYRACUSE POUNDS NAVY FOR 9TH VICTORY
LEAD: Coach Dick MacPherson of Syracuse got into a rather heated discussion with the Naval Academy's deputy commandant, Capt.
Ed Kristensen, on the field today.
It seems that the coach and his quarterbacks, going through warm-ups, were standing in the way of the brigade of midshipmen marching into the stadium before the kickoff.


Dance: Karen Monson
LEAD: IT'S easy to say what Karen Monson's ''Blood on the Saddle'' wasn't.
Despite its title, it wasn't a Western.
But it's harder to determine just what it was.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on Nov. 1 about a cruise from Helsinki to Leningrad gave an incorrect telephone number for Cosmos International Tours; it is 800-556-5305.


Man in the News; Strong Hand for Tunisia: Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali
LEAD: Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, the 51-year-old army general who yesterday became Tunisia's second President since it won independence from France in 1956, started out to become an electronics engineer.


Notre Dame Rallies
LEAD: Mark Green carried eight consecutive times, the last for a 2-yard touchdown, to complete a three-touchdown Notre Dame rally for a 32-25 victory over Boston College today.
Green, who rushed for 152 yards, led a second-half rushing attack that brought Notre Dame back from a 25-12 deficit.


A Canadian Becomes the 26th U. S. President
LEAD: THE PINCE-NEZ AND THE PUSH broom mustache have a lot to do with the visceral response of the audience to Len Cariou's entrance, in ''Teddy and Alice.'' The generous sprinklings of ''Bully!'' through the dialogue don't hurt, either.


Stage: Corporate Competition, in 'The Downside'
LEAD: In ''The Downside'' by Richard Dresser (at the Long Wharf Theater), a new anti-stress drug is about to be introduced on the American market, and a New Jersey pharmaceutical company has speeded up production in order to beat its competition.
Careers and lives are at stake.
As one suspects, the drug itself has damaging side effects - the ''downside'' of the title.


Listen to Workers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollars for Housing
LEAD: A total of $1.4 million for housing for the homeless has been awarded to three nonprofit organizations in Westchester and will be used to help create apartments for 26 families and a communal house for five individuals.
The money came from the New York State Homeless Housing Assistance Program, which gave $20 million for 24 projects across the state.


GINSBURG WITHDRAWS NAME AS SUPREME COURT NOMINEE, CITING MARIJUANA 'CLAMOR'
LEAD: Under enormous pressure from Administration officials and his own conservative supporters on Capitol Hill, Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg today asked President Reagan to withdraw his nomination to the Supreme Court.


NEW HAVEN RAISES PAY TO LURE OFFICERS
LEAD: THE New Haven Police Department plans to increase the starting pay and shorten the time it takes to certify a potential recruit to combat its chronic shortage of officers.


The Hand-Held Calculus
LEAD: NOT SO MANY years have passed since arithmetic teachers faced up to the grim prospect of classrooms full of cheap electronic calculators, enabling students to sidestep the painstaking memorization of multiplication tables.
What would happen, educators wondered, when these students went on to try the rigors of calculus?


Slumping Giants Search for What Went Wrong
LEAD: It is obvious what is wrong with the Giants.
Isn't it?
They spent too much time writing books.
Or, they did not spend enough time putting a strike team together.
Or, everyone points for a Super Bowl team.


Offer to Wright on Nicaragua Talks Reported
LEAD: House Speaker Jim Wright turned down a request by Nicaraguan officials to serve as an intermediary in cease-fire talks between the Sandinista Government and Nicaraguan rebels, diplomatic officials said today.


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  Post-Crash Careers


WITH GIANT DAMS ALL BUILT, AGENCY SEEKS NEW WORK
LEAD: ''TOUCH water and you touch everything'' in the West, John Gunther wrote in ''Inside USA'' in 1947.
And the engineers of the United States Bureau of Reclamation did not just touch the West's great rivers, they transformed them, turning dry and dusty wastelands into a modern-day Mesopotamia.


A CARETAKER NOMINATED TO OVERSEE THE BROCK LEGACY
LEAD: IN 1981, when President Reagan dismissed striking air traffic controllers who had refused to return to work, he noted that he had once led a strike as head of the Screen Actors Guild.
But it was his swift, firm response to the controllers' strike, not his background as a Hollywood labor leader, that set the tone for labor relations in his first term.


In Writing
LEAD: Ursula Meese said it was no worse than her husband's writing that ''Ursula and I send our best regards'' without consulting her first.
But some legal experts saw it differently.
What the wife of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d had written to a Federal judge last June - without, she said, consulting Mr.


TRACING STEPS OF LEATHER MAN
LEAD: HE looked so peculiar that ''high strung horses stopped and wouldn't move'' until he passed, or so the legend goes.
He trudged his 365-mile route for 30 years so punctually that housewives in Westchester County and Connecticut had a plate of food waiting every 34th day.


TRAVEL
LEAD:  Washington Monuments  Narrated by Robert Prosky.
Produced and written by Peter D. Edwards.
Atlas Video Library. 30 minutes. $19.95.
This is a dull, slow-moving, plodding and superficial attempt at a tourist guide or souvenir that, despite its pretty pictures, captures none of the historical or present-day excitement of our nation's capital.


Streetscapes: Fiss, Doerr &amp; Carroll Auction Mart; Who Holds the Reins on Fate Of a 1907 Horse-Auction Mart?
LEAD: A PRESERVATION battle may be on the horizon over the Fiss, Doerr &amp; Carroll Auction Mart on East 24th Street that could cast light on state-city sovereignty in landmarks matters.


RAIDING THE TITANIC
LEAD: William F. Buckley Jr.'s account of his adventurous descent to the graveyard of the Titanic kept my interest (''Down to the Great Ship,'' Oct. 18).
But it did not whet my enthusiasm for any further raiding of the lost ''ark.''


G.O.P. Debate Sets Off Missing Persons Alarm
LEAD: The debate among Republicans over the debate today was whether to debate at all.


Ginsburg Had Two Roles in a Pension Case, Documents Show
LEAD: Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, who withdrew today as President Reagan's choice for the Supreme Court, sat for two months this spring as a judge on a pension regulation case arising from actions in which he had been directly involved as a Government official two years earlier, according to court documents.


Jonathan L. Mechanic Wed to Wendy Levine
LEAD: Wendy Sue Levine, the daughter of Jane N. Levine of Clifton, N.J., and Dr.
Frank L. Levine of Saddle Brook, N.J., was married last evening to Jonathan L. Mechanic, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Mayer Mechanic of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., and Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi David Panitz and his son, Rabbi Michael Panitz, officiated at the Park Lane Hotel in New


The Burden Of Setbacks For Kasparov
LEAD: It is difficult to know what Gary Kasparov's intentions were in Game 10, a draw, of his world championship chess match with Anatoly Karpov in Seville, Spain, Friday.


FINDING PEACE AT THE SINK
LEAD:  PACO'S STORY  By Larry Heinemann. 210 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.
Cloth, $15.95.
Penguin Books.
Paper, $4.50.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended Oct. 24  MANHATTAN  East Midtown  $200,000
150 East 56th Street
1-bedroom. 1-bath, 880-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, hardwood floors; common charge $649, taxes $2,853 (Broker:


Decoding A Genius's Enigma
LEAD: EVERY NOW AND THEN THE DRAMATIST Hugh Whitemore and the actor Derek Jacobi would meet for lunch and ruefully wonder if they weren't jointly launched on an impossible project. ''Breaking the Code'' just didn't seem writable, and its protagonist, the British mathematician and inventor Alan Turing, just didn't seem performable.


FLOAT AND SLITHER
LEAD:  THE YELLOW UMBRELLA  By Henrik Drescher.
Illustrated by the author.
Unpaged.
New York: Bradbury Press. $9.95. (Ages 2 to 5)  RAINBOW RHINO  By Peter Sis.
Illustrated by the author.
Unpaged.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $11.95. (Ages 3 to 5)


In Career Goals, Female Valedictorians Fall Behind
LEAD: NANCY was valedictorian of her suburban Chicago high school class when she graduated in 1981.
She wanted to be a lawyer.
Mike was also his high school's valedictorian that year.
He too wanted to be a lawyer.


Antarctic Map Alters as Giant Iceberg Breaks Off
LEAD: An iceberg twice as big as Rhode Island has broken away from Antarctica and is drifting in the Ross Sea, the National Science Foundation says.


Social Events
LEAD: Dining and Dancing  Back to School  Nov. 8 - A dinner with music at 6 P.M. will raise money for an endowment for La Guardia High School, 65th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, which was merged in 1984 with the High School of Music and Art and the School of Performing Arts.
Alumni and friends of the schools are sponsoring the dinner by candlelight in La Guardia's marble lobby.


Commercial Rent
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Holy Cross Now 9-0
LEAD: Jeff Wiley passed for two touchdowns and Gordie Lockbaum ran for one and passed for another today as Holy Cross defeated Harvard, 41-6.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a lot of oil stains on my asphalt driveway.
What should I use on these stains before I apply a sealer?


Islanders Atone in Overtime
LEAD: It was an evening full of alarming scenes.
With 10 minutes left in the second period, Bill Smith's ankle gave out, leaving the Islander goaltender in a heap in front of his net.
Thirty minutes later, it looked like the entire team had collapsed.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Recycle or Repent ''THEY can put me in jail - I'm not paying any fine because of garbage.'' Marie Lawrence of Bohemia, the 24-year-old mother of Christopher, a 3-month-old, is to appear in court tomorrow morning as Long Island's first non-garbage-sorting offender.
Mrs.
Lawrence failed to separate her recyclables.


Correction
LEAD: An article Oct. 11 about the rise of computers in typography misspelled the name of a classic typeface.
It is Goudy Old Style.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  GEMS AND SPORTS  The Westchester County Center in White Plains, reopened after extensive renovations, will feature two attractions next weekend that in past years have drawn up to 8,000 people, according to Gloria Rothstein, the promoter.


THE YEAR'S BEST ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
LEAD: The illustrations on these pages have been taken from The Book Review's choices of the 10 best illustrated children's books of 1987.


A Slave Island Draws Descendants of Slaves
LEAD: Exploring this low island in the mouth of Africa's largest harbor, a black American visitor mused, ''This island almost belongs more to America than to Africa.''


Discovery Jolts an Island Where Time Stands Still
LEAD: For most of the three centuries that people have inhabited this marshy island in the middle of Chesapeake Bay, daily life has been governed by tide, wind, season, isolation and the Methodist church.


VOLCKER ON THE CRASH
LEAD: PAUL VOLCKER'S TELEPHONE keeps ringing.
The callers ask for his advice or sound him out on how much damage has been done.
Even out on the street, Volcker can't escape his questioners.
At 6 feet, 8 inches, he is hard to miss.
So people stop him to ask, ''Are we going to be all right?'' or to say, ''We need you back in Washington.


SMALL MOMENTS OF GRACE AND CHANGE
LEAD:  HEREDITY  By Patricia Storace. 80 pp.
Boston: Beacon Press.
Cloth, $20.
Paper, $7.95.
QUIET MONEY  By Robert McDowell. 68 pp.
New York: An Owl Book/Henry Holt &amp; Company.
Paper, $9.95.
SNUG HARBOR  By Richard Katrovas. 77 pp.
Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press.
Cloth, $17.


HOMOSEXUALS AND THE CHURCHES
LEAD: It is laudable that many homosexuals are striving to fill a spiritual need and draw closer to God, and it is the obligation of the churches to assist them in their quest.
But, are they?


Haiti Terror: The Old Order vs. the New
LEAD: For the last week, Haitians have been witnessing the unfolding of a campaign of terror apparently intended to disrupt elections and preserve the old order of the Duvalier family dictatorship.


'COLOR: PURE AND SIMPLE' IS DISPLAYED IN STAMFORD
LEAD: COLOR is a sensation caused by the action of light on the retina.
It is also definable as an entity that affects its observers physically as well as psychologically, although color choices are generally regarded as reflections of the chooser's mental state.


Keep Banks From the 'Muni' Market
LEAD: ON Oct. 12, Salomon Brothers Inc. announced plans to discontinue its municipal bond department and dismiss 12 percent of its work force.
News that the company with the largest share of the business was pulling out of the ''muni'' business was the hottest topic - until Oct. 19 when the stock market made history.


Seoul Is Alive With Sounds Of Politicians
LEAD: In this city loud with the blare of car horns, the cries of hawkers and the late-night bang of construction, there is a new sound: the talk of politics.


A Compromise on Arms Reached in Washington
LEAD: White House officials and Congressional leaders have worked out the basic elements of a compromise over arms control issues that until now had placed the two sides on a collision course, Administration and Congressional officials disclosed today.


Yale Grabs a Share of First
LEAD: For the first time since 1981, Yale reached the top of the Ivy League in November as the Elis scored a convincing 28-9 victory today over Cornell.


At Dartmouth, A Helping Candor
LEAD: DURING registration at Dartmouth College, students can pick up forms, course material and a sex-education packet containing a condom, a dental dam for oral sex, and an explicit pamphlet explaining how to have safer sex in the era of AIDS.
When they go to the library they can also get a condom when they check out a book.


MISHA'S AUTOGRAPH
LEAD: ''I WAS really very pleasantly surprised,'' said Mikhail Baryshnikov, after members of the American Ballet Theater danced the parts of fashion models at a show of Mr.
Baryshnikov's signature body- and dancewear collection.


DROP ME OFF IN THE RIVER
LEAD:  WEARING DAD'S HEAD  By Barry Yourgrau. 128 pp.
Salt Lake City: Peregrine Smith Books.
Paper, $7.95.


FICTION
LEAD:  HEAVEN AND HELL.
By John Jakes. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The concluding volume of John Jakes's North and South trilogy takes place in the years immediately following the Civil War.
Once again, the story centers on two families, the Hazards of Pennsylvania and the Mains of South Carolina, who become embroiled in the bitter social and political disputes of Reconstruction.


If You're Thinking of Living in:; The Far West Village
LEAD: AS the sun sets over the Hudson River a few blocks away, a woman walks her dog down a cobblestone street.
Outside his brownstone, a man beats a rug with a broom.
It is 1987, but the setting is turn of the century, for history has left its mark on the Far West Village.


Neck and Neck
LEAD: THEY'RE off, and as they come out of the March gate and head into summer it's Steve Cauthen in the lead with Pat Eddery keeping it close and the others trailing far behind.
As they round the turn into September and head toward fall, Cauthen with a mighty effort, extends his lead to 10 races.
It seems all over for Eddery, but what's this?


DESIGNS THAT REACH HIGH FOR PEOPLE WITH LOW INCOMES
LEAD: THE COMMON RESPONSE TO the question of what architects can do to solve the crisis of affordable housing for middle- and lower-income people is: not much.
Architects really do not have the power to alleviate this problem on their own, the reasoning goes, and significant solutions will have to wait for the time when the Government decides to spend some money.


An Artist Finds Poetry in Videotape
LEAD: IN 1973, FRESH OUT OF SYRA-cuse University, the video artist Bill Viola went to visit a friend in San Francisco who took him straight from the airport to a camping trip in the desert. ''We drove down to Death Valley and arrived at Zabriskie Point at midnight under a full moon.
In the next two days, my life was changed,'' Mr.


Headliners; On Stage
LEAD: What theater lovers these New Yorkers be!
The New York Shakespeare Festival will present all 36 plays of William Shakespeare in a six-year-long, $33 million series, Joseph Papp, the festival producer, announced last week.
They will be performed by an all-American company, including such stars as Meryl Streep, James Earl Jones, Robert De Niro, Raul Julia and Kevin Kline, who honed their craft in the Shakespeare festival at one time or another during its 34-year history.


A Lost World Interred in Berlin
LEAD: BEFORE World War II, Berlin ranked among the great cities of the world, and many images from that time are familiar to us: the grandeur of Unter den Linden, the cosmopolitan elegance of the Hotel Adlon, the brimming activity of Potsdamer Platz and Alexanderplatz.
But these places were destroyed, surviving today only in photographs that scarcely represent their grand subjects.


Meeting on Minorities
LEAD: SOME 60 minority-group members with professional baseball ties are meeting in Irving, Tex., this weekend to promote hiring of black and Hispanic persons in the major leagues.
The group, calling itself The Baseball Network, was organized by Frank Robinson, Willie Stargell, Ray Burris and a former scout, Ben Moore.


Troyat's Real Nationality
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Administration Ready to Discuss Wide Tax Rises, Negotiators Say
LEAD: Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d has told Congressional budget negotiators that he is ready to discuss a substantive package of tax increases but that in return he wants a commitment from Democrats on how much domestic spending they are willing to cut, participants in the talks said today.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  WOODWORKING SHOW  At noon Friday, the enthusiasts will start coming out of - or going into -the woodwork at the Hyatt Hotel on Route 70 in Cherry Hill for a show sponsored by the Woodworking Association of North America. (The association, with headquarters in Plymouth, N.H., has 6,700 members, 1,200 of them in New Jersey.)


THE MEN WHO WOULD BE PRESIDENT
LEAD:  THE GREAT TRIUMVIRATE  Webster, Clay, and Calhoun.
By Merrill D. Peterson.
Illustrated. 573 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $27.95


Postings: Hilton at Short Hills; 300-Room Hotel
LEAD: Yet another hotel is under construction in northern New Jersey, the 300-room Hilton at Short Hills, and it is scheduled for completion early next year.
The hotel is at 41 John F. Kennedy Parkway, directly across from the Short Hills Mall about 12 miles west of Newark International Airport, and near both the New Jersey Turnpike and the Garden State Parkway.


Brooklyn Neighbors Mourn Slain Woman, 92
LEAD: To her friends and neighbors, 92-year-old Ida Saltzman was sweet, friendly, sometimes headstrong but, like many grandmothers, always concerned about how you were and whether you were eating right.


Charles C. Steidel Wed to Miss Hoyt
LEAD: Sarah Nichols Hoyt, a daughter of Gayle C. Hoyt of Chatham, N.J., and Charles O. Hoyt of New York, was married yesterday in Sierra Madre, Calif., to Charles Colville Steidel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Steidel of Scottsdale, Ariz.
The Rev.
Michael A. Bamberger performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the


POPS ORCHESTRA TO MAKE ITS DEBUT IN TARRYTOWN
LEAD: THE county has a new orchestra, the all-professional Empire State Pops, and if you would like to be able to say you heard it when, now is the time: at 8 P.M.
Saturday at the Music Hall Theater in Tarrytown.


A Nod (Zzzz) To Sex Ed
LEAD: IT CAME to my attention recently that October had once again been designated by sex-education groups as National Family Sexuality Education Month.
Not knowing quite how to mark the occasion or whether businesses would be closed, I stayed put and gave it a little thought: What should the young learn about sex that they do not already know?


Fordham Clinches
LEAD: Interception returns of 85 yards by Ralph Rios for one touchdown and 18 by Mark Mullen for another carried Fordham to a 45-26 victory over Pace yesterday at Finnerty Field in Pleasantville, N.Y., to give the Rams their first championship in the three-year-old Liberty Conference.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  RULES FOR EAGLE WATCHERS  Ever since the Shepaug Eagle Observation area was set up in 1985, bird lovers in the state have been swarming to the site and unwittingly disturbing the eagles' privacy.
This year, however, the Department of Environmental Protection has set up some regulations to protect wintering bald eagles from the overwhelming number of visitors.


Soviet Celebrates 70th Anniversary
LEAD: Cavalrymen in uniforms of the era parading in Moscow yesterday in celebration of the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution.
Page 14. (Tass via AP)


Art
LEAD: In the front of the darkened room, slides blink on and off.
On the floor are three television sets and several dozen icepicks, their business ends dangerously vertical.
On the back wall are two glowing figures lighted by ultraviolet lamps.
It sounds like a torture chamber, but it's a multi-media installation called ''Common Mistakes.


Larry Davis's Companion Cites Police Threat
LEAD: The mother of Larry Davis's 16-month-old daughter was picked up by the police after Mr.
Davis's arrest last December and warned that she faced separation from her four children and prosecution for aiding a fugitive, she said in a three-hour court interview last week with Mr.
Davis's lawyers.


How O'Keeffe Painted Hymns to Body and Spirit
LEAD: THE GEORGIA O'KEEFFE CENTENNIAL exhibition at the National Gallery of Art is an attempt to allow the work of one of America's best- known artists to speak for itself.
The 10 galleries devoted to 120 of her works offer no meditations on the artist's glamour and theatricality, on her love affairs with Alfred Stieglitz and the Southwest, or on her particular blend of sensuality and abruptness, exhibitionism and reclusiveness.


TRUTH IN TRANSIT
LEAD:  AN ARTIFICIAL WILDERNESS  Essays on 20th-Century Literature.
By Sven Birkerts. 430 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.95.


Olivia Bell Mason And C. J. Beukers Planning to Wed
LEAD: Olivia Bell Mason and Christopher John Beukers, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Beukers of Stony Brook, L.I., and Longborough, England, plan to marry next month, the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Mason of Palm Beach, Fla., have announced.


TRYING A CITY FOR ITS VIOLENT CRIMES
LEAD: THE murder trial of Robert E. Chambers Jr., for which jury selection continued in Manhattan last week, had all the makings of an old-fashioned, straightforward, good-versus-evil courtroom drama.


What Survives in History
LEAD:  To the Editor:


WHAT THE LOVE BOAT LEFT BEHIND
LEAD: HE called the other day to check upon the whereabouts of our daughter.
As our conversation meandered through the trivialities of which we always speak - my mother, his aunt, the dog, the kids, our recent travels -he casually mentioned that he was giving a party to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the company.


THE PUMPKIN: NOT JUST A PRETTY FACE
LEAD: NOW that Halloween is over, most Americans look forward to only one more use for the abundant pumpkin crop: in the Thanksgiving pie.
That is a pity, because this estimable member of the squash family has a multitude of other delicious uses.


Contradiction In Terms
LEAD:  To the Sports Editor:


Miss Ferdon Is Affianced
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
John Jay Ferdon of San Francisco of the engagement of their daughter, Maggie Ferdon, to John Withrow Cooley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel P. Cooley of West Hartford, Conn., and Nantucket, Mass.
The couple plan a January wedding.


East Meets West on a Bus To Leningrad
LEAD: ''THE bus from Moscow to Leningrad,'' we were informed by Irma, the Finnish guide who had taken charge of our 30-member tour group on our arrival at Helsinki airport about a week earlier, ''was made in Finland.'' Not an exciting piece of news, but very much in the spirit of Irma, who had introduced us to Finnish history by emphasizing the effort of the Finns to remain independent of the big neighbor we were about to visit.


Thievery
LEAD: To the Editor: I recently had my passport wallet stolen from my jacket on a night train from Cologne to Stuttgart.
What ensued might interest your readers.
I reported my loss to the Stuttgart railway police about 6:30 A.M.: my passport, first-class German rail pass (with six days' validity remaining) and cash.


A New Exhibition on Old Chinatown Is Enhanced by Families' Artifacts
LEAD: Fay Chiang's father summarized his life in 10 minutes shortly before he died of cancer in 1974.
Only then did the daughter learn that he had started working in this country at the age of 10 in a laundry.


Ex-Governor's Bid Complicates Puerto Rico Race
LEAD: From the moment former Gov.
Carlos Romero Barcelo lost his post in the 1984 gubernatorial election, few people on this highly politicized island doubted that he would attempt a comeback.


Debuts; Three Pianists and a Violinist Play First New York Recitals
LEAD:  Eugene Rowley


A REPUBLIC OF LETTERS
LEAD:  THE ARK IN THE ATTIC  An Alphabet Adventure.
By Eileen Doolittle.
Photographs by Starr Ockenga.
Painted backgrounds by Eileen Doolittle.
Unpaged.
Boston: A Floyd Yearout Book/David R. Godine. $18.95. (All ages)  THE Z WAS ZAPPED  By Chris Van Allsburg.
Illustrated by the author.
Unpaged.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.


Judge Rejects a Donor's Bid on Property of The Bible Speaks
LEAD: A Federal judge has rejected an heiress's bid for the property of a fundamentalist church that the woman had forced into bankruptcy through a lawsuit.


Forget Cholesterol and Explore Other Heart-Disease Theories
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stephanie Blau Plans To Be Married in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey R. Blau of Old Westbury, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Stephanie Elizabeth Blau to Craig L. Koenigsberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maynard Koenigsberg of Kings Point, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.


THE LOS ANGELES CLUB SCENE
LEAD: This man, Mark Lindquist, can write (''Diary of a Lost Weekend,'' Oct. 11).
His words, the very phrasing, bring this funny/sad scene to a level of reality I wouldn't have thought possible.
Sight, sound and movement are built into the article.
SALLY T. PETIT  Bronxville, N.Y.


New Heights For the City?
LEAD: THIS city on Casco Bay, a center of new construction and renovation in the last decade, is to decide whether to allow construction of taller buildings now that land on the Portland Peninsula has become expensive and scarce.


FOOD
LEAD:  Annemarie Colbin's 'The Basics of Healthy Cooking'  The Natural Gourmet Cookery School. 101 minutes. $39.95.
Annemarie Colbin, who runs a cooking school in New York that specializes in natural foods, has put together a video on grains and beans that is stunningly complete.
It would be especially useful for a total novice, let's say a dyed-in-the-wool carnivore who has been told to take up a diet rich in beans and grains and has no idea where to begin.


Follow-Up On the News; Trying to Return Land to Indians
LEAD: ''THE legislation has a simple purpose: to right a wrong committed by the United States 100 years ago.''


Jazz Piano: Pete Malinverni
LEAD: IF Pete Malinverni were slightly more explicit about the melodies he plays on the piano, he might be accused of being a cocktail pianist.
But the melodies in his improvisations are elusive, and his running, single-note lines sometimes have a Count Basie touch or a suggestion of Willard Robison's down-home reminiscences.


Anne Lewis Is Affianced
LEAD: The engagement of Anne Beals Lewis and J. William Drake 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph W. Drake Jr. of Old Greenwich, Conn., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley P. Lewis of Southport, Conn.
An April wedding is planned.


A POWER IN PERFUME: Robin Burns; Creating Obsession and Making It Last
LEAD: ''I'VE come a long way from Cripple Creek,'' Robin Burns said cheerfully, reminiscing about the Colorado mining town where she spent her earliest years.
She ticks off favorite memories: riding a horse to school, collecting chunks of turquoise off the dirt streets to sell to tourists.


PIED PIPER ON THE COMPUTER
LEAD: IT WAS A SUNNY afternoon in Los Angeles, and the researchers at Alan Kay's computer lab were outside on the playground, shrieking their way through recess.
Inside, in the art room of a rather down-at-the-heels elementary school in West Hollywood, a group of local technologists - people from the University of California at Los Angeles, the Rand Corporation, the International Business Machines Corporation, Pacific Telesis, the Times Mirror Company - were gathered around Formica-topped tables to hear Kay talk.


The Big Dig
LEAD: THE LEGENDARY PROJECT, TO construct a tunnel beneath the English Channel, dates to 1881, the most recent effort having been aborted in 1974.
This year, however, a most auspicious beginning has been made.
Photographed above, the access shaft at Sangatte - 55 meters across, 62 meters deep (about 180 by 200 feet) - on the French side of the channel, has solved a problem that dogged engineers in the past.


A GIRL'S BEST FRIEND IS HER SKATE
LEAD:  I WANT A DOG  By Dayal Kaur Khalsa.
Illustrated by the author.
Unpaged.
New York: Clarkson N. Potter/Crown Publishers. $10.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Prosecution Rests in 7-Month-Old Genovese Trial
LEAD: Federal prosecutors have rested their case after presenting more than 100 witnesses, 360 taped conversations and 1,000 exhibits in a trial focusing on the Genovese crime family.


Sandinista Offer Of Conciliation: Is It a Bid for Peace or Just to Buy Time?
LEAD: THE Arias plan for peace in Central America registered an accomplishment last week that had eluded the United States Government in nearly seven years of political and clandestine military conflict with Nicaragua.
The Sandinista Government was placed on the defensive and obliged to accept indirect negotiations with the contra rebels.


Chinese Carpets Fit for a Prince
LEAD: ALONG with its many other treasures, Hong Kong is the home of the Tai Ping carpet, already as famous in only 30 years as some of those precious floor coverings that came out of pre-revolutionary China.
The hand-woven carpets of Tai Ping, made by Hong Kong Manufacturers Ltd., in the New Territories ''new town'' of Tai Po, about 25 miles north of Kowloon, are to be found in Buckingham Palace, Windsor Castle, the headquarters of the United Nations in Geneva, the Ritz Hotel in London, the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia and the Loews Regency Hotel in Manhattan, the Los Angeles Music


BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 8, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
KALEIDOSCOPE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
$18.95.) Three sisters, separated by fate, and the
lawyer whose mission is to find and reunite them.
2
2
20
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.


Susan Goodyear To Wed in June
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Daniel M. Goodyear of Robesonia, Pa., and Lynne P. Goodyear of Gulph Mills, Pa., of the engagement of their daughter Susan Rumsey Goodyear to Edward Mandell de Windt Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs. de Windt of Melvin Village, N.H.
A June wedding is planned.


A SHOP FULFILLS A DREAM
LEAD: NAVIGATING the winding roads of Litchfield County without the aid of a map, Francine Scherer zeroes in on farms tucked snugly in the hills and invisible from the main road.


Moscow's Eloquent Silence
LEAD: Just imagine what Mikhail Gorbachev's predecessors would have made of the stock market fall.
Capitalism's rottenness is now painfully obvious, they would have proclaimed.
Yet, as the world's Marxist-Leninists gathered in Moscow to commemorate the revolution that brought them to power 70 years ago, no such ideas were put forward.


Conflicting Goals Dwell In Philadelphia Mansion
LEAD: High on a plateau of the west bank of the Schuylkill, overlooking Fairmount Park and the city beyond, stands a butter-colored mansion.


A Radical Proposal For English Schools
LEAD: WHEN William J. Bennett, the United States Secretary of Education, emerged from a meeting with Kenneth Wilfred Baker, his opposite number, in London not too long ago, his first words spoke volumes. ''I was impressed,'' he said, ''by his use of the first person pronoun. 'I shall do this. . .' How nice to be able to do that and speak like that!


East Harlem Residents Concerned About Dwindling Bank Services
LEAD: More than 200 people, concerned about dwindling bank services in East Harlem, met yesterday to assess the impact of the problem on the predominantly black and Hispanic community.


Of Black Leather, Body Stockings And Barbie Dolls
LEAD: IN ''ORPHEE,'' HIS 1949 FILM TREAT-ment of the Orpheus legend, Jean Cocteau pictured Hell as an administrative office run by French bureaucrats.
This French penchant for mordant allegory and metaphor should be kept in mind with respect to the two dance-theater pieces performed by the Compagnie Maguy Marin in the Brooklyn Academy of Music's current Next Wave


Moore P. Huffman
LEAD: Moore P. Huffman, a retired partner of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, investment bankers, died of a heart attack Oct. 31 at his home in Woody Creek, Colo.
A former resident of Bedford Hills, N.Y., and of Aspen, Colo., he was 77 years old.


Dance: Joffrey Recasts 'Three Preludes'
LEAD: EVERY ballet company repertory needs a slight romantic pas de deux, and the Joffrey Ballet has one in Ben Stevenson's ''Three Preludes,'' a crowd-pleaser created in 1969 and acquired this year by the company, which presented it with a new cast on Thursday at City Center.
Set to piano music by Rachmaninoff that was performed here by Stanley Babin, ''Three Preludes'' offers a pastel vision of a studio flirtation between two young dancers and its extension into ballet partnering.


Thievery
LEAD: To the Editor: I usually take a cab to the airport.
However, I recently had extra time and thought I'd try the Carey bus service from Grand Central.


WHO SHOULD BE THE M.V.P.'S IN BASEBALL?
LEAD: Ozzie Smith and Alan Trammell should be the m.v.p.'s.
Smith hit .303, drove in 75 runs (without a home run) and played his usual brilliant shortstop, saving many runs with his glove.
More importantly, he missed only four games and kept the Cardinals together when key players like Jack Clark and John


Postings: Computer Surveys; Shopping For Loans
LEAD: If you have access to a computer and want to find the latest mortgage data in 36 areas around the country without scurrying from bank to bank or making a lot of phone calls, you might consider a new service offered by HSH Associates of Riverdale, N.J.


Jail Riot Quelled in Brussels
LEAD: The police restored order at a prison in Brussels today after 50 people were injured in rioting by inmates, officials said.
A police spokesman said about 100 inmates at the Forest Prison smashed furniture and lit fires Friday night.
He said order was restored after a few hours when police entered the jail and freed four guards who had been taken hostage.


Mozambique Downs Plane
LEAD: Armed forces shot down an unidentified plane near Mozambique's border with Malawi on Friday, Maputo radio said today.
The radio quoted military sources as saying the plane was violating the country's airspace about 10 miles from Malawi's western border.
The radio said the authorities were still trying to identify the plane.


RACING'S RECORD-BREAKER
LEAD: ALAIN PROST MUSCLED THE TITANIUM SHIFT into sixth gear, dialed up the 1,200-horsepower turbo booster and flung his iridescent red-and-white Formula One race car past the Estoril grandstands at 180 miles per hour, faster than an F-15 jet fighter on takeoff.
Prost, twice the world champion, was waging a record-breaking duel with Gerhard Berger in the dramatic closing minutes of the 70-lap 1987 Portuguese Grand Prix, one of 16 races in the Formula One Grand Prix championship, the World


A LEFTIST LEADER SURGING IN CANADA
LEAD: When President Reagan visited Canada's capital in April, White House officials declined a request for a meeting with Edward Broadbent, leader of the New Democratic Party.
Protocol required the President to meet with the country's official opposition Leader, John Turner, but not with Mr.
Broadbent, whose party has been a left-wing minority in Parliament for 52 years.


Wiretap Found on Phone of Bork Opponent
LEAD: A wiretap has been discovered on a Harvard University law professor's telephone, and the professor said today that the surveillance might have led to public disclosure of his misgivings about Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, who ended his bid for Supreme Court today.


When the Name of the Game Is Murder
LEAD: PRIME-TIME TELEVISION'S preoccupation with sociopaths is more intense than ever these days.


Syracuse Group Refuses to Cut Off Funds for Farrakhan Talk
LEAD: Student leaders at Syracuse University refused today to cut off money for a speech by the Nation of Islam leader, Louis Farrakhan, a spokeswoman said.


Out of Prison
LEAD: Govan A. Mbeki, who was confined in a South African prison 23 years ago for talk of taking arms against the system that ordered his imprisonment, was released last week.
Mr.
Mbeki, a longtime leader of the outlawed African National Congress and a close associate of Nelson R. Mandela, is now 77 years old and in ill health.


Quick Transition
LEAD: THOSE who can, do, and as for those who no longer can, well, if they're lucky they do what Dave Lewis did after the 34-year-old defenseman realized that he no longer had the skills that sustained him for most of his 15 seasons with four teams.
Lewis, a former Islander who joined the Detroit Red Wings before the 1986-87 season, retired after Friday's loss to the Minnesota North Stars and promptly began a new career as a Red Wing assistant coach.


GLASNOST COMES TO THE CABARET, AND POLITICAL SATIRE TAKES CENTER STAGE
LEAD: TO FIND THE PFEFFER-muhle, just follow Bach's disapproving gaze.
Standing on his sooty granite pedestal by the side of Leipzig's old St.
Thomas Church, where he used to direct the choir, he glowers at a wooden door across the way from which, in the evening, come muffled bursts of laughter.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Rent-Stabilized in a Hotel


Heyward's 175 Yards Help Pitt to Victory
LEAD: Craig Heyward, impressive in Pitt's homecoming loss to unbeaten Syracuse a week ago, staged a personal homecoming today, running for 175 yards and his eighth touchdown of the season as the Panthers beat Rutgers, 17-0.


America's New Brain Gain
LEAD: GEOFFREY Parker opened the letter and could scarcely believe his eyes.
Professor Parker, a historian at St.
Andrews University in Scotland, was being offered a job at triple his salary.
He had not applied for it. ''This is not an invitation to apply,'' he said, paraphrasing the wording in the letter, from the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana.


Young Transplant Patient Reaches Milestone
LEAD: Jamie Fiske, whose parents drew wide attention in 1982 with public appeals for organ donors, turns 6 years old on Thanksgiving Day, which doctors consider an important milestone in the girl's recovery from a liver transplant operation five years ago.


Trainer Under Scrutiny
LEAD: Six horses trained by Peter Ferriola, Aqueduct Race Track's leading trainer, were ordered scratched by track stewards yesterday because of a state investigation involving the possible illegal medication of his horses.


Dr. Park to Marry Fellow Physician
LEAD: Dr.
Felicia Kyung Park and Dr.
David Eustace Cummings, who graduated with the class of '87 from the Harvard Medical School and are in the medical residency program at the University of Washington Affiliated Hospitals in Seattle, plan to be married next month.


Facts Don't Always Give the True Story
LEAD: AS ITS TITLE MAKES CLEAR, and the film itself makes even clearer, ''Gaby - A True Story'' is about a real woman and her real travails.
Gabriela Brimmer was born with cerebral palsy, and without command of any muscles except those in her left foot.
That foot became her only means of communication: she could spell out words by pointing her big toe at an alphabet board.


Slain Girl Was Abused for Weeks, Evidence Shows
LEAD: Forensic evidence indicates that 6-year-old Elizabeth Steinberg was subjected to several weeks of physical abuse before the battering last weekend in which her fatal injuries were inflicted, a top official in the investigation said yesterday.


THE IRRESISTIBLE JINGO
LEAD:  GUNGA DIN  By Rudyard Kipling.
Illustrated by Robert Andrew Parker.
Introduction by Kingsley Amis.
Unpaged.
San Diego: Gulliver Books/ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $12.95. (Ages 5 to 9)  THE JUNGLE BOOK  By Rudyard Kipling.
Illustrated by Michael Foreman. 175 pp.
New York: Viking Kestrel. $13.95.


Ruth H. Kennedy Engaged to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Kennedy of Alexandria, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ruth Hefren Kennedy, to Robert Sloan Bowers, a son of Dr.
Malcolm B. Bowers of Branford, Conn., and Rebecca Sloan of New Haven.


We Must Expand Into New Fields
LEAD: AMERICANS are paying too much for their financial services.
But America's commercial banks are willing, and able, to help lower prices by hundreds of millions of dollars by increasing competition.
The missing ingredient is Congressional authority to give banks the capability to move into new markets that will strengthen our banking system.


A Nature Group in Vermont Moves to Safeguard Loons
LEAD: The Vermont chapter of the Nature Conservancy is stepping up efforts to protect the state's endangered common loons, having acquired one nesting site recently and hoping to purchase another one soon.


Soviet Says Special Push Is Needed in Arms Treaty
LEAD: Senior Soviet officials said today that high-level attention would be required to resolve remaining technical differences in a treaty to eliminate intermediate range missiles.


Playing With The Court
LEAD: The collapse of his second successive nomination to the Supreme Court tells us much about Ronald Reagan.
It shows us the price we pay for having a President who in even his most solemn appointing function is driven by narrow interests of politics and ideology.


Teach 13-Year-Olds Lincoln Freed Slaves
LEAD: To the Editor:


What the Bears of Summer Sensed
LEAD: LAST August, when the weather was hot and stocks were high, Edward M. Kerschner, an investment strategist at PaineWebber Inc., felt that something was wrong.
With the precision of a seismograph, Mr.
Kerschner's indictors showed the stock market was headed for a fall.
To his clients, he issued a warning: ''Stocks are now unattractive for the first time since 1984.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption in some copies of the Travel section today carries an incorrect description of a Chevrolet Bel-Air.
The car, on display at the Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Mich., is a 1956 model, not a 1955.


WHERE TECHNOLOGY AND POETRY MEET
LEAD: TO find the place where poetry and technology meet, one need only go as far as the Hastings-on-Hudson Middle School.
There, in a basement laboratory, students have been working with holography - the young science that confounds logic with its optical magic.


DAY CARE ENTERS THE MAINSTREAM
LEAD: IN the past, day care has been perceived by critics as service for people outside of mainstream family life - ''people with problems,'' professionals in the field say.
When nuclear families were intact and most mothers could stay home, day care, it was thought, met the needs of only a few.


OKLAHOMA WINS, BUT LOSES 2 STARS
LEAD: Oklahoma beat Oklahoma State, 29-10, today in a Big Eight Conference game but lost its two most productive backs, Jamelle Holieway and Lydell Carr, for the remainder of the season with knee injuries.


Pacers Overrun Woeful Knicks
LEAD: The Knicks have been hoping to shake up professional basketball a bit this season.
Faced with the prospect of relentless defensive pressure and a motion-oriented offense, their opponents were supposed to be wary of an evening that could result in frustration.


Guilt in the Lindbergh Case
LEAD:  To the Editor:


IN VICTORIES, DEMOCRATS SEE OMENS OF 1988
LEAD: IF there is one reliable result of state and local elections, it is the claim by interested parties that the outcome is a reliable guide to the course of a coming national contest.
And so last week, after two gubernatorial races and a handful of mayoral ones, the Democrats hailed good omens for 1988, and the Republicans, ''bittersweet success.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a lot of oil stains on my asphalt driveway.
What should I use on these stains before I apply a sealer?


SOUTHEASTERN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHEASTERN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
495,000
737,000
Per share
.22
.32
9mo net inc
2,618,000
2,725,000
Per share
1.17
1.39
Shares outst
2,236,171
1,971,374


Race Driver, 65, Killed in Florida
LEAD: Jim Fitzgerald, the driver with the most victories in the history of the Sports Car Club of America, was killed this afternoon in the early stages of the Trans-Am race at the St.
Petersburg Grand Prix.


Ad Spending Cut in Florida
LEAD: National advertisers have cut spending by 11.8 percent on television stations in major markets in Florida since the state extended its sales tax to advertising, a television industry organization said Friday.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1987
LEAD:  International


SKYLINK AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SKYLINK AMERICA
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
442,410
259,001
Net loss
134,497
b29,688
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


Full Program Trading To Resume on Wall St.
LEAD: Program trading, a sophisticated form of securities trading that critics have blamed for contributing to the stock market plunge three weeks ago, will resume today, leaving some analysts concerned about renewed volatility in stock prices.


U.S. AUTO MAKERS GET A LIFT
LEAD: When the stock market collapsed last month, American auto manufacturers braced themselves for a sharp downturn in their already sliding sales.


United Stand by Arabs Against Iran Is Urged
LEAD: The first major summit meeting of Arab heads of state in five years opened here today with a condemnation of Iran for its determination to carry on with the seven-year-old Persian Gulf war and an appeal to end Egypt's isolation from other Arab governments.


FRANKLIN RESOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRANKLIN RESOURCES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
51,300,000
46,300,000
Net inc
14,600,000
10,700,000
Share earns
.55
.40
Yr rev
206,700,000
143,100,000
Net inc
59,000,000
32,100,000
Share earns
2.21
1.21


ACTION INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACTION INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Sales
32,134,100
23,519,300
Net inc
b902,200
c162,600
Share earns
.16
.03
b-Includes a gain of $642,100 from a change in accounting.
c-After a loss of $386,100 from discontinued operations.


FOSTER L B CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOSTER L B CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
52,406,000
75,766,000
Net inc
b34,588,000
c8,648,000
Share earns
3.55
-
9mo sales
159,469,000
224,833,000
Net inc
b19,339,000
c16,467,000
Share earns
1.97
-


Gorbachev Lends an Ear To Proxmire's Hearings
LEAD: Soviet specialists here say they cannot recall a previous instance in which a Soviet leader made direct references to American Congressional testimony, let alone in a speech inside the Soviet Union.


Key Setback For Lilco; P.S.C. Action Viewed as Death of Shoreham
LEAD: The usual turmoil surrounding the Long Island Lighting Company and its Shoreham nuclear power plant has increased in the last several months, to the point where analysts and government officials seem certain that the plant will never receive its commercial operating license.


CHURCH &amp; DWIGHT CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHURCH &amp; DWIGHT CO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
85,894,555
72,670,562
Net inc
5,244,345
4,152,167
Share earns
.24
.19
9mo sales
230,945,469
199,828,233
Net inc
9,488,837
9,319,943
Share earns
.43
.44


Declining Strength Seen in Reagan's Loss on Court
LEAD: President Reagan's second failure in two weeks to place his nominee on the Supreme Court demonstrates his declining political influence and ability to shape public policy in his final 14 months in office, political analysts in both parties say.


Resistance Is Seen To Penney's Shift
LEAD: The J. C. Penney Company, which announced last July that it would move its headquarters from Manhattan to Plano, Tex., has run into considerable reluctance by employees to make the 1,500-mile move, according to sources close to the giant retailer.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Now that the Minnesota Twins and the St.
Louis Cardinals have furnished the first World Series in which the home team won every game, the following thought occurs: Has there been a World Series in which the home team lost every game?


Libya Assails U.S. Decision To Provide Weapon to Chad
LEAD: Libya said today that a United States decision to supply Stinger anti-aircraft missiles to Chad was a direct threat to Libya's security.


Exploited Labor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Horse Show; British Rider Wins Big Apple Jumping
LEAD: The $50,000 Big Apple Grand Prix, the international jumping competition that closed the National Horse Show last night, was won by John Whitaker, a member of the British team, atop Next Milton, a snowy horse who looked as if he had flown from the pages of a fairy tale.


2 Youths Arrested in Painting of Swastikas on Mahopac Synagogue
LEAD: The 16-year-old son of a Russian Orthodox priest, wearing a makeshift Nazi uniform, and a 12-year-old companion have been arrested in the spray painting of Nazi symbols on the only synagogue in Mahopac, N.Y., said police officers, who had been staking out the synagogue after a series of such incidents.


Relationships; Teaching Children The Value Of Money
LEAD: YOUR 12-year-old daughter wants a Benetton sweater just like the one (she assures you) all the other girls are wearing to class.
Your 16-year-old nephew is pestering his parents for a new set of Rossignol skis.
Both children know that their parents can afford the items; it does no good to suggest that they are beyond the family budget.


Advertising; With Merger, McCann Is Losing Haagen-Dazs
LEAD: The Haagen-Dazs Company, the premium ice cream maker, is regretfully leaving McCann-Erickson as a result of the planned merger of Geers Gross Advertising into McCann.
That is because Geers Gross is the ad agency for Kraft's Frusen Gladje premium ice cream.
That is a conflict without a doubt.


AMERIWEST FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERIWEST FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,568,000
1,404,000
Share earns
.49
.44


Free Concert Series
LEAD: Carnegie Hall and the Department of Cultural Affairs of the City of New York are presenting a season of 30 programs in the Neighborhood Concerts Series, to take place in libraries, community centers, churches and synagogues in the five boroughs through May 1988.
There will be jazz, classical and folk-music concerts, all open to the public free of charge, with seating on a first-come, first-served basis.


T-Arms and Teardrops: Restoring Street Lights
LEAD: It is a brilliant collection and ubiquitous, marked by tall civic sentinels whose names are cobra head and bishop's crook, teardrop and shoe box.
It is also shabby, neglected, rusting and vandalized.


Asian Markets Meeting
LEAD: Senior officials from nine Asian markets - including those in Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan - are scheduled to hold a one-day conference here Monday.
Taiwan stock exchange officials said the conference would focus on technical issues of trading stocks.


COMAIR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMAIR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,361,000
15,062,000
Net inc
1,118,000
6,000
Share earns
.12
-
6mo rev
39,844,000
30,322,000
Net inc
2,833,000
51,000
Share earns
.30
.01


Following a Star . . . a Hockey Star, That Is
LEAD: Pat Hickey, former Ranger hockey player, leading a string of youngsters around the Rockefeller Center rink.


CHRISTOPHER FINN WED TO MARGARET CHISHOLM
LEAD: Margaret Mary Chisholm, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry J. Chisholm of Westfield, N.J., was married there yesterday to Christopher Charles Finn, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Michael Finn of Bronxville, N.Y., and Flagstaff, Ariz.
The Rev.
William Morris performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.


VM SOFTWARE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VM SOFTWARE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,038,071
6,038,440
Net inc
180,570
844,721
Share earns
.03
.13
9mo rev
19,120,785
16,601,163
Net inc
1,082,436
2,452,438
Share earns
.17
.38


Metro Matters; Lindsay Reunion: Good Old Days Of Urban Strife
LEAD: Not many New Yorkers recall the era punctuated by transit, school and garbage strikes, by snow-choked streets and urban strife two decades ago as the good old days, if they recall it at all.


ELDORADO MOTOR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELDORADO MOTOR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Sales
20,059,495
17,399,811
Net inc
100,818
199,831
Share earns
.04
.08


LINDA SCHECHTER IS MARRIED ON L.I.
LEAD: Linda Schechter, an associate in the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler, was married in Garden City, L.I., yesterday to Stephen Giove, an associate in the law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling in New York.
Rabbi Stuart Geller performed the ceremony at the Garden City Hotel.


In Autumn, a Silhouette of Summer
LEAD: The sun-flecked waters of Port Washington, L.I., harbor formed the backdrop yesterday as Peter Giossi entertained his 4-year-old son, Michael.
The sun may be in short supply today, as rain is expected. (NYT/Barton Silverman)


Dance: New Works From 2
LEAD: SOME fledgling choreographers spill all their ideas onto the stage.
Others stick to a safer, if more modest route by working well within the styles that have influenced them.
A program of dances by Greg Esposito and Laura Marchese, performed on Saturday night at the Nikolais-Louis Choreospace, fell irretrievably into the second category.


Sports World Specials; Tossing Them a Bone
LEAD: Last March, when the evangelist Oral Roberts said that God might ''call me home'' if he did not reach a lofty fund-raising goal, Jerry Collins wrote him a check for $1.3 million.
Animal-welfare groups suggested that Collins, a Florida dog-track operator, might have better spent some money for research and treatment of the greyhounds who race at his tracks in Sarasota and


Results Plus
LEAD: N.H.L.
Sabres 6, Flames 3: Buffalo got a pair game streak without a victory. (AP)  Tennis  Mayotte Outlasts Gilbert: Tim Mayotte won the final of the $840,000 Paris apen yesterday by beating a fellow American, Brad Gilbert, 2-6, 6-3, 7-5, 6-7, 6-3.
Mayotte captured his fourth tournament of the year and won $140,000.


Olympic Notebook; Proposal for a Joint Team of 2 Koreas
LEAD: The International Olympic Committee is reviewing a proposal by North Korea to have North Korea and South Korea be represented by a joint team in the 1988 Seoul Olympic games.
Under such an arrangement, all the Games would be held in Seoul, the capital of South Korea.


STEVEN GIRDEN IS MARRIED TO LYSSA ANN RAICHELSON
LEAD: Lyssa Ann Raichelson, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Raichelson of West Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Steven Scott Girden, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene L. Girden of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbis Norman Patz and Alex J. Goldman officiated at the Headquarters Plaza Hotel in Morristown, N.J.


COTTON STATES LIFE &amp; HEALTH INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COTTON STATES LIFE &amp; HEALTH INSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b650,326
c89,676
Share earns
.24
.03
9mo net inc
b1,672,572
c1,523,554
Share earns
.61
.55
b-Includes capital gains of $246,923 and $766,775 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Death Prompts Action on Car Racing
LEAD: Everybody on Francis Lewis Boulevard in Whitestone, Queens, has a story about cars racing down the street.


DRESHER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DRESHER INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,788,000
12,705,000
Net inc
718,000
682,000
Share earns
.16
.15


Stage: Satirical 'Medea,' By the Ludlam Troupe
LEAD: OF all the memorial tributes the theater has bestowed upon its fallen giants this year, perhaps the most painful to watch was the one given in July by the Ridiculous Theatrical Company for Charles Ludlam, who died at age 44 last spring.
The tribute was in part dedicated to demonstrating the continuity of the company Mr.


Sports World Specials; A Crusader Looks Back
LEAD: Forty years after Jackie Robinson broke the color line in major-league baseball, there are few left from the small band of firebrands and visionaries who laid the groundwork for his triumph.


First Look at Homeless: A Raw Sight for Tourists
LEAD: They march through Grand Central Terminal or the Port Authority bus station, headed for Macy's, the South Street Seaport or a Broadway matinee.
But first, they must pass the homeless men numbed by Thunderbird who snore under newsprint blankets and the ragged women who rant incoherently about Jesus, Ronald Reagan or their lost loves.


Bears' General Has Returned As Promised
LEAD: BEFORE the season, Jim McMahon posed for a poster in a bomber jacket and sunglasses, smoking a pipe and invoking the pledge, ''I shall return.'' The allusion seems apt, although Gen.
Douglas MacArthur, as far as anyone can recall, never wore a punk hairdo.
The Bears' quarterback, like MacArthur a cantankerous field commander who doesn't always agree with the boss, has also made good on his promise.


INTERFACE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERFACE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
68,288,000
31,320,000
Net inc
3,675,000
1,764,000
Share earns
.22
.14
Shares outst
17,087,828
12,599,928
9mo sales
191,841,000
98,378,000
Net inc
9,422,000
5,639,000
Share earns
.62
.45
Shares outst
15,302,381
12,599,928


Johnson and Scott Pace the Lakers
LEAD: Magic Johnson and Byron Scott each scored 23 points and A. C. Green grabbed a career-high 18 rebounds tonight to lead the Los Angeles Lakers to a 101-92 victory over the Houston Rockets.


World Bank Move Faulted
LEAD: A tribunal of the World Bank has determined that the bank's management acted improperly during a recent reorganization in which it dismissed nearly 10 percent of its staff.


Crash With Fire Engine Kills One
LEAD: A 24-year-old woman was killed last night when a car she was riding in was hit broadside by a fire engine responding to a fire in Ozone Park, Queens, the police said.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


NATIONAL PRESTO INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL PRESTO INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
30,933,000
32,240,000
Net inc
5,151,000
5,442,000
Share earns
.69
.73
9mo sales
65,188,000
66,242,000
Net inc
11,417,000
11,606,000
Share earns
1.54
1.57


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I'm satisfied beyond doubt that this was the work of the I.R.A.''  - Sir John Hermon, chief of the Royal Ulster Constabulary.  [ A1:1. ]


Crushing the Drug Dealers of Washington Square
LEAD: The neighbors around Washington Square Park, once one of New York City's most blatant drug bazaars, now tell a story with an unusual, happy ending: Greenwich Village won, the drug dealers lost.


TEXAS PACIFIC LAND TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS PACIFIC LAND TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,335,878
1,555,265
Net inc
643,054
682,637
Share earns
.17
.18
Shares outst
3,745,380
3,818,505
9mo rev
4,367,283
4,762,202
Net inc
2,275,181
2,352,082
Share earns
.60
.61
Shares outst
3,768,035
3,833,045


Schools of Social Work Swamped by Applicants
LEAD: In what some scholars are calling a return to the social activism of the 1960's and others fear is opportunism, the nation's graduate schools of social work are seeing significant increases in enrollment after nearly a decade of decline and stagnation.


TRAVELERS REAL ESTATE INESTMENT TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRAVELERS REAL ESTATE INESTMENT TRUST
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
444,387
676,593
Share earns
.18
.27
9mo net inc
1,690,670
2,031,937
Share earns
.67
.81


MUSIC: GOSPEL AT TRIPLEX
LEAD: THE World Music Institute's Grass-Roots Gospel Festival presented three groups Friday night, in the first of two weekend programs at the Triplex Theater of theBorough of Manhattan Community College.
The Original Blind Boys of Alabama, who won a local following outside the gospel community with their performances in the musical ''Gospel at Colonus,'' were the headliners.


CMX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CMX CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,036,000
2,482,000
Net inc
b308,000
b157,000
Share earns
.04
.03
b-Includes tax credits of $89,000 and $31,000 for the latest quarter and year- earlier period, respectively.


Actively Seeking Stardom in Manhattan
LEAD: On her first trip to Manhattan, 19-year-old Melissa Tomaini was standing where so many in this town of big dreams and stardust hope to be: under the stage lights of a New York City theater.
But her big chance turned out to be an especially small one.


DR. CAROL GOLDMAN WEDS A NEUROLOGIST
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
Carol Marcia Goldman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George D. Goldman of Jericho, L.I., to Dr.
Ross Alexander Reife, the son of Diane Reife of Hallendale, Fla., and the late Irving N. Reife, took place yesterday at the Water's Edge in Long Island City, Queens.
Rabbi Martin Zion officiated.


John F. English, Political Adviser To Three Kennedys, Is Dead at 61
LEAD: John Francis English, a national, state and Long Island Democratic leader for many years, died Saturday of liver cancer at Mercy Hospital in Rockville Centre, L.I.
He was 61 years old and lived in Muttontown, L.I., and in Kismet on Fire Island.


Allied Stores President
LEAD: Robert Morosky, former vice chairman of The Limited Inc., is expected to be named president of the Allied Stores Corporation soon, according to retail trade sources.


6 Held in Drug Scheme; $7.5 Million Is Seized
LEAD: Federal agents seized $7.5 million in cash and arrested six men Thursday in connection with what they said was a scheme to launder profits from drug sales.


Panel Says Peace Is Advancing in Central America
LEAD: The panel charged with verifying compliance with the Central American peace agreement said today that the accord was working.


Blast Jolts Earthquake Area
LEAD: Residents were awakened early today by what some thought was an earthquake when scientists blew up 1,200 pounds of dynamite underground to study the fault that caused the powerful temblor in the Los Angeles area last month.
The explosion occurred at 4:10 A.M. near the epicenter of the Oct. 1 earthquake that killed seven people.


Advertising; Ayer Says U.S. Inquiry On Army Ads Is Ended
LEAD: Louis T. Hagopian, chairman of N. W. Ayer, announced to his people Friday that the United States Attorney had closed the investigation into the agency's 20-year handling of the Army recruiting account.


ANAREN MICROWAVE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANAREN MICROWAVE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,623,592
6,966,882
Net inc
392,288
382,010
Share earns
.09
.09


Five Choreographers Get New Awards
LEAD: The National Corporate Fund for Dance Inc. has announced the first recipients of its American Choreographer Awards, which will be given in a ceremony at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum on Nov. 23.
The choreographers - John Kelly, Ralph Lemon, Susan Marshall, Patricia Olalde and Stephen Petronio - will share a total of $20,000.


CHICAGO RIVET &amp; MACHINE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHICAGO RIVET &amp; MACHINE CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,003,808
4,894,549
Net inc
112,001
104,036
Share earns
.15
.14
9mo sales
16,620,869
17,022,036
Net inc
629,894
631,644
Share earns
.86
.85
Shares outst
731,325
743,065


Vallone Urges Jail For Homeless People Who Decline Help
LEAD: People who live on the streets and refuse to be taken to a shelter or a hospital should be subject to arrest and a night in jail, the majority leader of the New York City Council, Peter F. Vallone, said yesterday.


Rush for Money on Road Spurs Debate
LEAD: Columbus is a city buzzing with talk of mystery and morality two weeks after hundreds of thousands of dollars fell from an armored truck and were scooped up by passers-by.


Gamble and Lockbaum Race for Award
LEAD: Two of the leading candidates for the Walter Payton Award, given to the best player in Division I-AA, are Kenny Gamble of Colgate and Gordie Lockbaum of Holy Cross.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 9, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


Good Reasons to Help U.S. Apparel Industry
LEAD: To the Editor:


ESCAGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESCAGEN CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
645,000
-
Net loss
305,000
-
6mo rev
1,192,000
-
Net loss
545,000
-
The company went public in April 1987.


A Hot Ticket Is Round Trip, to or From Moscow
LEAD: Dr.
Zara Khetagurova and Tamara Abova, members of a delegation of Soviet women traveling from Moscow to the United States, suffered an indignity familiar to many an American traveler: They were bumped from their Aeroflot flight, on which they had been booked for six weeks.


Preventing Child Abuse: When Early Hints Are Not Enough
LEAD: When she was fatally beaten one week ago, 6-year-old Elizabeth Steinberg was no stranger to New York City social workers.
Over four years, they had twice visited her home to investigate reports of possible mistreatment and had at least once inspected her body for bruises and other signs of abuse.


BLACK VOTERS KEY TO MIAMI ELECTION
LEAD: The tangled runoff election Tuesday for Mayor of Miami is between two Hispanic politicians who have held the office, but it may be black voters who decide which one returns to City Hall.


1 Killed, 2 Shot in Brooklyn
LEAD: An argument involving three teen-agers on a Brooklyn street corner erupted into gunfire yesterday, that killed one youth, wounded another and grazed a bystander, the police said.
Anthony Lucena, 17 years old, of 10 Amboy Street, died after being shot in the back about 5:30 P.M. at Ralph Avenue and Prospect Place in the Crown Heights section, said a police spokesman, Sgt.


GENTEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENTEX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,980,944
3,211,462
Net inc
214,417
78,926
Share earns
.04
.01
9mo sales
10,267,016
9,129,781
Net inc
945,950
537,301
Share earns
.16
.09


Mandela's Release Linked to Freed Colleague
LEAD: The Pretoria Government said today that the release of Govan A. Mbeki Thursday was a ''trial run'' for the release of the jailed African National Congress leader, Nelson R. Mandela.


SILICON VALLEY GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILICON VALLEY GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,226,000
7,100,000
Net inc
1,214,000
528,000
Share earns
.12
.06
Shares outst
10,144,000
8,764,000
Yr sales
39,300,000
27,842,000
Net inc
3,148,000
2,646,000
Share earns
.32
.30
Shares outst
9,892,000
8,876,000


Irked Condo Considers Seceding From a Town
LEAD: Residents of a condominium complex that attracts retired people have been been battling their town for years over perceived slights, like the denial of a bingo permit.
Now, feuding again with the town fathers, they say they are studying plans to secede and form their own city here in Fairfield County.


STOCKHOLDER SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STOCKHOLDER SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,955,000
4,361,000
Net inc
1,003,000
827,000
Share earns
.25
.20
6mo rev
9,016,000
7,856,000
Net inc
1,471,000
1,230,000
Share earns
.36
.29


SENILE BOURGUIBA DESCRIBED IN TUNIS
LEAD: Supporters and opponents of Habib Bourguiba, the ousted President, offered details today of his mental deterioration, which prompted Prime Minister Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali to depose him and appoint himself President on Saturday.


Deeds and Words in South Africa
LEAD: Jail doors open slowly in South Africa.
It's been nearly three years since President P.W.
Botha first mooted the possibility of releasing long-jailed leaders of the African National Congress.
One has now been freed, Govan Mbeki, a former president of the Congress, sentenced to life along with Nelson


Better Care Promised for New York's Street Lamps
LEAD: Years of neglect for New York's 340,000 street lamps are apparently coming to an end.
Shown are a T-arm fixture, above, and a Central Park luminaire.
Page B7. (NYT/Vic DeLucia)


TRANSTECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSTECHNOLOGY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
46,057,000
49,864,000
Net inc
2,365,000
2,032,000
Share earns
.44
.44
Shares outst
5,368,000
4,618,000
6mo rev
90,061,000
91,490,000
Net inc
4,007,000
2,566,000
Share earns
.75
.56
Shares outst
5,364,000
4,612,000


Study Says Nursing Home Costs Impoverish Many
LEAD: The high cost of nursing home care forces many elderly patients into poverty a few months after they enter the homes, a Congressional survey reported today.


Business People; New B. Altman Chief Cites 'Ambitious Plans'
LEAD: From Bloomingdale's to B. Altman may be just a matter of a few miles in Manhattan, but for John J. Schultz there was a 1,500-mile detour to Dallas.


Cowboys Cut Off At Pass by Lions
LEAD: James Griffin's 29-yard interception return set up the 4-yard go-ahead touchdown run by Garry James as the Detroit Lions upset the Dallas Cowboys today, 27-17.


TIC INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIC INTERNATIONAL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,478,949
1,484,873
Net inc
b110,830
c166,619
Share earns
.14
.19
6mo rev
2,942,472
2,955,240
Net inc
b235,190
c392,309
Share earns
.29
.41


Robbery Suspect Hurt Fleeing in Subway Tunnel
LEAD: A 20-year-old robbery suspect who fled into a Times Square subway tunnel, was arrested yesterdy after he fell against the third rail and was critically burned, the police said.


Sports World Specials; New Lesson
LEAD: It's not that there aren't plenty of perfectly good golf magazines on the market, each packed with features designed to appeal to recreational golfers and chock full of ads designed to dispose of some of their often extensive disposable income.


LAM RESEARCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAM RESEARCH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 4
1987
1986
Sales
10,506,000
4,579,000
Net inc
b666,000
c1,921,000
Share earns
.08
-
Shares outst
8,080,000
7,600,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $52,000.
c-Net loss


KLEER-VU INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KLEER-VU INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,093,000
3,289,000
Net inc
b3,457,000
d1,000
Share earns
.42
-
9mo rev
9,998,000
9,731,000
Net inc
b2,016,000
cd380,000
Share earns
.26
-


Sports of The Times; 'NINE YEARS IS A LONG TIME'
LEAD: UNTIL the Giants' 17-10 victory over the Patriots last night, Jeff Rutledge had not been the starting quarterback in a game his team won for nearly nine years.
Not since the 1979 Sugar Bowl when he was the University of Alabama quarterback.
In his five previous starts in the National Football League, one with the Los Angeles Rams and four with the Giants, his team's record had been 0-4-1, including a 6-3 loss to the Buffalo


Jack Gilford, Malleable Mirthmaker
LEAD: With his malleable face and gentle ways, Jack Gilford, the actor and comedian, has returned to cabaret for the first time in 30 years, and the way he talks, you would think it was an act of masochism.


Bridge: Little-Known Players Given Chance to Seek U.S. Honors
LEAD: Players little known to fame can take the first step on a long road to national honors during the next seven weeks.
Those who are not yet life masters can play in clubs in New York City and on Long Island with the possibility of advancing through local finals of the Grand National Flight B to national playoffs in Salt Lake City in


ELDON INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELDON INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,086,000
16,505,000
Net inc
1,485,000
1,142,000
Share earns
.27
.21
40wk sales
61,670,000
53,649,000
Net inc
4,469,000
3,605,000
Share earns
.81
.66


Yachting; Powerboat Final Plans Grueling Course With Safety in Mind
LEAD: Don Johnson, the slick crime buster of the television show ''Miami Vice,'' doesn't need a stunt man when it comes to driving the program's powerful 38-foot speedboat on camera.
In fact, Johnson has taken to the part so well that he plans to carry it into real life; he will be a co-driver this week in the powerboat world championship in Key West, Fla.


PRAISE FOR TWO MEN
LEAD: The departing Defense Secretary, Caspar W. Weinberger, has been making a point to applaud William Howard Taft 4th, his deputy secretary, as often as he compliments Frank C. Carlucci, his replacement.
At the Rose Garden ceremony for Mr.
Weinberger, at a Pentagon news conference and on television, Mr.


Market Place; Big Stock Sale By Japanese
LEAD: THE largest single entity on the Japanese stock market, the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation, is scheduled to begin selling tomorrow an issue of 1.95 million shares with an estimated value of about $38 billion.


Facing Facts on Conventional Forces
LEAD: Throughout the West the wails are heard: Eliminating medium-range missiles from Europe will soon lay pitilessly bare the West's weakness in conventional forces.
That's baloney.
Many a nuclear layer will survive the prospective Euromissile agreement, and in any case destroying missiles so recently deployed isn't the cause of NATO's conventional arms worries.


Outdoors: A Classy Gunner Is Armed With Modesty
LEAD: NO matter how long one has pursued waterfowl or upland birds, there is always a slight uneasiness about whether one's wing shooting will be up to snuff.


Moralism Wins Again
LEAD: Numerous valid reasons appeared to be developing for the rejection of Douglas H. Ginsburg, President Reagan's second-choice nominee for a Supreme Court seat.
In the end, however, Judge Ginsburg became one more victim of a moralistic new standard that is more deplorable than the private behavior it condemns.


Horse Racing; 3 of Trainer's Horses Fail Drug Tests
LEAD: Three horses trained by Peter Ferriola who raced at Aqueduct last week subsequently tested positive for the prohibited medication Lasix, the track stewards said yesterday.


College Football; L.S.U. Loss Clouds Forecast for Bowls
LEAD: Alabama's 22-10 upset over previously unbeaten Louisiana State on Saturday night scrambled the post-season bowl picture, raising doubts about how highly ranked a team the Sugar Bowl can attract to play the Southeastern Conference champion.


ADAM J. CIOTH MARRIES BETH FRANCES COBERT
LEAD: Beth Frances Cobert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maxwell Cobert of Montclair, N.J., and Adam Julian Cioth, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Boguslaw B. Cioth of Rolling Hills Estates, Calif., were married yesterday at the Chanticler in Short Hills, N.J.
Cantor Robert Abelson and the Rev.
Salvatore Umana, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


COMPUTER AUTOMATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER AUTOMATION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,610,000
5,311,000
Net inc
b426,000
b288,000
Share earns
.18
.14
Shares outst
2,318,000
2,059,000
b-Includes tax credits of $136,000 for the latest quarter and $37,000 for the year-earlier period.


BERNICE NAPACH IS WED
LEAD: The marriage of Bernice Napach, a reporter for the Reuters news agency, and Charles Paikert, a freelance journalist, took place yesterday at the Swan Club in Roslyn, L.I.
Michael Grupp, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, performed the ceremony.
The bride, the daughter of Lillian Napach of Little Neck, Queens, and the late Alex Napach, was formerly the New York bureau chief for Commodity World News.


THE GOOD LIFE IS HARDER FOR AMERICANS IN ROME
LEAD: American expatriates who have succumbed to the charms of Rome realize that their passion for the city is subject to ups and downs.
Sometimes it flames; sometimes it flickers.
Right now it is burning low.


VESTAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VESTAR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
665,000
177,000
Net loss
845,000
1,003,000
9mo rev
1,423,000
799,000
Net loss
2,711,000
2,729,000


School Football; Chaminade Edges Cardinal Spellman
LEAD: Chaminade, getting a safety to go with its four touchdowns, defeated Cardinal Spellman, 29-28, yesterday in a quarterfinal game of the Catholic High Schools Athletic League playoffs.


ENERGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENERGEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
47,518,000
52,831,000
Net loss
1,732,000
2,002,000
Yr rev
328,014,000
369,060,000
Net inc
9,160,000
2,013,000
Share earns
2.11
.47


Bears Beat Packers On Final-Play Kick
LEAD: Kevin Butler kicked a 52-yard field goal on the final play of the game today as the Chicago Bears rallied to beat the Green Bay Packers, 26-24, for their third straight comeback victory.


SYNALLOY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYNALLOY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,123,000
11,828,000
Net inc
432,000
b1,333,000
Share earns
.11
.35
9mo sales
35,993,000
37,304,000
Net inc
303,000
b1,641,000
Share earns
.08
.43


SCIENCE DYNAMICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCIENCE DYNAMICS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,148,938
1,613,572
Net inc
28,477
212,269
Share earns
.01
.07
9mo sales
3,459,797
4,386,377
Net inc
222,417
546,110
Share earns
.08
.18


Amoco Clears Dome Hurdle
LEAD: The Amoco Canada Petroleum Company said Friday that its proposed $3.87 billion takeover of Dome Petroleum Ltd. would not face a legal challenge from Canada's director of investigation and research, Calvin S. Goldman.
He found that competition in the crude oil, natural gas and sulphur markets would not be diminished by the merger, said the Canadian subsidiary of the Amoco Corporation.


UNGERMANN-BASS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNGERMANN-BASS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Revenue
38,150,000
29,766,000
Net inc
1,839,000
1,155,000
Share earns
.10
.07
9mo rev
105,527,000
78,564,000
Net inc
4,241,000
b1,938,000
Share earns
.24
-


UNITED TELEVISION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED TELEVISION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,533,000
20,560,000
Net loss
242,000
b2,625,000
Share earns
-
.24
9mo rev
67,816,000
63,112,000
Net inc
927,000
5,487,000
Share earns
.08
.50


HOTEL INVESTORS CORP-HOTEL INVESTORS TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOTEL INVESTORS CORP-HOTEL INVESTORS TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,905,000
7,696,000
Net inc
b4,275,000
c11,046,000
Share earns
.33
2.74
Shares outst
12,215,000
4,050,000
Yr rev
64,525,000
33,604,000
Net inc
b9,863,000
c7,508,000
Share earns
.84
1.86
Shares outst
11,031,000
4,019,000


India Adjusts To the Taking Of Weekends
LEAD: Two years ago, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's Government, fresh to power and bubbling with new ideas, introduced a revered Western concept to ancient India - the weekend.


Congressmen Show Off
LEAD: Members of Congress like to show off local products.
New Yorkers, for example, have been known to import deli from Brooklyn, and Hawaiians nearly bury the Capitol in macadamia nuts, while Floridians seem intent on floating it on a sea of orange juice.
Senator Christopher J. Dodd the other day brought something from his home state of Connecticut that will be hard to match.


Giants Pull Together to Win, 17-10
LEAD: Jeff Rutledge finally won his first National Football League game at the age of 30 tonight.
And it came just in time to keep alive the Giants' bruised playoff hopes.


Business and the Law; Rising Costs Of Texaco Case
LEAD: THE fight between Texaco Inc. and the Pennzoil Company over the Getty Oil Company took another turn last week, insuring that the legal meters will keep ticking in a case that has already produced some fat bills from Texas and New York law firms.


Israel Won't Prosecute Security Unit's Agents
LEAD: Agents of the Shin Beth security agency will not be prosecuted for lying in court about the methods they used to extract confessions from prisoners, under a series of findings adopted by the Cabinet today.


NUCLEAR SUPPORT SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUCLEAR SUPPORT SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,598,754
7,440,775
Net inc
640,870
700,558
Share earns
.33
.33
Shares outst
1,971,106
2,129,300
Yr rev
40,426,716
30,622,306
Net inc
2,388,604
2,357,346
Share earns
1.18
1.09
Shares outst
2,016,364
2,167,310


A Dim View of Justice
LEAD: First Bork, then Ginsburg.
Not since Richard Nixon responded to the Senate's rejection of Supreme Court nominee Clement Haynsworth in 1969 by nominating the unqualified G. Harrold Carswell, has a President acted as if he held the American people in such utter contempt.
Surely in the wake of the bruising Bork battle, it was incumbent upon President Reagan to offer a confirmable nominee of demonstrated judicial vision and high moral character.


4-Year-Old Boy Kills Mother After Finding Loaded Pistol
LEAD: A 4-year-old boy shot and killed his mother after he found a loaded .22-caliber pistol hidden in a closet, the police said Saturday.


Surgery for Holieway
LEAD: Jamelle Holieway, the Oklahoma quarterback, underwent knee surgery this morning to repair ligament and cartilage damage he suffered Saturday in a game against Oklahoma State.


Cunningham Leads Eagles to an Upset
LEAD: The Philadelphia Eagles upset the Washington Redskins today with their wide-open style of play that Philadelphians have taken to calling Buddy Ball, an admiring reference to the team's coach, Buddy Ryan.


DELPHI INFORMATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELPHI INFORMATION
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,895,000
4,820,000
Net loss
102,000
b156,000
9mo rev
10,111,000
8,127,000
Net loss
81,000
b722,000
b-Includes a loss of $50,000 for both the quarter and 9 months.


DH TECHNOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DH TECHNOLOGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,220,000
4,502,000
Net inc
807,000
716,000
Share earns
.17
.14
Shares outst
4,825,000
5,240,000
9mo rev
12,557,000
12,473,000
Net inc
2,275,000
1,820,000
Share earns
.47
.35
Shares outst
4,903,000
5,200,000


British Faster Again
LEAD: The Marines found a few good runners for yesterday's 12th annual Marine Corps Marathon, but as it turned out, they weren't quite good enough.
For the fourth year in a row, the British Royal Marines defeated the United States Marines.


Books of The Times
LEAD: THE LIFE OF THE PARTY.
Democratic Prospects in 1988 and Beyond.
By Robert Kuttner, 265 pages.
Elisabeth Stifton/Viking. $18.95.


Donald Trump's Circus, and Bread
LEAD: After an ardent 18-month courtship, Donald Trump has failed to win the hand of NBC as owner-tenant for 10 acres of his dramatic 76-acre development proposed for Manhattan's West Side.
That adds urgency to efforts by Mayor Koch and Governor Cuomo to keep NBC in New York, the way they have now succeeded in keeping the Dreyfus Corporation.


Kuwaiti Firm Gets B.P. Stake
LEAD: A major Kuwaiti investment company has bought a large stake in the British Petroleum Company just days after the issue of B.P. shares flopped in stock market turmoil, according to industry sources.


VIDEO DISPLAY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIDEO DISPLAY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,487,370
5,804,860
Net inc
b1,176,628
385,240
Share earns
.27
.09
6mo sales
14,828,988
11,423,908
Net inc
b1,624,498
730,117
Share earns
.38
.18


BRONCOS BEATEN BY BILLS, 21-14
LEAD: Robb Riddick ran for a touchdown and blocked a Denver punt to set up one of two Buffalo safeties as the Bills defeated the Denver Broncos, 21-14, today.


TV Review; 'The World's a Stage,' Theater History on 31
LEAD: BEGINNING tonight at 9, WNYC, Channel 31, begins ''All the World's a Stage,'' a 13-part BBC series that is an attractively packaged history of the theater, a sort of electronic Theater 101 course.
Actually, it is, as a subtitle indicates, ''one man's journey'' through that history.
The man is Ronald Harwood, the writer whose credits include ''The Dresser,'' both play and film, and, more recently, the HBO movie ''Mandela.


Hong Kong, Wary of China, Sees Its Middle Class Fleeing
LEAD: Four decades after their parents and grandparents swarmed from revolutionary upheaval in China to the safety of Hong Kong, a wave of young Chinese professionals is again fleeing Communism, packing their bags for Canada, the United States and Australia.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD:  BASF Corp., Parsippany, N.J., named Peter R. Heinze executive vice president and president of the chemicals division, succeeding Edwin L. Stenzel.
Bass &amp; Co., a division of the Phillips-Van Heusen Corp. that manufactures leather footwear, named John S. Thorbeck president.
Bowater Inc., Darien, Conn., a maker of newsprint and a producer of coated publication papers, bleached kraft market pulp, and continuous computer business forms, elected as a director Hugh D.


Walton Hopes Jets Play With Emotion
LEAD: The Jets had their final workout today for Monday night's game against the Seattle Seahawks, but for all that he had said and done during the week, Coach Joe Walton still was unsure if his attempts to shake up the team had been successful.


DR. DAVID R. HENSEN WED TO DR. DEIRDRE MUNISTERI
LEAD: At the Setauket Presbyterian Church in Setauket, L.I., Dr.
Deirdre Munisteri and Dr.
David Roy Hensen, who are veterinarians, were married yesterday by the Rev.
Theodore J. Wardlaw.


A BATTERED WIFE'S FIGHT, IN AND OUT OF COURT
LEAD: ''The other day,'' said Charlotte Fedders as she sank back on the couch at her home in Potomac, Md., ''someone asked whether I would have any feeling for John Fedders if he walked into this room.''


Suitor Undaunted By Pan Am Doubts
LEAD: Fifteen years ago Steven Hoffenberg started a credit business with $2,000 in a small downtown New York office with a couple of employees.
Now he is the head of a modest financial group, the Towers Financial Corporation, which is leading investors in a bid to control Pan American World Airways.


Advertising; The Search For Expert Spokesmen
LEAD: THE more astute television viewers of the day are certainly aware of the increasing popularity of celebrity endorsements.
But are they equally aware of the company spokesmen who fill a lot of time on local news and talk shows and whose corporate affiliation is not always apparent?


The 60's Meet the 80's; Disclosures on Marijuana Widen Debate Over Public Standards and Private Lives
LEAD: Once again, the focus of the 1988 Presidential campaign has veered away from the matter of how the country should be governed toward highly personal questions about those who would govern it.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Nov. 8, 1987:
MONDAY
Minnesota Mng &amp; Mfg
Stone Container
Pitney-Bowes Inc
TUESDAY
Advest Group
McDermott Intl
Eldon Indus
Mickelberry Corp
Fleet Fin'l Group
Russ Berrie &amp; Co
Household Intl
Staley Continental
Intl Paper
SunTrust Banks
WEDNESDAY
CSX Corp
Marlon Laboratories
Cincinnati Milacron
Meredith Corp
Esselte Business Sys
Sears Roebuck
Fireman's Fund
USG Corp
Gerber Products
USLIFE Inc Fd
THURSDAY
Allegheny Ludlum Corp
Maytag Co
Arvin Industries
Oakite


What Chance Elections? British Hedge
LEAD: The mistrust and uncertainty in Hong Kong seem to be compounded these days by the sense that Britain and China together intend to block the emergence of democracy in the territory.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday


Diversion Case Pleas Offered
LEAD: Two brothers have pleaded not guilty to charges of conspiracy to sell supercomputer technology to the Soviet Union.


Words From a High School Principal on Choosing a Chancellor
LEAD: To the Editor:


CASTLE A M &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CASTLE A M &amp; CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
92,950,000
79,372,000
Net inc
1,867,000
b390,000
Share earns
.49
-
9mo sales
274,223,000
242,533,000
Net inc
4,861,000
303,000
Share earns
1.28
.08


Edendale Journal; In Apartheid's Shadow, Zulu Wages War on Zulu
LEAD: A flickering candle caused a crucifix to be framed between the dancing shadows of a hand-forged dagger and a medieval ax on the roughly plastered wall.


Distant Fires Create Haze In New York
LEAD: The air smelled of autumn wood smoke and leaf-burning, and the sky had an eerie quality, as it does just before an eclipse or a tornado.
And for anyone who saw it go down, the sun was an oversized orange ball reminiscent of a science-fiction orb on the rim of a strange planet.


Risk Is Too High in AIDS Patient Surgery
LEAD: To the Editor:


City Opera: 'Student Prince'
LEAD: GRANTED that there is an apparently limitless audience for kitsch and that it supplies the New York City Opera with full houses and increased revenues.
But if the company steadfastly avows that operettas and musical comedies have enough artistic merit to be presented alongside the standard operatic repertory, it might at least offer consistently polished performances of such works.


Palestinians Hijack Boat With 8 Aboard
LEAD: The Palestinian guerrilla group led by Abu Nidal announced here today that one of its units had seized a French-registered boat with eight people aboard off the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip.


2 New York Officers Arrested at a Pit Bull Fight
LEAD: A New York City police detective and a police officer were arrested yesterday with 25 other people at a farm in Orange County that the state police said was used for pit bull fights.


Advertising; SecondHome Owners Get a New Publication
LEAD: Northeast Second Home is an every-other-month tabloid that has just made its debut as a joint venture of Thomas H. Forbes, 34-year-old editorial director of Adweek, and A/S/M Communications, the company that publishes Adweek.


PHILANTHROPY AND GRIT GIVE HOPE TO OGLALA SIOUX
LEAD: The poverty did not surprise the visiting leaders of Chicago's wealthy MacArthur Foundation who traveled 2,800 miles by air and another 280 over broken roads to see what life is like in the nation's poorest community.


ARX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARX INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,732,000
10,441,000
Net inc
b649,000
939,000
Share earns
.10
.16
b-After an extraordinary charge of $298,000.


Poland's Foreign Debt
LEAD: Poland said that its foreign debt had reached $36 billion and that it did not expect to come to grips with its repayment problems until the mid-1990s.
The official Polish news agency quoted the deputy finance minister, Andrzej Dorosz, as saying over the weekend that Poland's continuing inability to pay the full interest due on its loans was contributing to the growth of the debt.


I.R.A. IS SUSPECTED
LEAD: Eleven people were killed today when a huge bomb exploded as crowds gathered in Enniskillen for a wreath-laying ceremony honoring Britain's war dead.


GUARANTY NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GUARANTY NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,520,000
c2,143,000
Share earns
.36
.16
9mo net inc
b15,110,000
c8,481,000
Share earns
1.21
.77
b-Includes capital gains of $165,000 and $891,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, and tax credits of $831,000 for the quarter and $2,852,000 for the 9 months.


ALLWASTE INC reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLWASTE INC
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,084,000
13,120,000
Net inc
1,587,000
581,000
Share earns
.30
.16
Shares outst
5,339,000
3,689,000
Year-ago figures have been restated to reflect poolings of interests as a result of seven acquisitions made in fiscal 1987.


10 Candidates Wrap Up Blitz Of Iowa Voters
LEAD: From Spencer to Grundy Center, it was the busiest weekend yet for Presidential politics in Iowa, as six Democrats and four Republicans converged on the state for a two-day burst of handshaking and speechmaking.


ENSERCH EXPLORATION PARTERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENSERCH EXPLORATION PARTERS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
46,538,000
50,665,000
Net inc
7,718,000
7,206,000
Share earns
.08
.08
Shares outst
100,157,000
90,556,000
9mo rev
149,595,000
182,046,000
Net inc
28,892,000
41,928,000
Share earns
.29
.48
Shares outst
98,272,000
86,943,000


SUN STATE SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUN STATE SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,634,000
2,007,000
Per share
.28
.46
9mo net inc
4,788,000
7,792,000
Per share
.82
1.77
Shares outst
5,850,000
4,400,000


International Report; Swiftly Rising Prices Alarm China's Leaders
LEAD: There is a new ugly word in China: inflation.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


STRATEGIC MORTGAGE INVESTMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STRATEGIC MORTGAGE INVESTMENTS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,635,540
3,281,877
Share earns
.48
.60
9mo net inc
9,275,426
9,405,573
Share earns
1.70
1.72


Budget Meeting With President Puzzles G.O.P.
LEAD: Republican leaders left a meeting with President Reagan on Friday confused about what was said and without a clear direction on budget priorities, reflecting a split among Republicans and indecision in the White House, participants in the meeting said today.


HADSON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HADSON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
108,205,000
54,459,000
Net inc
2,569,000
1,801,000
Share earns
.13
.12
Shares outst
20,092,000
14,696,000
9mo rev
307,496,000
141,503,000
Net inc
5,301,000
4,363,000
Share earns
.29
.30
Shares outst
18,199,000
14,577,000


AMERICAN INDEMNITY FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN INDEMNITY FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
286,182
405,598
Share earns
.14
.21
9mo net inc
b1,464,000
1,742,469
Share earns
.94
.91
b-After a gain of $1,800,000.


SILICON GENERAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILICON GENERAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,718,000
9,583,000
Net loss
915,000
b318,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Ulster Ordeal: The Bad Years
LEAD:  Dec. 4, 1971 - A bomb planted by Protestants kills 15 Roman Catholics in a Londonderry bar.  an. 30, 1972 - In what is remembered as ''Bloody Sunday,'' 13 Catholic demonstrators are killed in Londonderry by British soldiers fearing an I.R.A. ambush.
Feb. 22, 1972 - Bombs kill 7 British soldiers and civilians in Aldershot, southwest of London, in what is believed to be revenge for ''Bloody Sunday.


Rate Drop Is Viewed As Cushion
LEAD: The sudden decline in interest rates that began when stock prices plunged on Oct. 19 has been large enough to help assure many economists that turmoil in the stock market will not lead to a recession.


Debt Pact Attacked in Brazil
LEAD: A provisional debt agreement reached by Brazil and foreign commercial banks in New York late Thursday has come under immediate attack from influential members of this country's two main political parties.


Enron Lags In Debt Plan
LEAD: The Enron Corporation, hit by the downturn in the stock market and a loss of $85 million from unauthorized trading, said Friday that it might not meet a debt-reduction target for the end of the year as proposed in a restructuring plan.
The Houston-based company had planned a major stock offering the week of Oct.


Federal Judge Orders Professor Reinstated At Boston University
LEAD: A Federal district judge has ordered Boston University to reinstate with tenure a professor of English who was found to have been the victim of sex discrimination.


De Laurentiis Plans to Quit
LEAD: Dino De Laurentiis, chairman and chief executive of the financially troubled De Laurentiis Entertainment Group, plans to resign from the company and is currently negotiating his release from a contract that pays an annual base salary of $850,000.


Treasury Sales Limited This Week
LEAD: Treasury auctions are limited this week to the three- and six-month bill issues sold every Monday.
Except for a two-year note issue and one-year bills expected next week, government securities dealers do not expect any Treasury offerings other than short-term bills until the last half of December.


Stage: 'Old Business,' On Father-Son Conflict
LEAD: THE eternal battle between fathers and sons is examined in Joe Cacaci's ''Old Business,'' as Abe Fleischer, a septuagenarian real estate tycoon, reluctantly makes way for his son to become head of the family empire.
In retirement in Florida, Abe keeps close watch on the son's activities and, predictably, returns to action.


Two Plead Not Guilty In Murder-Arson Case
LEAD: Two 13-year-old boys who are accused of setting fire to an abandoned car in a Brooklyn lot on Thursday, fatally burning a man inside, pleaded not guilty to second-degree murder and arson charges early yesterday.


DONEGAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DONEGAL GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b569,510
-
Share earns
.19
-
9mo net inc
b1,554,719
-
Share earns
.53
-
b-Includes realized investment gains of $118,063 and $498,971 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


BALLET THEATER SEASON TO PRESENT NEW WORKS
LEAD: American Ballet Theater will present the world premieres of bal-lets by Agnes de Mile, Mark Morris and Clark Tippet during its 1987-88 season.
It will also present the com-pany premiere of George Balan-chine's ''Ballet Imperial'' and re-vivals of Antony Tudor's ''Gala Per-formance'' and Leonide Massine's ''Gaiete Parisienne.


Gottlieb Reign Alters The New Yorker
LEAD: Nine months after taking over as editor of The New Yorker, following a tumultuous outcry by authors and editors protesting the ouster of his predecessor, Robert Gottlieb is beginning to put his stamp on one of the nation's best-known magazines.


On Afghanistan: Repercussions of Soviet Invasion
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHARLOTTE MAYOR'S DEFEAT ECHOES FAR
LEAD: Harvey Gantt is a compelling symbol of the New South.
In 1963, he became the first black to enroll at Clemson University.
Twenty years later, he became the first black Mayor of Charlotte, elected by a city that was 70 percent white.


Our Next Step In Central America
LEAD: With the first phase of the Arias peace plan in place, the question continues to be what role the United States should play in furthering the peace process, both in the short term and in the years to come.


Stage: Bel Canto Troupe In Pizzetti's 'Cathedral'
LEAD: AMONG the benefits of reviving forgotten works is that the passage of time and the concurrent shifting of taste tend to cast these pieces in wholly new lights, occasionally making what had seemed worthless or uninteresting now evocative and engaging.
So it appears to be with Ildebrando Pizzetti's ''Assassinio Nella Cattedrale,'' an opera that was not much admired when it received its American premiere in 1958 but that provided reasonable pleasure at its revival Saturday evening by the Bel Canto Opera, at St.


Mexican Ambivalence
LEAD: Repeatedly over the last seven years, the Reagan Administration has expressed hopes of creating a North American common market that would link the United States and its neighbors.
But in concluding a bilateral commercial accord here on Friday, Mexico and the United States showed that an enormous gap remains between that dream and current reality.


Tax Proposal Affects Bonds
LEAD: Investors in old bonds valued at less than their face value would be hit with a new tax under provisions of the tax bill passed last month by the House of Representatives For investors buying those bonds, known as ''market discount'' issues, the House bill proposes to tax the difference between the purchase price and the bonds' value at maturity.


DATAREX SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATAREX SYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,971,000
6,710,000
Net inc
116,000
101,000
Share earns
.07
.10
Shares outst
1,766,000
960,000
9mo sales
31,145,000
16,686,000
Net inc
562,000
252,000
Share earns
.32
.26


Small Drop In Gas Prices
LEAD: The average price of gasoline dropped only one-tenth of a cent a gallon during a two-week period, but a decline in wholsesale prices may bring greater reductions, an industry analyst said today.


Dickerson Fumble Helps Drop Colts
LEAD: When the National Football League schedule was determined months ago, this game looked to be an inconsequential meeting between two lackluster teams: the aging San Diego Chargers and the hapless Indianaplis Colts.


NOBLE DRILLING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOBLE DRILLING
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,896,000
7,180,000
Net loss
2,190,000
4,146,000
9mo rev
18,461,000
28,107,000
Net loss
8,364,000
11,469,000


Prices of Some Imports Can't Help but Go Up
LEAD: The latest plunge in the value of the dollar against other major currencies means that the prices of imported goods - ranging from German wines to Italian shoes to Japanese cars - will rise in coming weeks and months, according to importers, industry officials and economists.


Music: Chamber Society
LEAD: THE delicate balance of Saturday afternoon's program by the Chamber Music Society was upset by a sore throat.
Dawn Upshaw, the society's visiting soprano, decided not to chance the Liszt songs she had planned, but there were the Seven Romances of Shostakovich - settings for voice, two strings and piano to poetry by Alexander Blok.


TENURE AS COURT NOMINEE STRETCHED BY A TRAFFIC JAM
LEAD: Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg was stuck for an hour in traffic Saturday as he headed to the White House, delaying his announcement that he was ending his bid to join the Supreme Court, the White House says.


Bangladesh Chief Bans March
LEAD: The Government banned demonstrations today to thwart a planned march in the capital by protesters seeking the ouster of Lieut.
Gen.
H.
M.
Ershad as president.


CENTRAL BANKERS IN TALKS
LEAD: As the presidents of the central banks of the major industrial nations gather here today, their major concern is when the dollar will stop falling.


SUPREME EQUIPMENT &amp; SYSEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUPREME EQUIPMENT &amp; SYSEMS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,330,000
10,554,000
Net inc
b90,000
c18,000
Share earns
.08
.02
Yr sales
38,884,000
40,019,000
Net inc
b713,000
c410,000
Share earns
.65
.38


Ground Broken in Louisiana For Jail for Cuban Criminals
LEAD: The new Federal Detention Center for illegal aliens here will soon have an addition, an outgrowth of the nation's new immigration law.


Italy Voting on Atom Power and Other Issues
LEAD: Italy began voting today on five referendums that could produce important changes in nuclear energy policies and the criminal justice system.


CANTERBURY EDUCATIONAL SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANTERBURY EDUCATIONAL SERVICES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,016,111
36,591
Net inc
51,745
b389
Share earns
.02
-
9mo sales
2,219,098
240,841
Net inc
163,938
14,831
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Startup Journal; Low Odds and High Perils of Logging
LEAD: The men who cut down 200-year-old trees on the steep slopes of the Cascades don't go for a lot of romanticizing and myth-making about a job with an injury rate of one in three.
Every logger has a horror story and a scarred forehead or a missing finger to prove it.


UNITED SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION-MISSOURI reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION-MISSOURI
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
901,144
945,216
Per share
.54
.56
9mo net inc
2,720,139
2,773,818
Per share
1.61
1.65


Toni Morrison to Teach at Princeton
LEAD: Toni Morrison has been appointed to the Robert F. Goheen Professorship in the Humanities Council at Princeton University, effective in the spring of 1989, according to the university.
She is to teach in the creative writing program and participate in such other programs as Afro-American studies, American studies and women's studies.


TEKNOWLEDGE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEKNOWLEDGE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,438,000
2,142,000
Net loss
1,311,000
b308,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income and includes an extraordinary credit of $150,000.


ALLOY COMPUTER PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLOY COMPUTER PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,019,000
10,116,000
Net inc
490,000
454,000
Share earns
.09
.09
9mo sales
33,908,000
29,312,000
Net inc
2,092,000
1,306,000
Share earns
.44
.32


Report Assails U.S. Helicopter
LEAD: Crashes of the Army's most modern troop-carrying helicopters have been caused by ordinary radio waves from microwave towers, radio attennas and radar, a published report says.
But a military spokesman has vehemently denied the report.


Dance: All-Ashton Program by the Joffrey Ballet
LEAD: THE tenderness and wit for which Sir Frederick Ashton is justifiably famous as a choreographer were much in evidence in the all-Ashton program that the Joffrey Ballet presented Saturday night at the City Center Theater.
The program also featured several dancers in roles for which they had not been previously reviewed this season.


U.S.-Yugoslavia Talks
LEAD: The United States Deputy Secretary of State, John C. Whitehead, arrived here on Saturday for talks on Yugoslavia's economy and measures to restructure the country's $19.5 billion foreign debt, the Tanjug News Agency reported.
The agency said Mr.
Whitehead was received by the Croatian leader, Ante Markovic.


Pitino System to Take Time
LEAD: Nearly a month ago, Rick Pitino began trying to alter five years of bad Knick habits.
He introduced a system of basketball that asked the players to move, react and interplay with one another.
It was completely contrary to much of what had been drilled into the Knicks under Hubie Brown, who preached constraint and control during his five seasons as the team's head coach.


HORIZON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORIZON INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Sales
69,210,000
59,264,000
Net inc
1,491,000
1,333,000
Share earns
.36
.33
Yr sales
256,548,000
210,218,000
Net inc
3,471,000
1,688,000
Share earns
.84
.41


Advertising; Stevens &amp; Buchsbaum Takes Cosmetics Client
LEAD: Stevens &amp; Buchsbaum is celebrating its first anniversary ensconced in former Warwick Advertising space at 875 Third Avenue and billing almost $25 million.
Or so they say.


LISA BELKIN IS MARRIED TO DR. BRUCE D. GELB
LEAD: Lisa Beth Belkin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Myron D. Belkin of Merrick, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Bruce David Gelb, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen G. Gelb of Westfield, N.J., and New York.
Rabbi Charles Klein performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in South Merrick, L.I.


A TIE WITH FLYERS SATISFIES THE DEVILS
LEAD: The Devils will be satisfied any time they can get a point on the road.
They got one tonight at the Spectrum, where points have come the hardest for them over the years.


'So Old a Friend'
LEAD: To the Editor:


IMATRON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMATRON INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,750,000
220,000
Net loss
1,895,000
1,992,000
9mo sales
7,365,000
3,543,000
Net loss
7,638,000
4,527,000


TECHNOLOGY LEAK TO SOVIET FOUND
LEAD: The Soviet Union has acquired equipment and technology needed to produce an advanced material that can increase the accuracy of nuclear warheads by buying the items from the Scottish subsidiary of a New Jersey company, Government officials said.


SCICOM DATA SVC LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCICOM DATA SVC LTD
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,752,641
3,355,563
Net inc
249,920
194,369
Share earns
.23
.18


SIFCO INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIFCO INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,792,000
13,876,000
Net inc
b1,250,000
324,000
Share earns
.58
.15
Yr sales
63,112,000
61,323,000
Net inc
2,060,000
c2,520,000
Share earns
.95
1.17


SUNLITE INC reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNLITE INC (OTC)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Net loss
885,024
1,100,353
The latest year results include a provision for contingent loss of about $900,000 related to litigation.
Sunlite said the results include amounts for impairment of the company's oil and gas assets of $75,000 in 1987 and $1,132,000 in 1986.


TUESDAY MORNING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TUESDAY MORNING INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,341,392
11,664,609
Net inc
125,203
219,392
Share earns
.03
.05
9mo sales
39,927,964
34,277,722
Net inc
464,633
461,618
Share earns
.12
.12


INSIDE
LEAD:  Arab Leaders Condemn Iran


Al Richmond, Leftist Ex-Editor
LEAD: Al Richmond, a former editor who was convicted of subversion and imprisoned during the McCarthy anti-Communist era, died of pneumonia Friday.
He was 73 years old and lived in San Francisco.


Puzzling Out Foreign Profits
LEAD: The dollar's accelerated decline against the yen last week foreshadows bigger profits for Avon Products Inc.
Japan is Avon's largest foreign market, and the stronger yen will translate into more dollars when the money is accounted for at the company's New York headquarters.


Nicaraguan Cardinal Seeks Pledges Before Mediation Starts
LEAD: Just two days after the Sandinista Government agreed to name Miguel Cardinal Obando y Bravo as intermediary in talks with guerrilla leaders, the Cardinal said he was not sure he would accept the job.


REAGAN WEIGHING CONFLICTING ADVICE ON COURT NOMINEE
LEAD: Administration officials today weighed conflicting advice from senators and conservative strategists on how quickly to proceed in naming a new nominee for the Supreme Court.


AMAX GOLD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMAX GOLD (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,017,000
14,416,000
Net inc
b11,078,000
6,067,000
Share earns
.28
.15
9mo sales
48,312,000
32,434,000
Net inc
b31,503,000
12,541,000
Share earns
.79
.31


ENEX RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENEX RESOURCES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,752,009
2,077,651
Net inc
122,402
2,097
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
8,182,390
3,226,539
Net inc
464,032
118,324
Share earns
.02
.01


Concert: 'Music for Life,' a Benefit
LEAD: ONE watched with interest the faces of last night's elegant audience entering Carnegie Hall.
It was a benefit event called ''Music for Life,'' raising $1.7 million to support and care for victims of acquired immune deficiency syndrome.


GUARANTY TRUSTCO LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GUARANTY TRUSTCO LTD
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
173,573,000
162,332,000
Net inc
9,679,000
6,479,000
Share earns
.78
.50
9mo rev
485,744,000
447,170,000
Net inc
28,414,000
18,757,000
Share earns
2.27
1.65


Stocks Prices Slide in Tokyo
LEAD: Share prices fell in very light trading this morning.
Brokers said the decline came amid concern over the future direction of the American economy and the dollar.


BELVEDERE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELVEDERE CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,018,000
6,619,000
Net inc
b1,268,000
c532,000
Share earns
.21
.21
Shares outst
6,007,418
2,502,000
9mo rev
26,460,000
15,699,000
Net inc
b2,435,000
c1,451,000
Share earns
.42
.56
Shares outst
5,829,583
2,582,120


HIGHER ESTIMATES FOR ROBINS
LEAD: The A.H.
Robins Company should be required to set aside up to $2.3 billion to compensate 163,000 women who contend that they were injured by Robins's Dalkon Shield birth-control device, an expert witness testified today as a bankruptcy hearing continued in Federal court here.


Bombing of Dresden Hastened End of War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pop Music: Simply Red
LEAD: MICK HUCKNALL, the redheaded lead singer and chief songwriter of the pop group Simply Red, is one of the most emotionally intense vocalists to emerge out of the British blue-eyed soul movement.
The waifish young singer from Manchester, whose hair color inspired the group's name, has a raw piercing countertenor that he pushes with a punishing urgency.


ACC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACC CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,459,182
8,469,476
Net inc
102,182
307,516
Share earns
.03
.09
9mo rev
25,527,611
24,622,247
Net loss
458,823
b1,014,969
Share earns
-
.28
b-Net income


Few Program Traders Return
LEAD: Many money managers and individuals stayed away from the stock market yesterday out of fear of the return of computerized program trading.
But, ironically, program traders did not return in full force after the New York Stock Exchange lifted its restriction on the use of its trading floor computer system for the execution of such trades.


CANADIAN PACIFIC LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANADIAN PACIFIC LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,028,800,000
3,910,700,000
Net inc
b320,510,000
d81,248,000
Share earns
1.07
.27
9mo rev
9,023,400,000
11,439,200,000
Net inc
b791,669,000
cd274,111,000
Share earns
2.64
-


INTERMEC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERMEC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
19,709,000
16,397,000
Net inc
988,000
1,005,000
Share earns
.16
.17
6mo rev
37,524,000
30,824,000
Net inc
1,884,000
1,662,000
Share earns
.31
.28


Telex Extension
LEAD: The investor Asher B. Edelman said he had extended until Nov. 20 his $65-a-share offer for the outstanding shares of the Telex Corporation.
Meanwhile, the Tulsa, Okla., computer concern said it expected its pretax earnings and revenues to rise steadily from 1988 to 1993.
The company said the projection had been reviewed by its board in determining to submit a $775 million recapitalization plan to shareholders if the takeover offer from Mr.


Don't Play a Shell Game With Social Security; False Modesty
LEAD: To the Editor:


IDEAL BASIC INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IDEAL BASIC INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
75,079,000
73,512,000
Net inc
4,629,000
b4,367,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo sales
180,350,000
201,111,000
Net loss
5,343,000
14,912,000
b-Net loss


At Top of List, Judge Fitting Centrist Mold
LEAD: Judge Anthony M. Kennedy is a judicial conservative, but one whose style more closely resembles that of Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr., the pragmatic centrist who retired from the Supreme Court in June, than that of Judge Robert H. Bork, the thundering critic of liberal judicial activism whose nomination for the vacancy was defeated last month.


Unions in Lebanon Call Off Five-Day-Old General Strike
LEAD: Lebanon's trade unions called off a five-day-old general strike today after the Government pledged that the workers' demands would be met.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Canadiens 3, Maple Leafs 1: Stephane Richer's ninth goal of the season proved to be the game-winner as the Canadiens defeated the Toronto Maple Leafs last night in Montreal to to extend their unbeaten streak to seven games.
The Canadiens got some breathing room when Chris Nilan scored an insurance goal at 9 minutes 53 seconds of the third period.(AP)


For Pianist, a Too-Long-Delayed Debut
LEAD: On June 14, 1982, Avery Fisher Hall was booked for the American debut of the concert pianist Vladimir Feltsman.
However, he wasn't expected to be there.


Austin Journal; The Home of Hormel: A Town Still Divided
LEAD: The strike may be over.
The old union local may have been replaced by a new one.
And Spam may be selling better than ever. ''It's business as normal - better than normal,'' said David A. Larson, a vice president of Geo.
A.
Hormel &amp; Company.


Two Bears Injured
LEAD: Two members of the Chicago Bears' defensive unit will be lost for at least four weeks with injuries suffered in the team's victory at Green Bay on Sunday.
Dan Hampton, a defensive end, injured his left knee in a pileup in the first quarter.
Otis Wilson, a linebacker, injured his right knee in the fourth quarter.


MUNFORD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MUNFORD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1987
1986
Sales
115,286,000
114,084,000
Net loss
1,300,000
b281,000
Share earns
-
.07
9mo sales
326,396,000
338,770,000
Net loss
3,182,000
b624,000
Share earns
-
.16


Irvin Back With Rams
LEAD: LeRoy Irvin, the cornerback suspended by the Los Angeles Rams last week, has been reinstated.
Coach John Robinson suspended Irvin after the player requested renegotiation of his contract and demanded to be traded.


MOORE-HANDLEY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOORE-HANDLEY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,401,000
23,452,000
Net loss
216,000
b258,000
Share earns
-
.10
9mo sales
74,371,000
64,384,000
Net inc
476,000
991,000
Share earns
.19
.44


Premenstrual Allergy
LEAD: Severe premenstrual symptoms that in years past might have prompted a diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder have recently been identified as caused by an allergic reaction to a female hormone.


INTERNATIONAL CLINICAL LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL CLINICAL LABORATORIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
55,946,000
45,241,000
Net inc
1,714,000
1,072,000
Share earns
.22
.14
Yr rev
205,458,000
168,677,000
Net inc
4,790,000
4,100,000
Share earns
.62
.54


The Memorial's List Grows by 24
LEAD: The names are freshly etched in black granite on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial: Samuel Richard Bird, Steven Mark Connell, Carl Eugene Gronquist Jr.
The first, a 27-year-old Army captain, was shot while climbing out of a helicopter and died 17 years later, in 1984; the second, a 20-year-old Marine private, was shot while on patrol and died at home in Utah after a year and a half, and the third, a 33-year-old


58.85 Drop Puts Dow At 1,900.20
LEAD: Stock prices fell sharply and broadly yesterday as many investors stayed on the sidelines because of nervousness over both the dollar's continuing slide and the resumption of unrestricted program trading.


LEGG MASON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEGG MASON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
56,167,000
31,955,000
Net inc
3,033,000
2,189,000
Share earns
.35
.32
Shares outst
8,649,000
6,914,000
6mo rev
108,583,000
66,302,000
Net inc
5,450,000
4,966,000
Share earns
.63
.72
Shares outst
8,655,000
6,912,000


JETS STORM BY SEAHAWKS
LEAD: The Jets were not just good but great tonight in a spectacular performance against the Seattle Seahawks at Giants Stadium.


Towns Turn Pesky Leaves Into Food for Suburban Soil
LEAD: As they struggle to find places to bury or burn their trash, officials throughout the New York metropolitan region are beginning to see the lunacy of an autumn tradition - dumping leaves in landfills.


FOREST FIRE HAZE STAYS IN NEW YORK
LEAD: The thick, acrid smoke that drifted into the New York metropolitan area on Sunday remained there yesterday.
While it limited visibility at airports, annoyed people with sensitive lungs and created eerie optical effects, the haze did not cause any major problems, meteorologists and environmentalists said.


PIPELINE COMPANY TO CLEAN PCB SITES
LEAD: The Texas Eastern Corporation tentatively agreed today to clean up PCB's and other toxic wastes disposed of at 89 sites in 14 states along its 10,000-mile natural gas pipeline.
The cleanup will cost an estimated $400 million.
Under an ''agreement in principle'' with the Environmental Protection Agency, Texas Eastern will also pay penalties and costs of $15 million for violating regulations on the disposal of PCB's, or polychlorinated biphenyls, along the pipeline.The pipeline, operated by the company's Texas Eastern Transmission Corporation subsidiary, stretches from Texas and


In a Hostile Environment, Drab Can Be Beautiful
LEAD: THE worst defense against a menacing yellow jacket wasp may be the squashing body blow.
It could incite nearby yellow jackets into frenzied attack.


Belgian Dance Festival To Open at the Kitchen
LEAD: ''The Face, the Body and the Beast,'' a festival of Belgian avant-garde dance and performance art at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, opens Thursday with ''Face a Face,'' a program by Michele Anne De Mey, a choreographer and a member of Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker's Rosas company.
It will also be presented


BATTLE MOUNTAIN GOLD CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BATTLE MOUNTAIN GOLD CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
31,641,000
23,028,000
Net inc
12,147,000
6,277,000
Share earns
.19
.10
9mo sales
83,122,000
65,999,000
Net inc
30,185,000
18,184,000
Share earns
.47
.28


N.F.L. Becomes a Telethon
LEAD: HISTORY happened Sunday night.
ESPN and WABC-TV both televised the Giants-Patriots game from the Meadowlands, marking the first time either has shown a regular-season National Football League game.


No Headline
LEAD: IN their spring and summer collections, many of New York's designers declared their independence from fashion-by-decree.
They will offer many alternatives to baroque bubbles and thigh-baring bands masquerading as skirts that, though they hardly suit everybody, are now hailed as fashion's be-all and end-all.


KEARNEY-NATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEARNEY-NATIONAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
39,824,000
36,945,000
Net inc
b1,993,000
1,745,000
Share earns
.35
.31
9mo sales
117,578,000
109,130,000
Net inc
6,510,000
c7,848,000
Share earns
1.15
1.39


SENSOR CONTROL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SENSOR CONTROL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,264,384
970,065
Net inc
161,497
121,486
Share earns
.07
.11
Shares outst
2,237,143
1,082,143


CBS Names New Head Of Entertainment Unit
LEAD: Earle H. (Kim) LeMasters 3d was appointed president of the CBS Entertainment division yesterday, replacing B. Donald Grant, who resigned Oct. 30.


ERC INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ERC INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
31,894,000
26,408,000
Net inc
1,345,000
b368,000
Share earns
.31
.09
9mo rev
89,310,000
71,722,000
Net inc
3,890,000
b1,684,000
Share earns
.91
.40


Bank of Boston
LEAD: The Bank of Boston Corporation, the nation's 15th-largest bank holding company, said it had agreed to buy the BankVermont Corporation in a one-for-one stock swap valued at around $60 million.
The acquisition is the first under Vermont's new interstate banking law.
BankVermont, based in Burlington, has assets of $667 million.


Optimism Is Guarded as Oil Executives Convene
LEAD: The decline in oil prices last year has been felt even more strongly this year in oil-producing states, as measured by bankruptcies, tax revenues and other indicators, a survey by the American Petroleum Institute has found.


Contel Sets Write-Off
LEAD: The Contel Corporation, the big telecommunications company, said today that it would write off up to $200 million in the fourth quarter to restructure its ASC subsidiary, formerly the American Satellite Company.


Concert: London Ensemble
LEAD: THE arrival of the touring London Phiharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall on Monday evening provided an opportunity to check on the progress of Semyon Bychkov, one of the most generously praised of the world's under-40 conductors.
Mr.
Bychkov, who was born in Leningrad in 1952 and emigrated to the United States in 1975, is music director of the Buffalo Philharmonic and beginning in 1989 will hold the same post with the Orchestre de Paris.


LO-JACK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LO-JACK CORP
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
458,804
125,456
Net loss
248,323
743,224
6mo sales
1,057,247
125,456
Net loss
279,437
1,508,041


VALLEY FORGE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VALLEY FORGE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,765,439
5,006,828
Net inc
b443,281
c178,355
Per share
.26
.11
9mo rev
21,629,769
15,618,903
9mo net inc
b3,272,996
c1,235,114
Per share
1.93
.73


Devils' Johnson Lost to Injury
LEAD: The Devils gained a point at the Spectrum in Philadelphia Sunday night to put them in a first-place tie with the Islanders, but they lost two key players to injuries.


7 of 30 Aliens Still at Large After Miami Prison Breakout
LEAD: Seven aliens remained at large today from among 30 convicted felons who scattered into the Everglades after scaling two fences at a Federal detention center, the authorities said.


SONEX RESEARCH reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SONEX RESEARCH
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,920
3,320
Net loss
649,219
615,132
9mo rev
10,000
150,000
Net loss
1,866,000
1,639,000


Ballet: Cast Shifts in Joffrey 'Sacre' and 'Parade'
LEAD: ROBERT JOFFREY has given balletgoers many reasons to be grateful, prime among them his interest in collecting ballets of other times.
And the Joffrey Ballet's program of dances created for Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes, presented on Sunday night at City Center, is one of our happiest windfalls.


BLOCKBUSTER ENTERTAINENT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLOCKBUSTER ENTERTAINENT (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,090,000
2,029,000
Net inc
1,375,000
b824,000
Share earns
.32
-
9mo rev
28,391,000
2,780,000
Net inc
2,805,000
b2,283,000
Share earns
.78
-


TRANSIT SUPERVISOR SUSPENDED ON CONDUCT CHARGE
LEAD: A Transit Authority supervisor who had a private investigator check on the background of a subordinate has been suspended without pay, the agency said yesterday.


JONES MEDICAL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JONES MEDICAL INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,649,762
1,336,402
Net inc
200,179
177,800
Share earns
.06
.06
9mo sales
4,815,535
4,190,470
Net inc
602,322
496,361
Share earns
.19
.19
Shares outst
3,146,053
2,618,139


SERVICO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SERVICO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 24
1987
1986
Revenue
46,542,000
42,251,000
Net inc
b2,252,000
b1,396,000
Share earns
.59
.37
b-Includes gains from the sale of hotels of $5,904,000 and $2,471,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


DIAGNOSTIC-RETRIEVAL SYSEMS inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAGNOSTIC-RETRIEVAL SYSEMS inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,817,000
13,900,000
Net inc
1,067,000
674,000
Share earns
.19
.12
6mo rev
29,457,000
22,010,000
Net inc
1,799,000
1,068,000
Share earns
.32
.19


Woman Pushed Onto IND Track Crawls to Safety
LEAD: A 26-year-old pregnant woman was pushed by a stranger into the path of a subway train yesterday in Manhattan and survived by squeezing into a crawl space underneath the platform as the train pulled into the station.


Work on Solar Car Enriches Engineering On Many Fronts
LEAD: SUN-POWERED passenger automobiles are so far down the road that they may never amount to more than a dream.
But last week, an American automobile maker proved that an experimental solar-powered car could cross a continent nearly as fast as a conventional gasoline-powered vehicle.


Harmon Is Cleared
LEAD: The University of Iowa said yesterday that the National Collegiate Athletic Association and the Big Ten Conference have cleared Kevin Harmon, the Hawkeye running back, of any wrongdoing in connection with reports that he received money from sports agents.


New Hampshire Turnpike Bonds
LEAD: A $100 million issue of New Hampshire Turnpike System tax-exempt revenue bonds was tentatively offered yesterday with a maximum yield of 8 3/8 percent for an issue due in 2017.


Fear Is New To Americans In Philippines
LEAD: Charles Willis, the only American on Friendship Avenue, walked briskly to a tricycle taxi, keeping a wary eye on passing cars.


New York Officials Reach Indian Museum Agreement
LEAD: After months of arguing over alternative plans to keep the Museum of the American Indian in New York City, the highest New York State, local and Congressional leaders have united behind a proposal to house the collection in the Custom House in lower Manhattan.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


U.S. Fights a New Battle of Antietam
LEAD: On Sept. 17, 1862, the cornfields and wooded ridges surrounding Antietam Creek ran with blood as the Union and Confederate armies clashed in the most savage single day of fighting in this country's history.
As darkness fell, 23,000 Americans lay dead or wounded in the fields and woods.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Going Out Guide on Saturday about a songwriters' forum at New York University carried an outdated list of participants supplied by the organizers.
Dana Suesse, one of those scheduled to participate, died Oct. 16.


INTERNATIONAL HYDRON reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL HYDRON (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
21,011,000
18,236,000
Net inc
2,009,000
b1,468,000
Share earns
.17
.13
9mo sales
61,012,000
50,694,000
Net inc
4,723,000
b2,897,000
Share earns
.41
.26


500 Peacefully Protest Speech by Farrakhan
LEAD: Amid intensified security and worries of violence, about 500 people peacefully demonstrated outside a Syracuse University auditorium tonight before a speech by the head of the Nation of Islam, Louis Farrakhan.


Market Place; Bullish Outlook For Wrigley
LEAD: WITH the investment climate remaining cloudy, only three common stocks on the New York Stock Exchange set new 52-week highs last week.
Two of them, Piedmont Aviation Inc. and U.S.
Leasing International Inc., were takeover plays nearing completion.


Allis-Chalmers
LEAD: The Allis-Chalmers Corporation said it intended to propose a Chapter 11 reorganization in which its major businesses would be sold together or individually.
The diversified industrial company, which filed for protection from creditors last June, said it had retained the investment banker Lazard Freres &amp; Company to assist it in the effort to sell the company.


IRWIN UNION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IRWIN UNION CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
259,912
1,424,803
Share earns
.42
2.30
9mo net inc
944,928
2,418,614
Share earns
1.52
4.62


1,100 Held as Bangladesh Bans Protest in Capital
LEAD: Bangladesh outlawed public demonstrations in the capital today and said more than 1,100 people had been arrested for political activities.
The arrests were made to thwart a huge anti-Government protest scheduled for Tuesday.


Gruntal Buying Moseley Unit
LEAD: The Gruntal Financial Corporation, a regional brokerage firm, agreed yesterday to acquire the retail operations of the Moseley Holding Corporation, a securities firm that recently reported major losses, for at least $15 million.


ASPEN RIBBONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASPEN RIBBONS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,096,066
3,007,383
Net inc
234,504
157,862
Share earns
.07
.05


PIONEER FINANCIAL SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIONEER FINANCIAL SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,411,000
856,000
Per share
.30
.29
9mo net inc
4,484,000
2,824,000
Per share
.96
.94
Shares outst
s4,651,000
3,000,000


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding's Earnings Increase 59.6%
LEAD: Although its third-quarter revenue was up only 2 percent from the corresponding period last year, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications' net income shot up 59.6 percent.


ATALANTA-SOSNOFF CAPITAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATALANTA-SOSNOFF CAPITAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,507,000
7,599,000
Net inc
b2,289,000
1,957,000
Share earns
.26
.21
Shares outst
8,886,904
9,180,000
9mo rev
27,542,000
21,410,000
Net inc
6,821,000
6,551,000
Share earns
.76
.77
Shares outst
8,919,243
8,458,168


College Soccer; S.M.U. Gets to Play 'Football' After All
LEAD: Southern Methodist University, which has been national power in football recently but has no team this year, got national recognition in soccer yesterday when its team earned one of the two byes awarded in the national Division I tournament.


HOOPER HOLMES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOOPER HOLMES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,357,000
15,009,000
Net inc
294,000
196,000
Share earns
.14
.10
9mo rev
49,289,000
45,596,000
Net inc
1,300,000
920,000
Share earns
.53
.48


Getting Out
LEAD: The image of the savvy Congressional staff member - plugged in, knowledgeable, often better connected than his or her boss - was dealt something of a blow in a new survey by the Congressional Management Foundation.


WHITE HOUSE SAYS PROBABLE NOMINEE IS JUDGE KENNEDY
LEAD: The White House said today that Judge Anthony M. Kennedy would probably be nominated for a seat on the Supreme Court.


In an Ulster City, Grief for 11 and Rage
LEAD: With 11 of its citizens dead from a bomb blast Sunday, this town turned today to the rituals of mourning and sectarian rage that are a commonplace part of life in this tortured province For James Mullan, a tall pharmacist with a faced reddened by grief, that meant contemplating a dreadful irony.
Moments after a bomb estimated at 30 pounds ripped open the community center here, he located his 10-year-old son in a thick fog of dust.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q.What would happen if a thermonuclear bomb exploded on the surface of the Moon?
Could a large number of explosions alter the orbit of the Moon and affect our tides?
A.In order to disturb the Moon's orbit of the Earth, you would have to produce and focus enough energy to overcome the force of the gravitational attraction between the two bodies.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Continental Baking to Tatham-Laird &amp; Kudner, Chicago, for Bread du Jour, now in test in five markets.


Talks on Nicaragua Truce May Open Next Week
LEAD: The first session between rebel leaders and an intermediary in talks with the Nicaraguan Government may be held as early as next week, according to United States Senators who have just visited Managua and rebel officials here.


SANDY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANDY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,218,874
8,990,816
Net loss
831,553
469,285
Yr rev
24,785,912
31,579,294
Net loss
1,507,529
405,854


GENERAL SIGNAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL SIGNAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
398,983,000
391,265,000
Net inc
18,920,000
18,632,000
Share earns
.67
.65
9mo sales
1,180,838,000
1,209,111,000
Net inc
48,209,000
56,950,000
Share earns
1.70
1.98


CCX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CCX INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,362,000
10,401,000
Net loss
b55,000
c212,000
b-Includes an extraordinary charge $19,000.
c-After income from discontinued operations of $126,000 and an extraordinary charge of $26,000.


BIOMEDICUS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOMEDICUS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,982,000
2,059,000
Net inc
162,000
406,000
Share earns
.03
.08
Shares outst
5,520,552
4,948,380
9mo sales
5,285,000
4,026,000
Net inc
52,000
864,000
Share earns
.01
.18
Shares outst
5,520,552
4,861,416


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Toys on Tour


Eaton Division Is Barred From U.S. Contracts
LEAD: The Air Force accused the Eaton Corporation's AIL division today of illegal activities, including falsifying payment requests, and it temporarily suspended the company from receiving any Government contracts.


Use of Hyperbaric Oxygen in Texas Well Rescue
LEAD: To the Editor:


Food Agency Chief Wins a Bitter Vote
LEAD: The Director General of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization was elected to a third six-year term today over the opposition of many donor nations, including the United States, Canada and Britain.


Gift of a Great Teacher
LEAD: TESSIE is different from the other teachers,'' a 9-year-old boy told his parents at dinner.
When he was asked how she was different, he replied, ''Tessie knows how we children think.''


HEIN-WERNER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEIN-WERNER CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
23,719,000
10,217,000
Net inc
544,000
348,000
Share earns
.30
.26
9mo sales
64,569,000
33,105,000
Net inc
1,380,000
825,000
Share earns
.92
.61


CENVILL INVESTORS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENVILL INVESTORS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,345,000
5,341,000
Net inc
3,696,000
3,713,000
Share earns
.53
.53
9mo rev
19,056,000
15,363,000
Net inc
b11,810,000
10,781,000
Share earns
1.69
1.54


LSI LOGIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LSI LOGIC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
68,879,000
46,543,000
Net inc
3,209,000
b1,333,000
Share earns
.08
-
9mo rev
183,873,000
139,831,000
Net inc
5,560,000
2,141,000
Share earns
.14
.05


BEST BUY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEST BUY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
95,764,000
43,064,000
Net inc
1,003,000
1,580,000
Share earns
.12
.19
6mo rev
171,067,000
80,112,000
Net inc
1,811,000
2,950,000
Share earns
.22
.39


One Killed as Trains Collide
LEAD: Two Union Pacific freight trains have collided head-on, destroying the lead engines on both trains and killing a conductor, officials said.
Six crew members were injured, some when they jumped before the crash.
The collision occurred around 6:15 A.M.
Sunday, about 10 miles west of Kemmerer, when a westbound train heading from Chicago to Seattle collided with an eastbound train going from Seattle to Chicago.


Ewing Is Inspiring In Knicks' 3d Loss
LEAD: By the end of Rick Pitino's inaugural season, last night will probably be remembered as nothing more than another painful lesson in the continuing re-education of the Knicks.


ENVIRONMENTAL TREATMENT &amp; TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENVIRONMENTAL TREATMENT &amp; TECHNOLOGIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
43,726,000
33,349,000
Net inc
3,137,000
2,665,000
Share earns
.26
.23
9mo rev
103,081,000
71,017,000
Net inc
5,424,000
b1,021,000
Share earns
.45
.09


FEDERAL INDUSTRIES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL INDUSTRIES LTD
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
425,991,000
385,939,000
Net inc
12,914,000
9,838,000
Share earns
.53
.46
9mo rev
1,163,591,000
858,859,000
Net inc
26,484,000
18,593,000
Share earns
1.05
.92


Avery Reorganizes
LEAD: Avery International Inc. said it planned a restructuring in 1988 that would affect about 1,000 workers, cut the revenue base by 9 percent and result in a $25 million write-off and an unspecified loss in the fourth quarter.
Avery, a manufacturer of self-adhesive labels and office products based in Pasadena, Calif., said the overhaul would mean the first earnings decline in 12 years.


Cannon Settles S.E.C. Case
LEAD: The financially troubled Cannon Group Inc. said today that it had settled a yearlong Securities and Exchange Commission inquiry into the company's accounting practices without the need for further financial adjustments.


OVERSIGHT GROUPS ASSAIL PRISON BARGE AS POORLY CONSTRUCTED AND DANGEROUS MAZE
LEAD: Officials overseeing New York City jails say the troop barge the city has leased from a British company to cope with inmate overcrowding is dangerous to both prisoners and correction officers.


Stage: 'Sophie,' Musical Drawn From Tucker
LEAD: ''SOPHIE'' describes itself as ''being loosely based on the life of Sophie Tucker.''


FRESH PUSH ON BASEBALL JOBS
LEAD: Officials of the newly formed Baseball Network met in Dallas for three hours yesterday with representatives of Commissioner Peter Ueberroth to discuss the low number of minority-group members in non-playing jobs in baseball.


UTILITECH reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UTILITECH
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,120,700
84,800
Net loss
79,900
685,200
6mo rev
1,619,000
85,900
Net loss
176,000
1,435,000


IN ALL CANDOR
LEAD: For all the tactical planning and painstaking briefings brought to bear on Presidential debates, spontaneity occasionally rears its head.


KDI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KDI CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
84,563,000
72,480,000
Net inc
3,161,000
c2,075,000
Share earns
.32
.22
9mo sales
236,889,000
210,212,000
Net inc
b16,131,000
c6,417,000
Share earns
1.66
.67


IC-Pepsi Venture
LEAD: IC Industries and Pepsico Inc. said they were forming a venture to bottle Pepsi-Cola products in the Midwest.
IC Industries, a diversified company based in Chicago, will own 80 percent of the venture, with Pepsico, based in Purchase, N.Y., owning 20 percent.
The venture will handle 12 percent of Pepsico's domestic soft drink volume, making it second only to the Pepsi-Cola Bottling group, which is owned by Pepsico and handles 33 percent.


V.A. Reduces Its Loan Rate
LEAD: The Veterans Administration said today that it was lowering its maximum interest rate for federally backed home mortgages by half a percentage point, to 10.5 percent, the first rate reduction in 10 months.


TEXAS INTERNATIONAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS INTERNATIONAL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,248,000
12,223,000
Net loss
6,422,000
c12,150,000
9mo rev
21,417,000
51,243,000
Net loss
b30,909,000
c30,678,000
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $515,000.


Dollar, Stocks Fall In Tokyo
LEAD: The dollar reached yet another record low against the yen today, dropping to 133.30 yen in afternoon trading.


Weinberger's Exit: What It Means
LEAD: It's reassuring these days to walk along Pennsylvania Avenue from the Treasury Department past the White House.
The buildings seem so sturdy and changeless in the Indian-summer sun.


Palestinian Group's Captives Are Not Israelis, Israel Says
LEAD: Israeli officials said today that the eight people reported Sunday to have been taken hostage at sea by the Palestinian guerrilla group led by Abu Nidal were not Israeli citizens.


Shuttle Cargo Weight
LEAD: The allowable landing weight for a space shuttle has been increased from 211,000 to 230,000 pounds, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration announced today.


Jerome H. Schloss; Philanthropic Worker, 103
LEAD: Jerome H. Schloss, former secretary of the New York Foundation, a philanthropic organization that provides funds for worthy organizations, died Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 103 years old.


Alcoholism: Genetic Links Grow Clearer
LEAD: RESEARCHERS studying sons and daughters of alcoholics are detecting specific biochemical and behavioral differences in their responses to alcohol that may be a key to why these children are prone to becoming alcohol abusers themselves.


Mansdorf to Play
LEAD: Despite a protest from the Israeli Foreign Ministry, Amos Mansdorf will compete in the $375,000 South African Tennis Open in Johannesburg next week.


MINE SAFETY APPLIANCES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MINE SAFETY APPLIANCES CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
88,603,000
90,168,000
Net inc
3,030,000
4,076,000
Share earns
.45
.62
9mo sales
279,433,000
290,881,000
Net inc
6,298,000
14,098,000
Share earns
.94
2.12


Drab Can Be Beautiful
LEAD: Scientists have postulated that many male animals evolved to be brightly colored to attract females.
But bright colors can be a distinct disadvantage for an animal trying to elude a predator.


INTERNATIONAL BANKNOTE CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL BANKNOTE CO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,135,000
18,716,000
Net loss
b3,017,000
c803,000
9mo rev
48,066,000
68,800,000
Net loss
b6,970,000
d11,729,000
Share earns
-
.68
b-After charges from stock-debenture exchange offers of $231,000 for the quarter and $419,000 for the 9 months.


Rising Yen Cuts Sales For Toyota
LEAD: The rising value of the yen is continuing to reduce car sales for the Toyota Motor Company in the United States, Toyota's chairman said yesterday.


Paul K. Cook, 62, Ex-U.S. Official And Analyst of Soviet Hierarchy
LEAD: Paul K. Cook, one of the country's leading specialists on the Soviet Union, died Sunday, apparently of a heart attack.
He was 62 years old and lived in Alexandria, Va.


Don't Play a Shell Game With Social Security
LEAD: To the Editor:


Charles Holland, American Tenor And Emigre in Europe, Dies at 77
LEAD: Charles Holland, an American tenor who pursued his career primarily in Europe and was rediscovered by the American avant-garde late in life, died Saturday at his home in Amsterdam.
He was 77 years old.


Snider Recovering
LEAD: Duke Snider, the former Dodger outfielder and member of the Hall of Fame, is recovering from heart bypass surgery at a hospital in the San Diego area.


NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS INC
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,122,948
1,615,558
Net loss
314,198
758,528
Yr sales
5,949,883
6,096,783
Net loss
250,009
893,260
The company stated that 1987 was a turnaround year insofar as operating results were breakeven before the company reserved $250,000 against its partially discontinued waste collection operations.


Don't Play a Shell Game With Social Security; Twice Taxed
LEAD: To the Editor:


IDEAL SCHOOL SUPPLY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IDEAL SCHOOL SUPPLY (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,317,000
8,682,000
Net inc
1,316,000
701,000
Share earns
.30
.23
9mo sales
28,844,000
24,175,000
Net inc
2,856,000
1,799,000
Share earns
.66
.60


Gore's Fears Are Eased On Issue of Marijuana
LEAD: On his way to meet Senator Albert Gore Jr. this morning, DuBose Porter stopped by Ma Hawkins's Coffee Shop to hear what the folks were saying about the Presidential candidate, who has admitted that he smoked marijuana years ago.


Foreign Cars Up in Japan
LEAD: Foreign car sales in Japan rose to 6,627 in October, a 34.8 percent increase from a year earlier and the 46th straight year-on-year increase, the Japan Automobile Importers Association said today.
But October sales fell from a record 10,089 automobiles in September.
West German-made cars, accounting for 70 percent of the October total, rose 27.3 percent from a year earlier, to 4,637.


Italians Approve Restrictions On Atom Power and Judges
LEAD: Italian voters have overwhelmingly approved five referendums to limit the development of nuclear energy and to make judges more liable for courtroom errors.


Stage: Borges Stories In 'Tango Apasionado'
LEAD: IN his story ''The Intruder,''


Dole Makes His Presidential Bid Official
LEAD: Calling himself a candidate of America's heartland, Senator Bob Dole returned to his prairie hometown today to formally announce that he is a candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination.
He put erasing the budget deficit at the heart of his Presidency.


WESTON, ROY F INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTON, ROY F INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
35,400,000
26,500,000
Net inc
1,183,048
782,612
Share earns
.18
.13
Shares outst
6,500,000
5,900,000
9mo rev
96,500,000
69,900,000
Net inc
3,100,000
1,800,000
Share earns
.48
.36
Shares outst
6,400,000
5,000,000


INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
36,952,000
34,724,000
Net inc
b6,205,000
c1,088,000
Share earns
.64
.10
Shares outst
9,674,192
11,068,519
9mo rev
121,408,000
99,975,000
Net inc
9,633,000
c3,331,000
Share earns
.99
.30
Shares outst
9,722,256
11,058,564


Arab Talks: Topic Is Iran
LEAD: The Arab summit talks that opened here Sunday could signal a turning point.
For the first time since the Arab League was founded in 1944, the primary focus of such a meeting is not Palestine and Zionism, but rather Iran and Islamic revolution.


First Boston Suffered Big Losses in October
LEAD: The First Boston Corporation has told its employees that it posted a net loss in October because of huge losses from its speculation in takeover stocks.
It appeared that the losses may have topped $60 million.


Hungary's Reformers Are Not in Warring Camps
LEAD: To the Editor:


Suit Seeks to Alter Voting System in Birmingham
LEAD: Birmingham, Ala., a city in which blacks are in the majority and hold most of the elective posts, is being sued under a 1965 Federal law that extended the voting rights of blacksbecause of its method of electing its City Council.


SABINE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SABINE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,906,000
13,279,000
Net loss
678,000
b28,574,000
9mo rev
48,876,000
50,872,000
Net loss
4,895,000
31,644,000
b-Includes a net writedown of $25,237,000 for oil and gas properties.


HILB, ROGAL &amp; HAMILTON reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HILB, ROGAL &amp; HAMILTON
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,973,000
7,619,000
Net inc
771,000
351,000
Share earns
.23
.13
9mo rev
27,341,000
22,768,000
Net inc
2,577,000
1,291,000
Share earns
.87
.46


GAY CULTURE SEMINAR
LEAD: A symposium on New York City gay and lesbian history and culture will be held next Tuesday at the City University Graduate Center audi-torium (lower level) at 33 West 42d Street.
The symposium is sponsored by the faculty Committee for Lesbian and Gay Studies at the school and will include a lecture on ''Creating Cul-tural Legacies'' and talks on the his-tory of lesbians in Cherry Grove, Fire Island, and of relations between the state and New York City gay bars.


Bomb Blast Kills 32 in Sri Lanka As Tamil Autonomy Bill Is Pressed
LEAD: Abomb exploded in a busy district of the capital this afternoon, killing at least 32 people and wounding more than 75, the police said.


TRANSMATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSMATION INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,864,000
3,561,000
Net inc
51,400
b84,900
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sales
7,705,000
7,300,000
Net inc
113,700
b73,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


GENERAL HOUSEWARES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL HOUSEWARES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
23,491,000
22,034,000
Net inc
562,000
479,000
Share earns
.24
.20
9mo sales
57,319,000
55,464,000
Net inc
802,000
639,000
Share earns
.34
.27


WHITEHALL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WHITEHALL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,215,000
7,239,000
Net inc
1,080,000
494,000
Share earns
.30
.13
9mo sales
29,552,000
28,059,000
Net inc
1,991,000
1,641,000
Share earns
.54
.45


VIACOM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIACOM INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
256,495,000
233,297,000
Net loss
37,509,000
b3,435,000
Share earns
-
.10
9mo rev
744,995,000
672,840,000
Net loss
87,996,000
10,551,000
b-Net income


Birth Control That Few Are Able to Practice
LEAD: To the Editor:


John Logan Dies at 64; A Prize-Winning Poet
LEAD: John Logan, a prize-winning poet, editor and English professor who taught at the State University at Buffalo and other colleges, died of a heart ailment and complications from gall bladder surgery Friday in San Francisco, where he lived.
He was 64 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: The headline on an article Oct. 11 by Joseph S. Nye Jr., ''For a Triple Zero Pact,'' was misleading.
Professor Nye argued that many Europeans are reluctant to rely on conventional deterrence and would therefore resist a ''triple zero'' agreement removing all nuclear weapons from Europe.


SEA CONTAINERS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEA CONTAINERS GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
248,279,000
233,698,000
Net inc
40,419,000
24,890,000
Share earns
3.12
1.83
Shares outst
11,451,367
10,770,926
9mo rev
563,930,000
505,483,000
Net inc
39,094,000
b1,639,000
Share earns
2.20
-


PROVENA FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROVENA FOODS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,698,256
7,057,501
Net inc
250,784
213,219
Share earns
.11
.11
Shares outst
2,199,912
1,888,870
9mo sales
23,573,111
17,907,629
Net inc
687,245
548,000
Share earns
.34
.28
Shares outst
1,993,690
1,918,516


8% Gain for Newspapers
LEAD: Newspaper advertising increased 8 percent in August over August 1986, according to estimates by the Newspaper Advertising Bureau.
The figure was $2.5 billion.
Retail was up 3.2 percent; classified, up 15.5 percent, and national, up 5.4 percent.


PRECISION RESOURCES reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRECISION RESOURCES
(
Qtr to Sept 3
1987
1986
Revenue
2,127,306
2,512,548
Net loss
408,738
b143,503
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


Bozell, Jacobs Is Given A 2d Toothpaste Brand
LEAD: Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt now has a second toothpaste assignment from S. C. Johnson &amp; Son's Rydelle Laboratories.
It is Zact, which is formulated for heavy smokers.
The client is not releasing budget figures.


A Larger Estimate for Robins
LEAD: Nearly $7.2 billion will be needed to compensate women injured by the Dalkon Shield birth control device, according to a statistics expert who testified today on behalf of the women filing claims at the A. H. Robins Company bankruptcy hearing.


For Dubcek, A Brief Brush With Politics
LEAD: Once again this week, Czechs and Slovaks were reminded that a man who retired some years ago from a petty bureaucrat's job is still among them, and memories were reawakened.


HWC DISTRIBUTION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HWC DISTRIBUTION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
23,788,000
20,478,000
Net inc
979,000
738,000
Share earns
.19
.17
Shares outst
5,242,000
4,290,000
6mo sales
43,875,000
39,926,000
Net inc
1,651,000
1,330,000
Share earns
.34
.31
Shares outst
1,651,000
1,330,000


Signoff
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole's formal declaration of candidacy yesterday for the Republican Presidential nomination will have many ramifications, among them his departure from the Washington-based radio program ''Face-Off.''


WAJAX LIMITED reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WAJAX LIMITED
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
75,413,000
70,251,000
Net inc
1,741,000
1,287,000
Share earns
.20
.16
9mo rev
224,107,000
208,143,000
Net inc
4,789,000
4,623,000
Share earns
.56
.53


STOCK INDEX PIT CALM IN PROGRAM TRADING
LEAD: Trading was relatively calm in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index futures pit today, despite fears that the resumption of program trading would increase volatility in the financial markets.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''You could say the terrorists could have well placed that bomb in a cathedral or church, as far as we are concerned.


TACO VILLA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TACO VILLA INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,234,000
21,857,000
Net inc
737,000
b811,000
Share earns
.09
-
9mo sales
60,807,000
65,165,000
Net inc
1,533,000
b923,000
Share earns
.18
-
b


ISRAEL PHILHARMONIC PLAYS WARSAW
LEAD: Zwi Litwak's father moved his family from Poland to Palestine in 1934, the year after Hitler became Chancellor of Germany.
This week, Mr.
Litwak, now a violinist with the Israel Philharmonic, and his 77-year-old mother, Miriam, returned to Poland for the first time.


Nations Letting Dollar Slide
LEAD: The value of the dollar slipped to new lows against several major currencies today amid renewed signs that foreign governments are unwilling to defend it if the Reagan Administration will not.


Amid Greek Threats, U.S. Opens Talks on Bases
LEAD: The United States and Greece opened formal negotiations today on the future of the American bases here amid threats by Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou that base rights would be ended unless major Greek demands are satisfied.


In a Polish Forest, Neglect and Study
LEAD: THE thin yellow stripes on the four towering, vaguely spiral oaks barely pierced the forest's thinning autumn foliage.


Horses Get Substitute Trainer
LEAD: Peter Ferriola's stable, which had won 16 races at Aqueduct this fall before being put out of action when three of its horses failed post-race drug tests last week, will be racing again tomorrow, but with a new trainer at the helm.


Dole Formally Becomes a Candidate
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole and his wife, Elizabeth, waving to supporters yesterday in his hometown of Russell, Kan., after announcing his candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination.
Page A18. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Say They Will Rule On Teen-Ager Chastity Law
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether a law intended to encourage chastity among unmarried teen-agers violates the Constitution by promoting religion.


Corrections
LEAD: A list in Business Day on Saturday showing values of publicly traded funds included a number of incorrect figures.
A corrected list appears today on page D22.


INTERNATIONAL RECTIFIER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL RECTIFIER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
37,773,000
37,878,000
Net loss
b2,901,000
1,401,000
b-After a capital gain of $3.3 million from the sale of certain assets of International Rectifier's Crydom division and the stock of the company's Crydom de Mexico subsidiary to Silicon Power Tube of Long Beach, Calif.


DIAGNON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAGNON CORP
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
851,623
699,390
Net inc
42,798
b271,360
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss and includes a loss of $278,736 from discontinued operations.


Bridge: A Social Invitation Was Start Of Partnership That Lasted
LEAD: For reasons that are unclear to this department, more boys than girls are attracted to bridge, as they are to chess and mathematics.
But the balance can sometimes be redressed in unexpected ways.


Zulu Chief Agrees to Meet With Freed Nationalist
LEAD: The Zulu leader, Chief Gatsha Buthelezi, said today that he would welcome talks with Govan A. Mbeki, the newly freed African National Congress veteran, on the civil strife in Natal Province that has killed more than 170 people this year.


Corrections
LEAD: A dispatch on Friday from Port Elizabeth, South Africa, about the release of Govan Mbeki, an African National Congress leader, misstated the length of Mr.
Mbeki's imprisonment.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
9.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.70
6.79
n.a.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.88
5.41
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.19
6.37
5.51
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.61
8.58
7.20
30-YR.


2 More Top Aides Quit Arizona Chief's Staff
LEAD: Two more top aides left Gov.
Evan Mecham's staff today.
One, facing extortion charges, resigned shortly after his trial date was set, and the other took a leave of absence to head the Mr.
Mecham's fight against a recall campaign.


The Dance: Rachel List Company
LEAD: WHEN Rachel List and Company performed Sunday night, dancers made music and musicians danced in a jolly get-together that sometimes resembled a barn dance.
But instead of occurring in a barn, it took place at the Emanu-El Midtown Y. A former member of Les Grands Ballets Canadiens, Ms.
List is also an expert in Appalachian clogging dances, and she based ''Crazy Quilt'' upon them.


Tunisia Is Moving Delicately on Transition
LEAD: A color photograph of Habib Bourguiba, youngish and smiling broadly, still hangs in the lobby of the Meridien Africa Hotel here, but for how long no one can say.


JIM WALTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JIM WALTER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
709,381,000
662,337,000
Net inc
b53,523,000
50,042,000
Share earns
1.32
1.28
Yr rev
2,429,205,000
2,368,304,000
Net inc
b166,148,000
138,552,000
Share earns
4.09
3.71
Shares outst
40,560,000
37,285,000


DAVOX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAVOX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,350,000
4,562,000
Net loss
226,000
b427,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo sales
17,300,000
9,800,000
Net inc
1,100,000
c393,000
Share earns
.28
-
b-Net income


HEALTH IMAGES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTH IMAGES INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,226,000
1,240,000
Net inc
378,000
c140,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
10,059,000
2,963,000
Net loss
b1,088,000
538,000
b-Includes a $1.8 million non-cash charge relating to the exchange by an officer and director of 554,000 shares of common stock for 443,000 shares of common stock and a 10-year warrant to purchase 250,000 shares of common stock at $4.50 a share.


Japan Seeking Foreign Chips
LEAD: Japan is urging domestic companies to buy more chips abroad to quell complaints that its market is closed, a spokesman for the Ministry of International Trade and Industry said today.


CONCERT SITE CHANGED
LEAD: The site of the first in the Neighbor-hood Concert Series has been changed.
The New York Strings, a jazz ensemble, will appear at 1 P.M. tomorrow at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 14 West 54th Street.
Thirty free concerts are being sponsored by Carnegie Hall and the De-partment of Cultural Affairs of the City of New York.


Senator Chiles Admits Marijuana Use in Past
LEAD: Senator Lawton Chiles, a Florida Democrat, smoked marijuana once in private, his chief spokesman said today after the Senator's expected Republican challenger in the 1988 election, Representative Connie Mack, admitted using the drug.


CONCERT: YOUTH SYMPHONY
LEAD: LOOKING back to the community arts schools and settlement houses at the turn of the century, one has the impression that America took cultural education for the many more seriously then than it does right now.


RAYONIER TIMBERLANDS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAYONIER TIMBERLANDS LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,479,000
15,157,000
Net inc
10,051,000
10,611,000
Share earns
.53
.53
9mo sales
57,553,000
44,751,000
Net inc
40,292,000
30,299,000
Share earns
1.97
1.56


YOUTH IS IMPRISONED FOR SHOOTING SPREE THAT LEFT FOUR DEAD
LEAD: A teen-ager acquitted of killing his father, brother and two other people in a shooting spree last December, but convicted of conspiring to commit murder, was sentenced today to 8Y to 25 years in prison.


Europe's Space Agency Trims Ambitious Plans
LEAD: The European Space Agency trimmed part of its ambitious long-term space exploration program today in a cost-saving measure aimed at overcoming differences among its 13 members.


The Editorial Notebook; AIDS, in Harsh Review
LEAD: The AIDS epidemic spread so far because initially no one took it seriously enough: Government, the media, researchers, blood banks and the gay community each found their own reasons to ignore or deny the threat.
That's the compelling theme of ''And the Band Played On,'' by Randy Shilts.
It's a highly readable account, full of valuable reporting and insight.


STARSTREAM COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STARSTREAM COMMUNICATIONS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
528,000
80,630
Net inc
155,409
b77,541
Share earns
.10
-
9mo rev
1,092,186
295,867
Net inc
258,603
b127,111
Share earns
.18
-
b-Net loss


Commodore's Odd 128
LEAD: THE Commodore 128, introduced a few years ago, is an odd bird.
It is, in effect, three different computers in one box.
In its first mode, it is completely compatible with the enormously popular Commodore 64 (now 64c), and you can plug all of the 64 peripherals into the 128 or run any of the thousands of programs written for the older machine.


WORLDCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WORLDCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
40,000,000
19,000,000
Net inc
5,200,000
b36,800,000
Share earns
.37
-
9mo rev
107,053,000
49,910,000
Net inc
671,000
b28,599,000
b-Net loss


Careers; Fish Farms Providing New Jobs
LEAD: SPACE AGE farmers of the seas.


OPTROTECH LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OPTROTECH LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,462,216
6,911,056
Net inc
839,599
260,798
Share earns
.16
.05
9mo rev
29,403,276
19,349,767
Net inc
2,024,021
464,098
Share earns
.39
.09


Who's in Charge Here?
LEAD: It was a funny fad that started in 1962: picture books called ''Who's In Charge Here,'' mocking political figures like Ronald Reagan with fake speech balloons on real photographs.
In 1987, the title has stopped being funny.
People are asking, on one issue after another, Is President Reagan truly in charge?


2 Plead Not Guilty in Using Funds for Campaign Aides
LEAD: A state senator from Rochester and a former state senator from Brooklyn pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges that they had conspired to steal thousands of dollars of public money to finance election campaigns.


TWO WAYS TO GO DOWNTOWN
LEAD: Giorgio Sant'Angelo and Stephen Sprouse both held fashion shows after dark on Thursday.
Each presented a spring line in his own downtown Broadway showroom.


Less Density Sought in Theater Area
LEAD: A proposal that would reduce allowable density for buildings along Broadway, Seventh Avenue and more than a dozen side streets around the theater district was submitted yesterday to the New York City Planning Commission.


Major Shift at ITT Raising Questions
LEAD: Edmund M. Carpenter was perhaps the single most important person at the ITT Corporation, in the eyes of securities analysts, until last week.
Mr.
Carpenter, ITT's president, is credited with the turnaround in the conglomerate's performance in the past year and was considered the heir-apparent to Rand V.


Bennett Says Youthful Lapses Shouldn't Bar Office Seekers
LEAD: Secretary of Education William J. Bennett said tonight it would be ''crazy'' to bar people from the Supreme Court or other high public office because they had smoked marijuana or committed other indiscretions in their youth.


New Products Fuel Boom in Exhibits at Show
LEAD: THE annual Comdex Fall '87 computer trade show held here last week was the biggest and most interesting in years.
More than 100,000 people, including computer makers, dealers and buyers, wandered through the Las Vegas Convention Center looking for the next major advances in computer hardware and software.


Philadelphia School Bonds
LEAD: The Philadelpia School District is tentatively offering $73.5 million of insured general obligation bonds through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


WAXMAN INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WAXMAN INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
34,782,000
26,680,000
Net inc
1,300,000
762,000
Share earns
.21
.12


Pro Basketball Notebook; At Start, 2 Crucial Injuries
LEAD: The National Basketball Association opened its season last Friday night with 29 players on the injured list, a number that Rod Thorn, the league's vice president of operations, described yesterday as ''a little above normal.''


BENCH CRAFT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BENCH CRAFT INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
39,716,000
31,628,000
Net inc
1,293,000
1,256,000
Share earns
.23
.22
9mo sales
115,893,000
87,642,000
Net inc
4,099,000
3,470,000
Share earns
.72
.61


Obando as Peacemaker: A Stormy Path
LEAD: For most of the eight years Nicaragua's Sandinista leaders have been in power, Miguel Obando y Bravo, the Primate of Nicaragua, has been engaged in a running battle with them.


Statement on Meeting
LEAD: Following is the text of the statement issued today by Karl Otto Pohl, president of West Germany's central bank and chairman of the Group of 10 central bank governors.
The group consists of the United States, Japan, West Germany, Britain, Canada, France, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands and Sweden.


2 Buyouts Try Unusual Twist
LEAD: Two big investment firms asked stockholders of the CNW Corporation and the Seaman Furniture Company yesterday to help finance management buyouts by accepting junk bonds - risky, high-yield securities - as part payment.


Ballet: Canadian Troupe in Glen Tetley's 'Ronde'
LEAD: Glen Tetley has followed up his big hit of last year for the National Ballet of Canada, ''Alice,'' with a new ballet that also draws upon a psychological and literary inspiration.


Corrections
LEAD: The manuscript of an article by Theodore Friend on Oct. 26, ''Aquino's Mixed Success,'' carried the phrase ''some months before those around President Marcos murdered him  [ Benigno S. Aquino Jr. ] .'' Because of an editing error, the words ''those around'' were dropped.


ALEX BROWN &amp; SONS INCORPORATED reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALEX BROWN &amp; SONS INCORPORATED (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
80,078,000
57,207,000
Net inc
5,019,000
3,165,000
Share earns
.31
.22
9mo rev
244,458,000
181,530,000
Net inc
20,206,000
15,526,000
Share earns
1.27
1.07


F.B.I. OPENS INQUIRY IN GINSBURG CASE
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that it had begun an inquiry to determine whether F.B.I. agents mishandled five separate background investigations in recent years that failed to detect past marijuana use by Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg.


DATACOPY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATACOPY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,864,187
1,875,919
Net inc
129,082
c36,099
Share earns
.03
.01
9mo sales
9,517,242
5,248,105
Net loss
303,581
bc110,311
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


DYNAMICS CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYNAMICS CORP OF AMERICA (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
30,641,000
36,948,000
Net inc
b1,705,000
c1,468,000
Share earns
.41
.35
9mo sales
84,053,000
106,836,000
Net inc
b2,909,000
c4,081,000
Share earns
.70
.98


Bipartisan Ad Plea for Budget Cut
LEAD: Leading businessmen and former public officials are putting pressure on budget negotiators in Washington to come up with ''credible'' deficit reductions that would include some limitations on cost-of-living increases for Social Security.


Soviet, Revising Its Criminal Code, Seems Likely to End Internal Exile
LEAD: Internal exile, a form of punishment with a long history in this country, is likely to be abolished in a revision of the criminal code, the Justice Minister said today.


HEALTHWATCH INC reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTHWATCH INC
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,486,000
1,130,000
Net inc
87,992
49,299
Share earns
.05
-
Share earnings are adjusted for a 1-for-10 reverse stock split effective Oct. 22.


TAINTED SITES NEAR PIPELINE
LEAD: Here are the sites along the Texas Eastern Corporation pipeline where PCB's have been found in concentrations above 10 parts per million and where dioxin compounds have been found in concentrations above 0.1 parts per billion.
In general, several substances were sampled at each site, such as soil, groundwater, stream water and disposal pit sediments.


WESTERN WASTE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN WASTE INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,588,000
23,087,000
Net inc
1,377,000
1,105,000
Share earns
.28
.22


Past Marijuana Use Held Insufficient Reason to Rule Out Candidate
LEAD: A majority of Americans say that having tried marijuana is insufficient reason to disqualify someone from serving as either President or as a Supreme Court Justice, according to a New York Times/CBS News Poll.


The Wrong Reasons
LEAD: One after another, the persona is punctured and collapses.
For Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, it was marijuana, although there was nothing in his record to show he had the expertise, experience and wisdom to qualify him for the Supreme Court.


Visa Teller Link
LEAD: Visa International, the international organization of Visa card-issuing banks, said it had exercised its option to link up with Plus, the network of automatic tellers.
The move means that holders of Visa cards from outside the United States will be able to use Plus machines, many of which are in this country.


AMC ENTERTAINMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMC ENTERTAINMENT (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
127,068,000
82,908,000
Net inc
2,192,000
2,373,000
Share earns
.14
.16
6mo rev
220,259,000
145,128,000
Net loss
1,760,000
b321,000
Share earns
-
.02


Swiss and U.S. In Insider Pact
LEAD: American and Swiss officials are scehduled to sign an agreement Tuesday giving the Americans greater access to the records of suspected insider traders who are trying to shield their transactions by taking advantage of Swiss bank secrecy laws.


An Upset at the Book Awards
LEAD: In a stunning literary upset, Larry Heinemann, a 43-year-old Army veteran who said he was still embittered by his experience as an infantryman in Vietnam, won the 1987 National Book Award for fiction with his second novel, ''Paco's Story,'' the story of a wounded Vietnam veteran's efforts to readjust to civilian life.


Corrections
LEAD: The headline of a dispatch from Oakdale, La., yesterday about the Federal Detention Center there misstated the reason for the center's expansion.
The additional space will be used for aliens from countries other than Cuba who have criminal records.


After Decades, Inventor's Work Is Still Felt in the Laboratory
LEAD: When Dr.
Arnold O. Beckman devised a gadget in 1934 to help a colleague measure the sourness of lemon juice, he little suspected that he was founding a family of laboratory instruments that would change the course of science.


Exchange Staff Goes on Strike
LEAD: Clerical employees at the New York Stock Exchange said they would strike today over what their union termed inadequate pension benefits.


BUCKEYE PARTNERS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUCKEYE PARTNERS LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
37,500,000
37,600,000
Net inc
7,900,000
7,400,000
Share earns
.65
.61
9mo sales
113,500,000
107,900,000
Net inc
21,700,000
18,100,000
Share earns
1.79
1.49


Our Towns; Housing Decree: Moderate Homes For Mere $149,000
LEAD: When the full story of the Reagan Administration's housing policies is written, Glastonbury will be a prime example of what happens if no one is willing to tell a wealthy suburb it must build housing for the poor.


INTERNATIONAL TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL TECHNOLOGY (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
70,776,000
62,502,000
Net inc
1,428,000
5,791,000
Share earns
.05
.20
6mo sales
132,380,000
124,082,000
Net inc
2,264,000
11,164,000
Share earns
.08
.38


Selenium Threatens Waterfowl Area
LEAD: Selenium levels higher than those that caused birth defects earlier this year in birds at the Kesterson National Wildlife Refuge have been found in the Grassland Water District, California's largest remaining waterfowl wintering area.


GORMAN-RUPP COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GORMAN-RUPP COMPANY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
23,170,000
16,031,000
Net inc
2,372,000
1,029,000
Share earns
.61
.26
9mo sales
56,473,000
49,483,000
Net inc
4,850,000
3,696,000
Share earns
1.25
.94


SAMSON ENERGY LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAMSON ENERGY LP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,130,000
1,851,000
Net inc
88,000
b280,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
6,523,602
8,641,702
Net inc
246,979
b13,935,597
Share earns
.12
-
b-Net loss


FLORENCE SUSSMAN MARRIES HARRY GEORGE FLETCHER 3d
LEAD: Florence Sussman, the assistant re-gional administrator in the Bronx of H.I.P., the health-insurance concern, was married in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., yesterday to Harry George Fletcher 3d, the director of the Fordham Uni-versity Press.
Judge Albert M. Rosenblatt, the chief administrative judge of the State of New


What the Resurgence of Marriage Means
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSTRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSTRON CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,463,000
19,558,000
Net inc
15,000
937,000
Share earns
-
.15
9mo sales
65,111,000
62,681,000
Net inc
1,488,000
2,966,000
Share earns
.24
.48


LYDALL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LYDALL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
32,955,000
26,924,000
Net inc
741,000
314,000
Share earns
.26
.10
9mo sales
99,291,000
82,515,000
Net inc
2,239,000
1,519,000
Share earns
.79
.52


NATIONAL WESTERN LIFE INSURNCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL WESTERN LIFE INSURNCE CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
909,502
2,583,571
Per share
.26
.74
9mo net inc
6,321,937
9,976,639
Per share
1.82
2.87


Reagan Says New Steps May Lead To Direct Talks With Nicaragua
LEAD: President Reagan said today that the United States could soon hold direct talks with the Nicaraguan Government if the Sandinistas begin ''serious negotiations'' with American-backed rebels.


LAWSON PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAWSON PRODUCTS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
38,708,836
35,011,751
Net inc
4,821,333
3,106,669
Share earns
.49
.32
9mo sales
108,589,699
100,637,697
Net inc
11,751,926
8,433,888
Share earns
1.19
.86


EASTERN UTILITIES ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTERN UTILITIES ASSOCIATES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
87,718,000
80,549,000
Net inc
11,100,000
8,571,000
Share earns
.86
.74
9mo rev
269,832,000
257,793,000
Net inc
32,561,000
24,767,000
Share earns
2.61
2.15


UNITED MERCHANTS &amp; MANUACTURERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED MERCHANTS &amp; MANUACTURERS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
196,557,000
201,214,000
Net loss
4,059,000
b7,355,000
Share earns
-
.77
b-Net income and includes a tax credit of $3,031,000.


FLORIDA STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA STEEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
113,770,164
87,070,937
Net inc
4,869,773
b5,779,622
Share earns
.80
.96
Yr sales
380,996,323
319,324,037
Net inc
16,928,584
b15,393,261
Share earns
2.80
2.56


The U.N. Today: Nov. 10, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


EASCO HAND TOOLS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASCO HAND TOOLS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
47,948,000
51,176,000
Net inc
3,088,000
2,187,000
Share earns
.22
.19
Shares outst
14,000,000
11,665,000
9mo sales
141,264,000
30,933,000
Net inc
6,819,000
4,151,000
Share earns
.53
.36
Shares outst
12,828,000
11,665,000


SCHMIDT AND RIPKIN STAY PUT
LEAD: Mike Schmidt and Cal Ripken Jr. reached agreement on new contracts late last night, depriving the free-agent market of two of baseball's most glamorous players.
Schmidt agreed to a deal with Philadelphia that guarantees him $2.5 million if he plays only one year.
Ripken accepted a one-year contract for $1.7 million from


New York Collections: Starring Sexy Dressing
LEAD: When it comes to inventiveness, New York designers stacked up quite well against their European counterparts this season.
In the spring and summer fashion openings that began in Milan, Italy, at the beginning of October and ended here Friday, they all embraced short skirts with the same sort of gleeful abandon.


Federal Agents Arrest Fugitive In Connecticut
LEAD: Alphonse (Ollie Boy) Persico, a former head of the Colombo organized crime family who has been a fugitive since 1980, was arrested yesterday by Federal officers in West Hartford, Conn., the authorities announced.


3 Resignations At Del Webb
LEAD: The Del E. Webb Corporation said today that three of its nine remaining directors resigned from its board only a week after the company's chairman and chief executive, Robert K. Swanson, stepped down for health reasons.
The company said L. Roy


Manila's Push for Common Policy On U.S. Bases Surprises Its Allies
LEAD: An unexpected bid by Manila to forge a common Southeast Asian policy in support of American military bases in the Philippines has brought consternation to neighboring capitals, according to regional officials and private analysts meeting here to discuss Pacific security.


Rates Steady in Quiet Trading
LEAD: Interest rates were little changed in very quiet trading yesterday as traders and investors waited for a budget agreement in Washington and for more data showing the effects of the stock market's decline on the economy.


Unchecked by Meeting
LEAD: The dollar continued to slide yesterday, unswayed by a meeting of central bankers that ended without any initiatives to calm the financial markets.


Variety Moves Off Broadway
LEAD: ''VARIETY ANKLES GREAT WHITE WAY.''


McFarlane, Testifying at Deaver Trial, Tells of Unannounced Visit
LEAD: Robert C. McFarlane, President Reagan's former national security adviser, testified today that Michael K. Deaver, after leaving his White House job to become a lobbyist, made an unannounced visit to Mr.
McFarlane's White House office even after being told that such a visit would be improper.


South Dakota City Is Divided Over Prison on Campus Site
LEAD: The Federal Government would like to turn the campus of defunct Yankton College into a minimum-security prison, but some residents think the middle of a residential neighborhood is the wrong place.


Vallone Denies Urging Policy to Jail Homeless
LEAD: The City Council majority leader, Peter F. Vallone, who said Sunday that homeless people refusing to go to shelters should be arrested and ''accommodated in a cell overnight'' for their own protection, yesterday denied that he meant to suggest jailing them.


US INTEC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*US INTEC INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,851,000
15,634,000
Net inc
438,000
1,213,000
Share earns
.15
.40
9mo sales
40,899,000
40,187,000
Net inc
1,766,000
2,276,000
Share earns
.58
.75


Tax Watch; 'Supply Side' Reappraisal
LEAD: THE stock market's recent nose dive has prompted some longtime supporters of President Reagan's economic policies to reappraise the ''supply side'' doctrine that Administration officials contend has been largely responsible for the economic boom of the last few years.


A Pre-Summit Push on Emigration
LEAD: Rarely has there been as much harmony between an administration and an interest group as there is now between the Reagan Administration and the organizations campaigning on behalf of Soviet Jewry.


REFAC TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPENT CORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REFAC TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPENT CORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,427,000
2,723,000
Net inc
510,000
32,000
Share earns
.10
.01
9mo rev
10,965,000
7,538,000
Net inc
1,041,000
297,000
Share earns
.20
.06


Laurence, Charles Adds 2 McDonald's Groups
LEAD: Laurence, Charles, Free &amp; Lawson has added two more McDonald's owner-operator groups to its client list and about $2 million in billings along with them.


Behind the Ginsburg Smoke
LEAD: History would be shortchanged if Judge Douglas Ginsburg were remembered only as the man who withdrew from consideration for the Supreme Court because he had smoked marijuana.
As he withdrew, the judge correctly observed that debate over his qualifications had become obscured by the public clamor over pot smoking.


Yugoslav Economic Ills
LEAD: Yugoslavia today reported slackening industrial output, a declining currency and rising inflation as its economic crisis continues to escalate.
The state press agency, Tanyug, said industrial output would fall short of a 3.6 percent target for the year, having risen 2 percent in the January to September period.


Longer Prison Terms Are Backed in Survey
LEAD: A new Government survey shows strong support for longer prison terms than criminals have been receiving.


Spread Above Bill Rates Widened by Sallie Mae
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association is offering $250 million of nine-month floating-rate notes with an interest rate set at 75-hundredths of a percentage point above the average bond equivalent yield set at each week's auction of new three-month Treasury bills.


PRESIDENTIAL VISIT
LEAD: President Reagan talking with a group of students yesterday at the United Way headquarters in Alexandria, Va.
He was there to receive the community service group's annual report (AP)


Glass-Steagall Shift Gaining Support
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board and top Treasury officials appear to be lining up behind Senator William Proxmire's effort to repeal provisions of the Glass-Steagall Act that prohibit banks from underwriting securities.


KENT ELECTRONICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENT ELECTRONICS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Sales
6,328,000
4,117,000
Net inc
348,000
135,000
Share earns
.14
.07
Shares outst
2,558,400
1,884,200
6mo sales
12,009,000
8,719,000
Net inc
640,000
313,000
Share earns
.29
.20
Shares outst
2,226,600
1,589,600


Charles M. Heistand; Boy Scout Executive, 90
LEAD: Charles M. Heistand, a retired national executive of the Boy Scouts of America, died Friday at the Willow Valley Health Center in Lancaster, Pa.
He was 90 years old and lived in Lancaster, where he was born.


THE GRAY FOX
LEAD: ONCE upon a time there was a college football coach who believed, unlike many before him and after him and during him, that football should not be all war and brutality and win-at-any-cost.


Unisys To Acquire Timeplex In Swap
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Timeplex Inc., a leading supplier of communications networks, in a stock swap valued at more than $300 million.


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-17


ENTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENTRONICS CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
477,529
4,528,970
Net inc
16,832
1,095,655
The company went public Aug. 12.
The company said results reflects signficantly smaller shipments of its machines to two customers, Southland Corp.


Despite Progress, Giants Aren't in Clear
LEAD: With a facial expression as tightly controlled as a game plan designed for Jeff Rutledge, Coach Bill Parcells conceded today that the Giants were doing some things right, he but added that they were also having ''problems in some areas.''


FOOTE CONE &amp; BELDING COMUNICATIONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOOTE CONE &amp; BELDING COMUNICATIONS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
83,090,000
81,429,000
Net inc
3,751,000
2,350,000
Share earns
.89
.56
9mo rev
239,613,000
239,542,000
Net inc
11,474,000
9,644,000
Share earns
2.74
2.31


MESABA AVIATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MESABA AVIATION INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,411,000
5,349,000
Net inc
501,000
b443,000
Share earns
.16
-
6mo rev
14,580,000
9,855,000
Net inc
1,045,000
b640,000
Share earns
.34
-
b-Net loss


SYNTECH INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYNTECH INTERNATIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,250,000
5,581,000
Net loss
1,587,000
b858,000
Share earns
-
.08
9mo rev
18,941,000
-
Net loss
2,601,000
-
b-Net income  No comparable 9-month figures are available because the company shortened its fiscal year to 9 months in 1987.


TIMEPLEX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIMEPLEX INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
42,240,000
33,342,000
Net inc
4,927,000
b7,602,000
Share earns
.49
.88
Shares outst
10,087,316
8,603,212
b-Includes a reduction in deferred taxes of $4.8 million.


DIAMOND CRYSTAL SALT co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAMOND CRYSTAL SALT co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
32,267,000
29,178,000
Net inc
1,767,000
1,007,000
Share earns
.69
.39
6mo sales
62,197,000
55,189,000
Net inc
1,348,000
391,00
Share earns
.53
.12


Corrections
LEAD: A Washington dispatch on Friday and a picture caption on Saturday about the Supreme Court nomination of Douglas S. Ginsburg misstated arecollection of Prof.
Hal S. Scott of Harvard.
Professor Scott said that he found out about Mr.
Ginsburg's smoking of marijuana at a party in Cambridge, Mass., in 1978 but did not see it, and that he later confronted Mr.


INTERSTATE POWER CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERSTATE POWER CO (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
270,872,000
295,301,000
Net inc
b11,556,000
24,196,000
Share earns
.88
2.15
b-After an extraordinary charge of $6,817,000.
The latest period includes a charge to bad debts from bankruptcy of a major industrial customer of $3.6 million.


Mcorp Fights a Tide of Losses
LEAD: One by one, the proud leaders of the big bank holding companies in Texas traded their independence this year for rich partners who contributed hundreds of millions of dollars to replace capital lost by the banks in the Southwest's unforgiving economic climate.


CENTRAL HOLDING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL HOLDING (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
95,000
953,000
Share earns
.03
.36


Don't Play a Shell Game With Social Security; Not an Entitlement
LEAD: To the Editor:


WELLS FARGO MORTGAGE &amp; EQITY TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WELLS FARGO MORTGAGE &amp; EQITY TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b543,000
b2,728,000
Share earns
.08
.41
b-Includes a loss of $633,000 for the latest first quarter and a gain of $495,000 for the year-ago period both on the sale of property.


BUCKEYE FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUCKEYE FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
2,908,000
b606,000
Share earns
-
.23
9mo net loss
6,980,000
b2,010,000
Share earns
-
.75
b-Net income and includes extraordinary gains of $230,000 and $705,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


A Debate on Broadway Over District's Future
LEAD: A dozen panelists at the Eugene O'Neill Theater addressed problems confronting the Broadway district yesterday, some of their points literally underscored by demolition blasts around the corner.


IDLED FARMLAND MAY RISE IN 1988
LEAD: The Agriculture Department projects that farmers next year may come close to the record for the amount of land idled under Government programs.


Advertising; New Breed Of Small Agencies
LEAD: EVERY once in a long, long while, out of a client-agency relationship evolves an agency compensation plan directly related to the client's sales.
But such systems of payment have never gained wide acceptance.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Police Spoke to Child Victim  Last month, Elizabeth Steinberg was questioned by state police officers who had received a report of a sobbing little girl.
Page B1.
National Book Awards  Larry Heinemann's novel ''Paco's Story'' and Richard Rhodes's nonfiction work ''The Making of the Atomic Bomb'' won the 1987 prizes.


Dr. Frederic M. Wheelock; Professor, 85
LEAD: Dr.
Frederic M. Wheelock, a retired classics professor who had taught at Brooklyn College and City College, died of a heart attack on Oct. 29 at Sharon (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Kent, Conn.


A NEW KHAN IS FAVORED IN SQUASH
LEAD: Jansher Khan, the 18-year-old who is the latest of his fabled clan to claim the world squash-racquets championship, will make his New York City playing debut this afternoon in the $50,000 Rolex United States Open squash championship.


After Exodus, Hope Comes to a South Bronx Block
LEAD: The block of Vyse Avenue between Home Street and West Farms Road is emblematic of all that went wrong in the South Bronx -and of the forces that are slowly returning some hope, and people, to its blighted neighborhoods.


ADVANCED TELECOMMUNICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANCED TELECOMMUNICAIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,592,000
13,823,000
Net inc
2,411,000
1,006,000
Share earns
.29
.18
Shares outst
8,234,000
5,620,000
6mo rev
44,151,000
24,924,000
Net inc
4,670,000
1,804,000
Share earns
.57
.32
Shares outst
8,206,000
5,662,000


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: GRAMERCY PARK.
An American Bloomsbury.
By Carole Klein. 330 pages.
Illustrated.
Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.


KERR GLASS MANUFACTURING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KERR GLASS MANUFACTURING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
69,094,000
68,713,000
Net inc
1,313,000
1,613,000
Share earns
.30
.24
9mo sales
197,239,000
200,813,000
Net inc
3,676,000
4,705,000
Share earns
.84
.68


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


ARISTECH CHEMICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARISTECH CHEMICAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
239,700,000
187,100,000
Net inc
18,700,000
14,400,000
Share earns
.72
.56
9mo sales
676,900,000
574,800,000
Net inc
48,300,000
32,500,000
Share earns
1.87
1.26


Beneath a Street, Art Soothes
LEAD: Times Square is many things to too many people, but one thing it is to everybody is noise.
The noise comes from every direction, and it is of every kind -squealing, honking, rumbling traffic, above all, but also the murmur and babble of thousands of people, the rush of wind, the blaring of street musicians, the roar of the subway from beneath the sidewalk.


INCSTAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INCSTAR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,464,800
1,970,800
Net inc
b120,900
209,400
Share earns
.04
.07
6mo sales
5,875,500
4,086,500
Net inc
b244,000
504,900
Share earns
.08
.16
b-After extraordinary losses of $30,100 for the quarter and $8,500 for the 6 months.


TV Reviews; 'NAPOLEON AND JOSEPHINE,' A MINI-SERIES
LEAD: AS the producer of the opening and closing ceremonies for the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, David L. Wolper became the country's uncontested King of Kitsch.
Who will ever forget those dozens of eager pianists pounding out ''Rhapsody in Blue''?
Now, Mr.
Wolper secures his position even further with ''Napoleon and Josephine: A Love Story,'' a six-hour mini-series getting under way tonight at 9 on ABC and continuing tomorrow and Thursday evenings.


Continental Cuts
LEAD: The chairman of the Continental Illinois Corporation, Thomas Theobald, told securities analysts that the holding company's exit from the mass-market retail banking business would lighten its payroll by 1,100 employees, banking sources said.
Continental's decision to leave the retail banking business was announced Oct.


Democrats Prepare a Counteroffer To Republican Plan to Cut Deficit
LEAD: Democratic budget negotiators from the House and Senate decided this evening to offer an alternative deficit reduction proposal Tuesday in the hope of nudging the talks, now in their third week, toward a compromise, several officials said.


TRIO-TECH INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRIO-TECH INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,559,000
4,342,000
Net loss
261,000
b24,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


SECURITY TAG SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SECURITY TAG SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,238,734
1,685,818
Net inc
203,223
113,049
Share earns
.02
.01
6mo rev
4,433,692
3,232,226
Net inc
462,602
137,371
Share earns
.04
.01


BANCTEC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANCTEC INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Revenue
23,763,000
19,804,000
Net inc
b1,508,000
704,000
Share earns
.26
.13
6mo rev
45,533,000
40,321,000
Net inc
b2,604,000
1,315,000
Share earns
.49
.23


Two Accept Challenge Of Ailing Crazy Eddie
LEAD: Unlike other turnaround specialists, who tend to stick to healing ailing companies in one industry, Victor H. Palmieri takes a more catholic approach to the recovery game.


Judge Dismisses 3 Suits On Comex's Silver Role
LEAD: A Federal judge in Manhattan has dismissed three lawsuits seeking some $500 million in damages from the Commodity Exchange Inc. for its role in the Hunt silver crisis.


CENTRAL BANKERS CALL FOR REDUCING TRADE IMBALANCES
LEAD: The central bankers of the major industrial nations today called on their governments to adopt budgetary policies aimed at reducing trade imbalances and stabilizing exchange rates.


ARMOR ALL PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMOR ALL PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,926,000
19,117,000
Net inc
2,867,000
2,273,000
Share earns
.14
.13
6mo rev
47,304,000
44,460,000
Net inc
8,139,000
6,709,000
Share earns
.39
.32


Variety Lexicon
LEAD:  Some expressions that Variety invented or popularized over the years:


IOMEGA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IOMEGA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
22,167,000
31,221,000
Net loss
2,207,000
1,258,000
9mo sales
60,259,000
95,229,000
Net loss
39,109,000
b5,946,000
Share earns
-
.39
b-Net income and after a tax credit of $1,297,000.


Steel Output Drops
LEAD: Steel production fell five-tenths of 1 percent, to 1.866 million tons, in the week ended last Saturday, from 1.875 million tons in the previous week, the American Iron and Steel Institute said yesterday.
Output amounted to 86.4 percent of capacity during the week, compared with 86.8 percent in the previous week.


CUTCO INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CUTCO INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,616,000
4,045,000
Net inc
249,000
214,000
Share earns
.21
.13
Shares outst
1,183,128
1,687,843


DOSKOCIL COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOSKOCIL COMPANIES (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Revenue
55,678,000
58,846,000
Net inc
b506,000
c1,143,000
Share earns
.09
.19
Shares outst
5,636,000
6,022,000
9mo rev
160,901,000
161,269,000
Net inc
b3,186,000
c5,675,000
Share earns
.55
.96
Shares outst
5,794,000
6,016,000


Conrail to Buy Locomotives
LEAD: Conrail will buy 30 new high-horsepower locomotives from the General Electric Company for more than $36 million, the freight railroad said.
The 4,000-horsepower, four-axle B40-8 locomotives will be built at General Electric's plant here and will be delivered in the second quarter of 1988, Conrail said.


OPEC Seeks Output Audits
LEAD: OPEC may set up an independent auditing system to assure that members comply with new oil production quotas, OPEC officials said today.


WEINGARTEN REALTY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEINGARTEN REALTY (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,333,000
10,841,000
Net inc
4,593,000
4,550,000
Share earns
.33
.33
9mo rev
37,313,000
33,673,000
Net inc
13,542,000
13,218,000
Share earns
.98
.96


BUDGET RENT A CAR reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUDGET RENT A CAR (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
115,400,000
91,200,000
Net inc
5,600,000
4,000,000
Share earns
.51
.36
9mo rev
308,200,000
249,500,000
Net inc
10,700,000
5,800,000
Share earns
1.13
.61


Hero of the Metropolis
LEAD: To the Editor:


Air Force Missile Destroyed
LEAD: An unarmed Minuteman 2 missile was destroyed because of technical problems seconds after liftoff tonight, the Air Force said.
Base firefighters battled a blaze caused by the explosion, but no injuries were reported.
Officials said they did not know what caused the problems.


Cuomo Says Sympathy Can Aid Minority Youth
LEAD: Governor Cuomo called today for compassion coupled with accountability to help black and Hispanic children.


Robert C. Allen; Disney Executive, 55
LEAD: Robert C. Allen, vice president of Walt Disney World, died Sunday, apparently after a heart attack.
He was 55 years old.


BRAND COS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRAND COS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
32,643,000
27,650,000
Net loss
1,258,000
b4,121,000
Share earns
-
1.00
9mo rev
77,578,000
86,625,000
Net loss
1,670,000
b6,265,000
Share earns
-
1.52


ARITECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARITECH CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,869,000
26,949,000
Net inc
1,031,000
972,000
Share earns
.34
.33
9mo sales
86,149,000
77,664,000
Net inc
2,802,000
2,267,000
Share earns
.93
.76


CHI-CHI'S IS SWITCHING TO D.M.B.&amp;B., ST. LOUIS
LEAD: Chi-Chi's Mexican restaurants, based in Louisville, Ky., has left Young &amp; Rubicam, Chicago, and is giving its advertising account to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis.
The billings have been estimated at $8 million.


NOBLE INSURANCE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOBLE INSURANCE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,147,059
c1,814,339
Per share
.23
.36
9mo net inc
b5,537,754
c4,660,711
Per share
1.11
1.09
Shares outst
5,006,875
4,194,208
b-Includes capital gains of $94,738 and $900,730 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


GANDER MOUNTAIN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GANDER MOUNTAIN (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,708,000
13,241,000
Net inc
687,000
514,000
Share earns
.25
.19


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1987
LEAD:  International


INTERNATIONAL SHIPHOLDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL SHIPHOLDING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
37,255,000
23,445,000
Net inc
2,033,000
497,000
Share earns
.62
.15
9mo rev
97,824,000
85,243,000
Net inc
4,004,000
1,844,000
Share earns
1.23
.56


Troopers Took Photos of Child In Abuse Case
LEAD: Ten days before she was found near death in a coma, 6-year-old Elizabeth Steinberg was questioned and photographed by the state police on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway after a toll taker saw her with a bruised forehead, sobbing and alone in a car with her father.


FIBRONICS INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIBRONICS INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
49,100,441
8,560,630
Net loss
354,163
b97,428
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
26,527,559
21,185,011
Net loss
849,813
1,171,776
b-Net income


Peruvian Leader Finds His Charm Is Slipping
LEAD: Having spellbound this country with his charismatic populism during most of his first two years in office, Peru's young President, Alan Garcia, is now seeing his popularity tumble amid growing disenchantment with his Government.


Massive Clusters of Galaxies Defy Concepts of the Universe
LEAD: AS Hamlet would say to an astrophysicist these days, without drawing an argument, there are more things in the heavens ''than are dreamt of in your philosophy.''


KYSOR INDUSTRIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KYSOR INDUSTRIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
64,243,000
42,759,000
Net inc
4,204,000
1,048,000
Share earns
.61
.16
9mo rev
170,044,000
120,249,000
Net inc
10,167,000
5,021,000
Share earns
1.47
.76


BEMIS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEMIS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
226,000,000
215,860,000
Net inc
8,237,000
6,913,000
Share earns
.61
.50
9mo sales
688,337,000
635,818,000
Net inc
21,771,000
17,369,000
Share earns
1.60
1.25


Holiday Tomorrow
LEAD: Tomorrow is Veterans Day, and closings vary.
Following are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Parade: Begins at 9 A.M. at 39th Street and Fifth Avenue, heads south to 24th Street and ends about noon.
Parking: Alternate-side parking suspended.
Sanitation: No collection or street cleaning.


UNIGENE LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIGENE LABORATORIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
806,000
161,000
Net inc
241,000
b565,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
1,403,000
482,000
Net loss
374,000
1,395,000
b-Net loss


NATIONAL INSURANCE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL INSURANCE GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,629,000
1,952,000
Net inc
803,000
330,000
Share earns
.21
.14
9mo rev
9,527,000
5,239,000
Net inc
1,944,000
965,000
Share earns
.57
.39


Savings Units' Rate Risk Seen
LEAD: Savings and loan associations, despite a post-stock plunge reprieve from rising interest rates, face significant risk if rates begin climbing again, a Federal regulator said today.


County Bills an Estate For Aid in Depression
LEAD: Rock County has placed a lien against a woman's estate because it says she owed $100.21 for public assistance received in the Depression.


ALTOS COMPUTER SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALTOS COMPUTER SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Sales
40,600,000
32,600,000
Net inc
2,200,000
1,300,000
Share earns
.17
.10


PANTERA'S CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PANTERA'S CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Revenue
29,116,598
5,487,694
Net loss
717,970
b207,398
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income  Latest quarter includes results for Pizza Inn Inc. acquired in July.


Rare White Rhino Dies
LEAD: A rare white rhinoceros intended for a breeding program has died after a 38-hour trip from the San Diego Zoo and nearly two more days in a tight enclosure, officials of Wildlife Safari say.


Panel Studies Third World Health Woes
LEAD: An international commission of experts will spend the next two years developing programs to fight health problems in developing countries, the Harvard School of Public Health has announced.


INFOTRON SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INFOTRON SYSTEMS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,949,000
20,936,000
Net inc
656,000
518,000
Share earns
.13
.10
9mo rev
59,018,000
61,688,000
Net loss
2,261,000
b1,756,000
Share earns
-
.34


Mesa Gets 9.9% Stake In Singer
LEAD: T. Boone Pickens, through his Mesa Limited Partnership, announced today that he had increased his stake in the Singer Company to 2.1 million shares, giving him a 9.9 percent interest in the aerospace and electronics manufacturer.


Pristina Journal; Blood Will Have Blood; It's the Code of the Clans
LEAD: Despite 40 years of strict Yugoslav laws against blood feuds, including capital punishment, a feud in which one murder must be answered by another is under way in Kosovo Province.


Zenaida Drabkin Siskind; Lawyer, 86
LEAD: Zenaida Drabkin Siskind, a former president of the Bronx Bar Association and member of the Mayor's Judiciary Committee under two administrations, died of pneumonia, following a series of strokes, Sunday at Goldwater Hospital.
She was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Worlds Seeks New Capital
LEAD: Battered by declining sales of key products, Worlds of Wonder Inc. said today that it would explore various refinancing alternatives, including a merger.


Islanders Facing A Difficult Encore
LEAD: Kelly Hrudey remembers it as the strangest of things, which in a sense is appropriate considering it closely followed one of the longest, most amazing games.


ORTEGA PROPOSES TALK WITH REAGAN AND THE CONTRAS
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua said today that if President Reagan agreed to receive him he would consent to the presence of rebel leaders at the meeting.


Woman Ordered Held In Special Mental Unit
LEAD: While a state judge pondered the future of Joyce Brown, the first person hospitalized under Mayor Koch's new program, another judge yesterday denied a second homeless woman's request to be released from a psychiatric ward at Bellevue Hospital Center.


CENTURY PAPERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTURY PAPERS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
34,739,000
31,979,000
Net inc
575,000
238,000
Share earns
.49
.20
6mo sales
66,821,000
62,291,000
Net inc
998,000
388,000
Share earns
.85
.33
Share earnings are adjusted to reflect a 5 percent stock dividend paid in September.


MCDERMOTT INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCDERMOTT INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
789,610,000
822,726,000
Net loss
b307,770,000
c32,257,000
Shares outst
37,094,260
36,974,722
6mo rev
1,677,499,000
1,579,780,000
Net loss
325,605,000
cd189,078,000
Share earns
-
5.11
Shares outst
37,078,712
36,974,981


GENESCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENESCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
103,988,000
130,864,000
Net inc
b6,507,000
c11,092,000
Share earns
.39
.69
9mo sales
292,889,000
382,161,000
Net inc
b4,005,000
c5,143,000
Share earns
.16
.22


CF&amp;I STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CF&amp;I STEEL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
60,908,000
42,064,000
Net loss
4,696,000
b11,660,000
9mo sales
176,130,000
147,498,000
Net loss
11,158,000
b18,819,000
b-After tax credits of $63,000 and $2,842,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Olympics for Coffey?
LEAD: As Paul Coffey's holdout and suspension from the Edmonton Oilers nears the end of a second month, the National Hockey League all-star defenseman is considering an attempt to join the Canadian Olympic hockey team. ''We felt if we can't work things out with the Oilers and they won't trade him, why not play for Canada?


Restore the Wolves to Yellowstone Park
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1987
LEAD:  Markets


Reagan Wants Dollar to Halt Fall, But U.S. Doesn't Take Any Action
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he did not ''want a further decline'' of the dollar, but beyond the President's remarks the Administration did nothing in the markets to stabilize it.


Brooklyn College Joins Conference
LEAD: Brooklyn College will be among five charter members of a Division III league to be known as the Atlantic Collegiate Football Conference that will begin play in 1988.


Baptist Fundamentalists in the South Suffer 2 Defeats in Battles for Church
LEAD: Fundamentalists here and in North Carolina suffered defeats today at the hands of moderate Southern Baptists in a struggle for power over the nation's largest Protestant denomination.


Economic Scene; Europe Wants Leadership
LEAD: AFTER the Wall Street plunge, which is still reverberating in markets around the world, Europeans are again looking to the United States for leadership to prevent the financial crisis from becoming a worldwide slump.
But they are fearful that sufficiently strong leadership will not be forthcoming either in Washington or Bonn or Tokyo or in the West collectively.


PEGASUS GOLD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEGASUS GOLD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
34,884,000
12,471,000
Net inc
7,029,000
1,671,000
Share earns
.30
.12
Shares outst
23,184,980
14,226,383
9mo sales
70,394,000
22,914,000
Net inc
11,060,000
1,989,000
Share earns
.54
.15
Shares outst
20,355,576
13,193,368


PORTS OF CALL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PORTS OF CALL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,500,000
13,100,000
Net inc
b1,300,000
300,000
Share earns
.51
.12
9mo rev
43,700,000
32,400,000
Net inc
1,100,000
650,000
Share earns
.44
.26


INDIANA FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDIANA FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
926,000
406,000
Per share
.34
-
9mo net inc
2,349,000
2,158,000
Per share
.86
-
The year-ago per share earnings are not available because the company went public in February.


MEDIA PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDIA PRODUCTS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,235,375
315,119
Net inc
227,009
b44,778
Share earns
.09
-
9mo sales
2,503,906
999,826
Net inc
234,417
b150,277
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


Proposed Prison Barge Undergoes an Inspection
LEAD: The Bibby Venture docked at Pier 36 on the East River as members of City Council Public Safety Committee took an inspection tour.
Officials overseeing the city's jails have criticized the barge, which can hold 381 prisoners, as ''a labyrinth of spaces that is largely unsupervisable by either sight or sound.


Kasparov Wins After Karpov Error
LEAD: Gary Kasparov capitalized on a blunder by Anatoly Karpov to win the 11th game yesterday and take the lead for the first time in their world championship chess match in Seville, Spain.
The 24-year-old champion now has six points to his 36-year-old challenger's five.


Arbitrage Role Appears Small
LEAD: Few shares of stock were sold on Oct. 19 by firms using computers to shift investments between stocks and stock index futures, a regulatory agency said today.


EMULEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMULEX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
28,775,000
25,015,000
Net inc
1,612,000
1,571,000
Share earns
.13
.12


KAY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
149,300,000
201,800,000
Net inc
470,000
b519,000
Share earns
.08
.10
9mo rev
421,900,000
576,200,000
Net inc
2,454,000
b3,652,000
Share earns
.42
.74


Advertising; S.&amp;S. Gets Toyota's Lexus Car
LEAD: TO nobody's surprise, Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A., didn't stray far from home to find an agency for Lexus, the luxury car it proposes to introduce in 1989.
It chose Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton, with which it has been working for 12 years as the agency for the Toyota models.


Devils Continue Rangers' Plunge
LEAD: Lucien Deblois called it a vicious circle, and a Ranger newcomer, Michel Petit, discerned an atmosphere of panic.
John Vanbiesbrouck termed it a constant struggle, and from Alain Chevrier's vantage point, the depths of the Ranger problem over their winless streak, which last night ballooned to eight games, made for a desperate team.


QUOTATIONS OF THE DAY
LEAD: ''When Mr.
Ortega agreed to have indirect talks, it was an acknowledgment of the importance of the contras, and now he is attempting to take back that acknowledgment.''  - Elliott Abrams, Assistant Secretary of State or Inter-American Affairs.  [ A14:3. ]


FOOD NOTES
LEAD: Prepared or Fresh?


Finley, Kumble, Major Law Firm, Facing Revamping or Dissolution
LEAD: The nation's fourth-largest law firm, Finley, Kumble, Wagner, Underberg, Manley, Myerson &amp; Casey, long rocked by internal rivalries and increasingly concerned about mounting debts, is about to undergo a dramatic reorganization, if not a total dissolution, according to lawyers in the firm.


RAYTHEON CONTRACT
LEAD: The Raytheon Company has re-ceived a $790.4 million military con-tract for 884 Patriot air defense guided missiles and 15 sets of ground equipment, the Army said.
It said the work on the antiaircraft missiles, which will be performed at Andover, Mass., is expected to be completed by the end of 1990.


DATASOUTH COMPUTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATASOUTH COMPUTER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,798,000
5,255,000
Net loss
121,000
b362,000
Share earns
-
.06
9mo rev
12,186,000
13,875,000
Net loss
545,000
b535,000
Share earns
-
.09


Under Pressure, Agency Rescinds Dismissals
LEAD: An independent Federal agency today rescinded the dismissal of its seven-member professional staff, saying it regretted ''any inconvenience or embarrassment which may have been caused to the commission's employees and their families.''


Rain Bringing Relief To Fire-Scarred South
LEAD: Rain brought relief to the fire-scarred woodlands of the South yesterday, allowing states to reopen some forests to the public and to allow some Western firefighters to return home.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Judge Kennedy Is Checked


INVACARE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INVACARE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
35,012,000
28,865,000
Net inc
b623,000
944,000
Share earns
.11
.17
9mo sales
93,020,000
80,608,000
Net inc
1,621,000
1,909,000
Share earns
.29
.34


Chip Indicator Shows Gain
LEAD: The semiconductor industry's leading indicator rose in October, as market conditions remained favorable for manufacturers based in the United States, Europe and Japan, a trade group reported today.
The Semiconductor Industry


Dole Faults Reagan, Meese and Bush
LEAD: Bob Dole came to the South today and chided President Reagan, Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d and, above all, Vice President Bush.


The Vote In Assembly
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote today in the General Assembly on a resolution calling on the Soviet Union to withdraw its forces from Afghanistan:  IN FAVOR - 123  Albania  Antigua &amp; Barbuda  Argentina  Australia  Austria  Bahamas  Bahrain  Bangladesh  Barbados  Belgium  Belize  Butan  Bolivia  Botswana  Brazil  Britain  Brunei  Burma  Burundi  Cambodia  Cameroon  Canada  Central


MOBAY TO ACQUIRE DENKA CHEMICAL
LEAD: The Mobay Corporation, a subsidiary of Bayer USA Inc., said it had agreed to acquire the Denka Chemical Cor-poration of Houston.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Denka has sales of nearly $100 million and em-ploys about 400 workers.


DYNCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYNCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
220,949,000
186,911,000
Net inc
3,446,000
3,789,000
Share earns
.32
.35
9mo rev
634,314,000
535,131,000
Net inc
b4,791,000
7,298,000
Share earns
.45
.71


Concern Lifts Cadbury Stake
LEAD: The General Cinema Corporation, a company that owns both movie theaters and soft drink bottling operations, has increased its stake in Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C. to 18.5 percent, from 8.3 percent.


Walker Out at Least 6 Weeks
LEAD: The Jets' victory over Seattle on Monday night, a decision that changed the team's outlook from dark to bright, was nevertheless costly.
Two luminaries went down.


Bertha Sperber Stein, Political Leader, 74
LEAD: Bertha Sperber Stein, a longtime leader in Queens Democratic affairs, died last Wednesday in Long Island Jewish Medical Center from complications following a stroke.
She was 74 years old and lived in Jamaica Estates, Queens.


FROST &amp; SULLIVAN INC reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FROST &amp; SULLIVAN INC (OTC)
Year to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
17,498,880
15,296,318
Net inc
290,351
234,686
Share earns
.19
.15


Addendum
LEAD: Business Week magazine will raise its North America rate base 4.9 percent, to 850,000, and its ad rates 8 percent next year.


HORN &amp; HARDART CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORN &amp; HARDART CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
98,530,000
91,905,000
Net inc
b1,750,000
c39,933,000
Share earns
.12
-
9mo rev
311,353,000
278,326,000
Net inc
b5,078,000
c47,204,000
Share earns
.35
-


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: THE super-stretch limousine, when Jennifer Dierckx de Casterle spotted it, had stopped for a light on Madison Avenue in the upper 60's.
Dimly discernible through the rear smoked-glass windows was a chic-looking woman.
At the wheel was a liveried chauffeur.
He was impeccably clad, from cap on down.


ADVERTISING;
LEAD: American consumers last year saved $2.75 billion on their shopping bills through the use of cents-off coupons, according to the A.C.
Nielsen Company, which monitors such activity.


Westies' Informer Links Gotti to Labor Shooting
LEAD: An informer testified yesterday that members of the Westies gang shot a union official as a favor for John Gotti, whom the authorities have called the boss of the Gambino crime family.


Saudi Says Goal for Oil Is to Keep Price at $18
LEAD: Saudi Arabia's oil minister said today that his country would try to keep the price of oil at $18 a barrel, the level set by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries a year ago, ''for some time to come.''


Abrams Asked to Study Ex-State Official's Case
LEAD: The Inspector General of New York State said today that he had asked Attorney General Robert Abrams to consider whether legal action was warranted against a former state insurance official who is accused of giving business to private companies controlled by his son.


U.S. Poll Puts the Economy Over Military in Importance
LEAD: Americans see economic strength as far more important than military strength in assuring United States influence in the world, a poll by a liberal research organization has concluded.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Nov. 6
Oct.30
Nov. 7
1987
1987
1986
Gasoline production, daily
6.5
6.4
6.8
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.8
2.8
Gasoline stocks
218.8
219.8
223.6
Distillate stocks
121.1
124.9
152.7
Crude imports, daily
6.0
5.5
4.7
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.1
1.8
Crude stocks
354.1
349.9
338.6
Crude production, daily
8.2
8.2
8.4
Refinery utilization (%)
81.0
81.8
82.0


Stage: Pound's 'Elektra'
LEAD: IN the early 1950's, while confined in St.
Elizabeth's Hospital for the criminally insane in Washington, Ezra Pound worked on a contemporary version of Sophocles' ''Elektra.'' Until now, Pound's adaptation (written in collaboration with Rudd Fleming, a classics scholar) has been unproduced and unpublished.


Two Foremen Accused Of Illegal Renovation
LEAD: Two construction foremen were arrested yesterday and accused of illegally renovating a landmark building on East 79th Street, city officials said last night.


Prince Weighs Cambodia Talks
LEAD: Prince Norodom Sihanouk is planning to travel to France this week amid reports that he may meet there before the end of the year with Cambodia's Prime Minister, a spokesman for the Prince said here today.


War Heroes, War Powers
LEAD: The essence of battle, says the historian John Keegan, is ''the behavior of men struggling to reconcile their instinct for self-preservation, their sense of honor and the achievement of some aim over which other men are ready to kill them.'' Most Americans are never called to endure this fearful struggle.


Ford Is Penalized $325,000
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company has paid $325,000 in penalties assessed by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration for alleged record-keeping violations at two plants.
Ford paid $305,000 for ''willful violations of OSHA's record-keeping standards'' at its Hapeville, Ga., plant, and $20,000 for similar violations at its St.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: LETTER to a Friend Who Smokes:


A Chorus of Cheers for Knicks' Jackson
LEAD: Lou Carnesecca sat in the den of his Jamaica Estates home Monday night and watched Mark Jackson, the Knicks' top draft choice, make his first start as a point guard in the National Basketball Association.


TRANS-LUX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANS-LUX CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,759,000
4,970,000
Net loss
b1,078,000
c5,034,000
Share earns
-
2.89
9mo rev
14,567,000
14,768,000
Net loss
b699,000
c4,351,000
Share earns
-
2.51


Contrasting Styles in Dealing With Loss
LEAD: Mark Breland and Michael Olajide share the dubious distinction of being hot young fighters from New York who have recently lost for the first time as professionals.


Mayor Wins 2d Term in Miami Runoff Vote
LEAD: Mayor Xavier Suarez of Miami was re-elected today to a second two-year term, repulsing the comeback try of former Mayor Maurice Ferre in a runoff election.


LINEAR FILMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINEAR FILMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,256,000
14,988,000
Net inc
b1,324,000
1,124,000
Share earns
.21
.18
6mo rev
32,461,000
27,666,000
Net inc
b2,599,000
2,078,000
Share earns
.41
.33


Hamilton S. Gregg, 63; Investment Firm Owner
LEAD: Hamilton S. Gregg, an investment executive, died of a heart attack Thursday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 63 years old and lived in Manhattan and Falls Village, Conn.


Stocks Fall Sharply Abroad
LEAD: The French and West German stock markets suffered some of their heaviest losses ever today as investors worried about the falling dollar and Washington's difficulties in cutting its budget deficit.  [ Tokyo stock prices fell 649.70 points, or 3 percent, on Wednesday following the declines in Europe and in New York.


TENNEY ENGINEERING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TENNEY ENGINEERING INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,518,090
5,070,189
Net loss
768,777
b70,120
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
13,260,556
16,089,340
Net loss
1,013,138
b268,351
Share earns
-
.08


IOWA SOUTHERN UTILITIES CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IOWA SOUTHERN UTILITIES CO (OTC)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
118,405,160
146,153,638
Net inc
b8,422,062
16,195,843
Share earns
1.46
2.81
b-After an extraordinary credit from an accounting change of $2,928,178.


RADIOACTIVE LEAK IDLES 400
LEAD: Leaks of low-level radioactive water contami-nated the clothing and skin of several workers at the closed Pilgrim nuclear plant over the weekend, and the Boston Edison Company ordered a work stop-page Monday and sent about 400 em-ployees home.


HALLWOOD GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HALLWOOD GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
13,192,000
13,752,000
Net inc
b3,047,000
c6,444,000
Share earns
.66
1.41
Yr rev
39,190,000
27,180,000
Net inc
b14,045,000
c9,660,000
Share earns
3.07
2.12


Acting Webb Chief May Be Permanent
LEAD: Philip J. Dion, a financial executive, will probably succeed Robert K. Swanson as chairman and chief executive of the Del E. Webb Corporation when its directors convene next week, industry analysts said yesterday.
The 42-year-old Mr.
Dion is already serving as acting chief executive.


Japan's Unusual Recovery
LEAD: Despite the turmoil in its stock and currency markets, Japan's economy is continuing to rebound from nearly two years of sluggish growth caused by the soaring yen.
But economists have begun to worry that the dollar's rapid fall against the yen in recent days could slow the robust recovery.


Bond Prices Decline Modestly
LEAD: Bond prices declined modestly yesterday, as investor demand remained slack before Veterans Day.


William C. Pahlmann, Decorator Known for Eclectic Designs, Dies
LEAD: William C. Pahlmann, a leading interior decorator and the first to design model rooms for department stores, died last Friday in a hospital in Guadalajara, Mexico, where he had a home.
Mr.
Pahlmann, who suffered for many years from arteriosclerosis, was 86 years old.


Oriole Officials Named
LEAD: Edward Bennett Williams, the owner of the Baltimore Orioles, completed his restructuring of the team's front office yesterday.
Roland Hemond was named vice president of baseball operations; Frank Robinson was named a special assistant to the owner; Doug Melvin was named director of the farm system, and Calvin


Roberta Peters to Head Music-Theater Institute
LEAD: The soprano Roberta Peters has been named chairman of the National Institute for Music Theater, an organization dedicated to raising money to help creators and artists in the fields of opera and musical theater in the United States.
The institute, which was founded in 1969 by Roger L. Stevens, established the George London Grant for opera singers and the Mary Martin Prize for artists in the musical theater.


Wal-Mart Up; Limited Is Flat
LEAD: Wal-Mart Stores Inc., a major discounter, said yesterday that its third-quarter profit rose 41 percent.
Earnings were flat at The Limited Inc., which owns women's apparel stores.


ORBITING OBJECT HINTS AT OTHER PLANET SYSTEMS
LEAD: The first strong evidence of a large object orbiting a star other than the Sun was reported yesterday by American astronomers.
They said the object, hotter, brighter and more massive than Jupiter, was most likely the first discovery of a brown dwarf, one of a type of hypothesized celestial objects that are intermediate between a planet and a star.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a dispatch yesterday from Russell, Kan., about the formal Presidential declaration of Senator Bob Dole misstated his relationship to Robin Dole.
She is his daughter by his first marriage.


KINNARD INVESTMENTS reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KINNARD INVESTMENTS
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,778,815
3,516,492
Net inc
90,363
b113,239
Share earns
.06
-
9mo rev
15,380,000
13,966,532
Net inc
597,545
575,810
Share earns
.37
.36
b


EASTGROUP PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTGROUP PROPERTIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,414,000
1,763,000
Net inc
b2,096,000
c1,629,000
Share earns
.79
.61
9mo rev
4,831,000
5,408,000
Net inc
b5,626,000
c6,779,000
Share earns
2.12
2.53


Maine Educational Loan Bonds
LEAD: The Maine Educational Loan Marketing Corporation is offering $100 million of educational loan revenue bonds, with an initial seven-day yield of 5 7/8 percent, through underwriters led by Chase Capital Markets.


DATA SWITCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA SWITCH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
25,007,000
11,121,000
Net inc
b1,201,000
c1,007,000
Share earns
.11
.10
9mo rev
69,480,000
30,455,000
Net inc
b46,000
c1,740,000
Share earns
-
.17


The Dance: Desrosiers Theater
LEAD: The image's the thing for Robert Desrosiers, a Toronto-based choreographer and dancer who happily turns every stage into a hallucinatory playpen.


Lincoln Center Seeking Funds for New Tower
LEAD: With a ceremonial shovel and a luncheon, Lincoln Center opened a campaign yesterday to raise money for its first new building in 20 years.
Officials said $45.6 million of the estimated $85 million needed had already been promised.


Jury Seated in Cocaine Trial
LEAD: A jury was seated today after five and a half weeks of selection for the cocaine-smuggling trial of Carlos Lehder Rivas, the reputed head of a Colombian drug ring.
Federal District Judge Howell W. Melton set opening arguments for Monday, and testimony is expected to last three months.
Mr.
Lehder, who is 38 years old, is charged in a 1981 indictment with smuggling 3.3 tons of cocaine from Colombia to Normans Cay in the Bahamas and then to Georgia and northern Florida in 1979 and 1980.


The Pop Life
LEAD: Squeeze Has a Hit The saga of Squeeze, the embattled English pop group that is appearing Friday evening at Madison Square Garden, is one rock-and-roll story in which artistic self-examination and the faith of a record company (A&amp;M) have worked together to create an unexpectedly happy ending.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''If Reagan invites me to talk, I would be willing.
If he wants to be joined by Secretary Shultz, by Calero or by the contra leadership, that is up to him.''  - President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua. [ A1:2. ]


HOWELL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOWELL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
50,007,000
20,895,000
Net inc
490,000
9,000
Share earns
.11
-
9mo rev
126,564,000
56,113,000
Net inc
1,274,000
b20,230,000
Share earns
.27
-
b-Net loss


60,000 Jobs to Be Cut In Moscow Ministries
LEAD: A national newspaper said today that 60,000 Moscow residents would be dismissed by 1990 under Mikhail S. Gorbachev's campaign to streamline government by cutting 50 percent of all ministry jobs.


WSHINGTON TALK: Capital Ethics; After Ginsburg, Where Do the Questions Stop?
LEAD: As the list of lawmakers and candidates who admit to having smoked marijuana grows longer, many political leaders are beginning to wonder whether this latest litmus test for personal character goes too far.


FASTENAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FASTENAL CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,567,131
4,192,649
Net inc
488,040
343,312
Share earns
.17
.13
9mo sales
14,629,959
11,169,462
Net inc
1,232,942
854,174
Share earns
.46
.33


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article and a picture caption on the Washington Talk page on Tuesday, about American efforts for an easing of Soviet emigration policies, misidentified a Soviet official from the Institute of U.S.A. and Canada Studies.
He was Vasily A. Vlasikhin.


Citicorp Paper Rates Down
LEAD: Interest rates declined at Citicorp's regular weekly commercial paper auctions yesterday.
It marked the fourth straight week that rates have fallen, bringing the total decline during that period to about 1 1/4 percentage points.


U.S. SEES RUSSIANS LAGGING ON PACT
LEAD: Reagan Administration officials said today that they were concerned that Soviet negotiators were not forthcoming enough in talks aimed at wrapping up the treaty banning medium- and shorter-range arms.


PUBCO CORPORATION, DEBTOR-IN-POSSESSION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUBCO CORPORATION, DEBTOR-IN-POSSESSION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,436,000
25,314,000
Net inc
b1,538,000
c2,020,000
Share earns
.05
.06
9mo sales
67,860,000
65,146,000
Net inc
b3,012,000
c3,029,000
Share earns
.09
.09


U.N. Urges Soviet to Pull Forces From Afghanistan
LEAD: The General Assembly voted overwhelmingly today for the immediate withdrawal of Soviet forces from Afghanistan, brushing aside Moscow's first concerted attempt to deflect such criticism by the United Nations.


MILGRAY ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MILGRAY ELECTRONICS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,457,814
15,535,214
Net inc
141,533
7,263
Share earns
.18
.01
9mo sales
53,625,121
46,160,424
Net inc
180,354
b30,157
Share earns
.23
-
b


Japanese Dominate Auction Bidding
LEAD: Japanese dealers and collectors dominated bidding last night at Christie's auction of Impressionist and modern art - purchasing paintings by Renoir, Kandinsky and Chagall at record prices for these artists and buying other major works by Monet, Miro, Rouault and Laurencin.


Notes From an Iconoclastic Wine Critic
LEAD: IN the old days, say about five years ago, a newspaper advertisement for wine might have read something like this:


WASHINGTON TALK: Republican Politics; Complaints From the Right Flank Fall Squarely on the White House
LEAD: In a city that relishes political paradox, few examples were more exquisite than the sight of Senator Orrin G. Hatch, a Reagan loyalist par excellence, standing in front of television cameras Monday and railing against ''gutless wonders'' in the White House.


Reagan Would Elevate V.A. to Cabinet Level
LEAD: President Reagan, who criticized his predecessor's creation of the Departments of Education and Energy, said today that he wanted to make the Veterans Administration a Cabinet-level department to give veterans ''the recognition they so rightly deserve.''


NORD RESOURCES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORD RESOURCES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,410,005
14,682,556
Net inc
3,076,583
c3,649,880
Share earns
.20
.26
Shares outst
15,011,669
14,046,639
9mo rev
53,015,081
43,383,753
Net inc
b11,580,915
c11,094,302
Share earns
.79
.79
Shares outst
14,743,192
13,957,110


CHASE MEDICAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHASE MEDICAL GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,240,000
960,000
Net inc
344,000
161,000
Share earns
.14
.10
Shares outst
2,408,696
1,637,415
6mo rev
4,065,000
1,750,000
Net inc
621,000
282,000
Share earns
.30
.17
Shares outst
2,084,617
1,637,415


B.U. Coach Dismissed
LEAD: Steve Stetson was dismissed yesterday after three losing seasons as Boston University's football coach, effective after the team's last two games.


The Big Congressional War Powers Surrender
LEAD: To the Editor:


Copper Producers Raise Their Prices
LEAD: Copper producers, responding to increasingly tight supplies of the metal, raised their prices yesterday to their highest point in seven years.


Airplane Owner Group Cited As Failing to Report as Lobby
LEAD: The influential group that defends the interests of private airplane owners has failed to register as a lobby for the last eight years and maintains questionable connections with former Federal aviation officials, Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn, asserted today.


First U.S. Ratings of Airline Promptness
LEAD: Fourteen airlines are required to report data to the Department of Transportation.
Figures are for September.
Chronically Late Flights  Percent of regularly scheduled flights delayed more than 15 minutes more than 70% of the time.
Pan American
6.1%
America West
5.1%
Delta
4.7%
Pacific Southwest
4.6%
Southwest
4.2%
USAir
3.8%
Northwest
3.4%
Continental
1.6%
Eastern
1.6%
American
1.3%
Alaska
1.3%
Trans World
1.0%
Piedmont
0.8%
United
0.6%


Moscow Hints At Longer Visit By Gorbachev
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev may extend his American visit next month by a few days to see more of the nation and the public, a senior Soviet official said today.


Shearson Reports Loss Of $70 Million in October
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. said yesterday that it had suffered after-tax losses of $70 million in October, becoming the latest securities firm to disclose the extent of its losses from the recent market turmoil.


BLACK &amp; DECKER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLACK &amp; DECKER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Sales
502,100,000
437,800,000
Net inc
14,900,000
bc16,800,000
Share earns
.26
-
Shares outst
58,600,000
58,400,000
Yr sales
1,934,800,000
1,791,200,000
Net inc
55,600,000
c6,300,000
Share earns
.95
.11
Shares outst
58,500,000
55,600,000


MCDONALD &amp; CO INVESTMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCDONALD &amp; CO INVESTMENTS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 25
1987
1986
Revenue
18,025,000
16,527,000
Net inc
1,335,000
861,000
Share earns
.21
.13
6mo rev
38,851,000
34,231,000
Net inc
3,076,000
2,055,000
Share earns
.47
.31


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: IT was a summer night when I heard the running footsteps behind me.
I ran, too, and slipped into the hallway of my building, a locked door and a pane of glass insulating me from the outside.
The woman was only a few steps behind me.
Her face on the other side of the glass was black with mascara mixed with tears.


A CHEERY GIFT FOR THE PUBS
LEAD: Breweries, bartenders and imbibers toasted a vote by the House of Commons today to scrap a provision requiring pubs in England and Wales to close for two and a half hours in the afternoon.


3 Die as Police Clash With Protesters in Bangladesh
LEAD: At least three people were shot and killed by the police here today as thousands of rioters set fire to cars and buildings, and threw bricks and homemade bombs in an attempt to force President H. M. Ershad from office.


LIMITED INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIMITED INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
891,726,000
803,699,000
Net inc
69,254,000
68,621,000
Share earns
.36
.36
9mo sales
2,517,382,000
2,160,593,000
Net inc
171,872,000
140,243,000
Share earns
.90
.75


HAKO MINUTEMAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAKO MINUTEMAN INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,104,000
6,342,000
Net inc
559,000
409,000
Share earns
.15
.14
Shares outst
3,668,385
2,954,100
9mo sales
20,953,000
19,298,000
Net inc
1,737,000
1,236,000
Share earns
.50
.42
Shares outst
3,464,204
2,954,100


Court Recognizes L.I. Woman As Mother of Slain 6-Year-Old
LEAD: A judge in Manhattan, in a ruling that ended a week-long debate over who would have the right to bury Elizabeth Steinberg, ruled early this morning that a 26-year-old Long Island woman was the natural mother and could claim the body of the child.


LAUREL ENTERTAINMENT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAUREL ENTERTAINMENT INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
154,686
3,265,996
Net loss
627,075
b907,068
Share earns
-
.35
6mo rev
621,452
5,235,687
Net loss
818,470
b1,588,926
Share earns
-
.64


2,000 Hippopotamuses Die In Zambia Anthrax Outbreak
LEAD: An outbreak of anthrax has killed more than 2,000 hippopotamuses in the Luangwa Valley wildlife sanctuary in the last two weeks, the Government said today.


Scenes at the Vietnam Memorial
LEAD: Rain-soaked combat boots lined up yesterday at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
The boots symbolize missing servicemen and were left from a rally over the weekend.
At right, Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel helping a visitor to the memorial find a name on the monument.
Mr.
Hodel, a computer enthusiast, wanted to try out the computerized catalogue, installed last spring, that directs a visitor to the location on the monument where a specified name may be located.


A Sweepstakes for Brighter, Lighter and Cheaper Subway Cars
LEAD: The New York City Transit Authority is readying plans for a new generation of subway cars that officials say would have wider seats and smoother rides and be brighter, lighter and substantially cheaper to run.


Music: 'Salsa Meets Jazz'
LEAD: WHEN salsa meets jazz at the Village Gate, it's usually a coming-together of disparate points of view, however sympathetic and compatible.
Jazz-trained improvisers and musicians whose roots are in Latin music tend to approach phrasing, rhythm, and the organization of solos quite differently.
The jazz musician plays on the chords,the structure, the thematic material.


Car Doors Spring Open In Sudden Subway Stop
LEAD: All the doors on one side of a 10-car subway train unaccountably sprang open yesterday when the operator slammed on the brakes to avoid striking a man on the tracks in a Manhattan station, the Transit Authority said.


THERMO ENVIRONMENTAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THERMO ENVIRONMENTAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,268,000
4,506,000
Net inc
b569,000
362,000
Share earns
.10
.08
Shares outst
5,775,000
4,702,000
9mo rev
15,686,000
12,341,000
Net inc
b1,073,000
1,054,000
Share earns
.21
.22
Shares outst
5,075,000
4,702,500


IMREG INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMREG INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
814,897
537,925
9mo net loss
2,294,166
1,339,036


THERMO INSTRUMENT SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THERMO INSTRUMENT SYSTEMS
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Revenue
21,628,000
19,418,000
Net inc
1,853,000
1,103,000
Share earns
.18
.12


Even Rivals Agree, Kings Sets Pace In Food Marketing
LEAD: NEW JERSEY has spawned a number of supermarket chains but when it comes to innovation in marketing and a reputation for quality and service, Kings Super Markets, a 16-store chain, is often ahead of the pack.


Blues Top Slumping Flyers
LEAD: Tony McKegney scored two goals and added an assist, leading the Blues to a 5-2 victory tonight over the Philadelphia Flyers.


Question on Gooden
LEAD: Judge John P. Griffin, who placed Dwight Gooden on two years' probation last January after the pitcher pleaded no contest in an altercation with the police in Tampa, Fla., said Monday that he is concerned the results of drug tests the Mets' pitcher is taking under the supervision of major league baseball are not being sent to probation officials in Florida or New


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Three days after Ron Harper severely sprained his left ankle and chipped a small bone in his foot, the Cleveland Cavaliers learned their star guard would be out eight to 10 weeks, not the four weeks physicians originally predicted.
So the Cavaliers signed 6-foot-11-inch Johnny Rogers, who was the second-round draft choice of the Sacramento Kings in 1986 and averaged 10.4 minutes and 4.2 points a game last season.


Ere Virtue Ruled
LEAD: Of the many amazing things about the latest Supreme Court fiasco, the most amazing is the revelation that there are grown-up people in the United States who have never smoked marijuana.
A number of mildly notorious persons, including some of the Presidential yearners, have, in fact, seized this occasion to announce that they have never smoked marijuana.


Pot, and Public Pieties
LEAD: The Age of Aquarius dawned in the late 60's; now it's noon.
As the stir over Douglas Ginsburg's marijuana smoking demonstrates, the anti-authoritarian generation born after World War II has begun to assume authority in a conservative, non-permissive era.
As long as the resulting conflicts and contradictions concerned purely private foibles, society could avoid coming to grips with them.


Air Force Missile Blows Up
LEAD: Air Force officials aborted the launching of an unarmed Minuteman 2 missile, blowing it up seconds after it left its pad Monday evening.
The aborted launching, which also set a brief brush fire, did not represent a major setback to the test program, but no immediate details were available on the reason for the failure.


Lest We Forget
LEAD: They walk as if on hallowed ground.
They touch the stone and speak with the dead.
They come to mourn and to remember - an old ritual made new, creating in this time another timeless moment.


Soldier Killed by Jersey Trooper
LEAD: One soldier was fatally shot and a second soldier was wounded in a fight with a state trooper who tried to arrest them for marijuana possession on the New Jersey Turnpike, the authorities said today.


DIRTY LYRICS: WORSE THAN DIRTY
LEAD: Now that Albert Gore Jr. is running for President, he'd like to cultivate the entertainment business - Los Angeles being a deep well for Democratic fund raising.
But the business has come to know his wife, Tipper, as a leading critic of raunchy rock music lyrics.
Such criticism is not the sort of thing that gets entertainment dollars flowing.


State Guidelines Try to Bring Equity To Child Support
LEAD: IN coming months, there will be a new and potentially influential factor to deal with on the issue of child-support payments: a set of numerical formulas to spell out for courts around the nation how much money is to be allocated to children.


Impact of the Prince of Prints
LEAD: Kenneth Tyler, the fine-art printer, remembers that a mere 30 years ago prints in this country were small, timidly black and white and mainly collected by book lovers.
Now they are large, bold and done by first-rank artists, thanks in part to Mr.
Tyler himself.
Thinking big and in glorious color, he has worked with such talents as Robert Motherwell, Frank Stella, Roy Lichtenstein and David Hockney to extend their vivid imagery into the graphic arts.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: IT always amuses me that the foods I prepare with the least effort are often the most appealing to my guests.
I am speaking, in particular, of fish and seafood stews.
Once the ingredients are assembled, I can prepare a fish stew in 20 minutes.


Industrial Advertising Study by McGraw-Hill
LEAD: McGraw-Hill has released the findings of a study on industrial advertising that should make some converts to the cause.


Jackie Vernon, 62; Comic in Television, Film and Nightclubs
LEAD: Jackie Vernon, a television and nightclub comedian, died of a heart attack yesterday at his home in Hollywood.
He was 62 years old.


Wshington Talk: Briefing; Don't Invite 'Em
LEAD: It was unusual enough that top officials of the Sandinista Government of Nicaragua should be attending a diplomatic reception at the State Department.
But the event, in honor of the Organization of American States, quickly turned undiplomatic as Adolfo Calero, a leader of the American-backed rebels who are trying to topple the Sandinistas, sought to shake hands with Victor Tinoco, the Nicaraguan Deputy Foreign


Stark Hesseltine Dies; Was Theatrical Agent
LEAD: Stark Hesseltine, a theatrical agent who represented some well-known actors and actresses in his career, died of an AIDS-related illness last Wednesday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 58 years old and a resident of Manhattan and East Hampton, L.I.


Three Manhattan Theaters Are Given Landmark Status
LEAD: The inside of the Biltmore Theater and the outside of the Broadhurst Theater became New York City landmarks yesterday, bringing to 13 the number of houses in the theater district to be designated by the Landmarks Preservation Commission.


Coliseum Urged To Keep Raiders
LEAD: By a 10-1 vote, the City Council today urged the Los Angeles Coliseum Commission to use the $19.6 million it received from an antitrust lawsuit settlement with the National Football League to improve the stadium and persuade the Los Angeles Raiders to remain there.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: Advances; A Reactor That Can't Melt Down?
LEAD: MORE than a decade after the last order was placed in this country for a commercial nuclear plant, some engineers and utility analysts think it is time to start developing a second generation of reactors that would be meltdown-proof.
Their hope is that these reactors would be available when the demand for power picks up and when cost or environmental impact makes fossil fuels unattractive.


FREDERICK'S OF HOLLYWOOD reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FREDERICK'S OF HOLLYWOOD (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 29
1987
1986
Sales
13,549,000
11,772,000
Net inc
201,000
b732,000
Share earns
.12
-
Yr sales
57,989,000
48,929,000
Net inc
1,006,000
b518,000
Share earns
.61
-


A Magazine Insert Pioneer
LEAD: Nowadays, with preprinted magazine inserts an expected part of the publishing business, it's hard to think of a time without them.
But, according to Batten, Barton, Durstine &amp; Osborn, that would have been prior to 1937, the year before its client Hammermill Papers ran what is believed to be the first of the species in


HANDY &amp; HARMAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANDY &amp; HARMAN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
153,858,000
138,941,000
Net inc
1,668,000
b964,000
Share earns
.12
-
9mo sales
449,479,000
420,010,000
Net inc
5,245,000
b1,802,000
Share earns
.38
-


Washington Talk: Briefing; High-Flying Snow Goose
LEAD: More than 800 paintings of North American ducks and geese were in competition yesterday in the United States Fish and Wildlife Service's annual Duck Stamp contest.
The winning entry, of a lesser snow goose flying over an early morning marsh, was painted by Daniel Smith of Eden Prairie, Minn.


Sports of The Times; THE MCHECTOR BACKFIELD
LEAD: IN this strike-snarled season, the real Jets had not won a game in seven weeks, not since they stunned the New England Patriots for a 2-0 start.
But in their 30-14 victory over the Seattle Seahawks on Monday night after that dreary display against the Indianapolis Colts, the real Jets reappeared.
And when they returned to their locker room, Joe


Major Airlines Are Ranked On Delays and Other Woes
LEAD: Under heavy pressure from Congress to do something about flight delays, the Department of Transportation today issued its first comprehensive monthly ranking of major airlines' on-time performance.


About New York; Where Liberals Feel Under Siege From Homeless
LEAD: Just about the saddest thing an old good-hearted New York liberal could imagine doing would be taking a stance against the homeless, which is what about 800 of them have done down on the Lower East Side, or the East Village, or the Bowery, depending on the cartographer who is doing the talking (the boundaries in this case are Houston to 14th Streets and Broadway to the East


Farmers vs. Banks: New Tactics on Unpaid Loans
LEAD: Kenneth M. Leffelman, the 59-year-old head of a beleaguered family, is in the county jail, the third farmer to be jailed in this area in disputes pitting them against lenders, officials and the courts.


VIPONT PHARMACEUTICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIPONT PHARMACEUTICAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,808,000
4,029,000
Net inc
1,342,000
504,000
Share earns
.23
.09
Yr sales
22,900,000
13,250,000
Net inc
3,113,000
804,000
Share earns
.56
.15


Film: Exoticism in 'Siesta'
LEAD: ''SIESTA'' is the kind of excitingly bad, artily experimental film that has become an endangered species, and as such it can be greeted with more warmth than would otherwise be warranted.
Bad?
Arty?
Here is how ''Siesta'' begins: with the image of Claire (Ellen Barkin) in a skimpy red dress lying motionless in a field of dead grass.


GOLDEN VALLEY MICROWAVE FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOLDEN VALLEY MICROWAVE FOODS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
24,700,000
11,200,000
Net inc
3,300,000
1,300,000
Share earns
.28
.14
9mo sales
69,300,000
32,000,000
Net inc
9,000,000
3,200,000
Share earns
.76
.35


LEXICON CORP reports earnings for Yr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEXICON CORP (OTC)
Yr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
17,098,000
12,686,000
Net inc
b2,803,000
c2,673,000
Share earns
.39
-
b-After a gain of $5,525,000 from the sale of a division and a loss of $1,450,000 from discontinued operations.


UNIFORCE TEMPORARY PERONNEL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIFORCE TEMPORARY PERONNEL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,288,192
16,582,215
Net inc
640,395
464,818
Share earns
.14
.10
Shares outst
4,575,513
4,497,854
9mo sales
54,514,924
44,544,264
Net inc
1,695,867
1,249,193
Share earns
.37
.28
Shares outst
4,579,070
4,459,557


Albert Kreindler, Real Estate Lawyer, 59
LEAD: Albert Kreindler, a real estate lawyer and former member of the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission, died Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital after a long illness.
He was 59 years old and lived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.


Ex-Goveror of Virginia To Seek Seat in Senate
LEAD: Former Gov.
Charles S. Robb, a Democrat, said today he would seek the United States Senate seat of Paul S. Trible Jr., a Republican who has said he would not run for re-election next year.


Graham D. Mattison, Investment Banker, 81
LEAD: Graham D. Mattison, a retired investment banker, died Nov. 3 at his home in Rio de Janeiro after a long illness.
He was 81 years old.


Niger Head's Death Costs West Ally Against Libya
LEAD: President Seyni Kountche of the West African country of Niger died of a brain tumor in a Paris hospital today after 13 years in office.


Abdel Sharkawi, 67, Egyptian Leftist Writer
LEAD: Abdel Rahman Sharkawi, an Egyptian writer and left-wing political figure, died of a heart attack today, his 67th birthday, the Middle East News Agency said.


ACCEPTANCE INSURANCE HOLDINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACCEPTANCE INSURANCE HOLDINGS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b895,000
c842,000
Share earns
.49
.55
9mo net inc
b3,210,000
c2,085,000
Share earns
1.79
2.26
b-After realized investment losses of $236,000 for the quarter and realized investment gains of $91,000 for the 9 months.


F.B.I. Uncovers No Problem In Check on Judge Kennedy
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation completed an exhaustive background check today on Judge Anthony M. Kennedy, the probable nominee for the Supreme Court, and reported to the White House that no significant problems had been found, a senior Administration official said today.


STAGE II APPAREL reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STAGE II APPAREL
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,984,000
11,779,000
Net inc
793,000
603,000
Share earns
.24
.18


IONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IONICS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
19,524,000
14,796,000
Net inc
411,000
b433,000
Share earns
.11
-
9mo rev
53,598,000
48,405,000
Net inc
1,163,000
533,000
Share earns
.31
.14
b-Net loss and includes an after-tax non-recurring charge of $558,000 from settlement of pending litigation.


TV Reviews; 20 Years After 'Sgt. Pepper'
LEAD: IT really was 20 years ago -June 1, 1967, to be exact, when the Beatles released ''Sgt.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band'' in Britain.
Was it the greatest and most influential rock album ever made? ''Sgt.
Pepper: It Was 20 Years Ago Today'' declares it was all that and more.
The two-hour documentary, on Channel 13 at 9 o'clock tonight, revisits a time and place.


Votes Against U.N. Slander
LEAD: Just 12 years ago, the United Nations adopted an ugly resolution equating Zionism with racism.
Voting on the anniversary, the House joined the Senate in unanimously approving a resolution calling on the General Assembly to repudiate that resolution.
Congress rightly condemned it for offending the U.N.


Trump and Saudis
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Arab Consensus Is Seen on Opposition to Iran
LEAD: A meeting of Arab leaders here appears to have realigned the balance of power in the Middle East in favor of the pragmatic policies and moderate forces opposed to Iran and led by Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Arab oil producers in the Persian Gulf.


Manila Forms Band to Fight Rebel Groups
LEAD: As 200 residents of the city's Tondo slum area looked on, police Maj.
Romeo Maganto, with a quick twist of his forearm, flipped one of his lieutenants onto the grass outside his station house.


The 2 1/2 No's
LEAD: The Chinese have taught us that not every problem in diplomacy has to be solved in a hurry.


From One Cookbook, an Expert Chef Was Made
LEAD: WHEN Faye Levy went to France in 1976, she figured she would stay for six weeks - just long enough to take a course at La Varenne, the newly opened cooking school that had been recommended to her by Julia Child.


First Executive Won't Issue Shares
LEAD: The First Executive Corporation said it was dropping a plan made last month to issue 10.5 million shares at $17.15 each, or $180.1 million, to the ICH Corporation.
First Executive's stock has declined sharply since the market's collapse, and closed today at $9.75, down 12.5 cents, in over-the-counter trading.


PARTY IN QUEBEC LOSES ITS LEADER
LEAD: Barely a week after the death of Rene Levesque, the party's founder, the leader of the Parti Quebecois has been forced to resign by militants who want to revive the campaign for Quebec's independence.


Veterans Day
LEAD:  NEW YORK  Parade: Begins at 9 A.M. at 39th Street and Fifth Avenue, heads south to 24th Street and ends about noon.
Parking: Alternate-side parking suspended.
Sanitation: No collection or street cleaning.
Government offices: Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
Post offices: Open at 90 Church Street, 909 Third Avenue, Grand Central Terminal, 610 Fifth Avenue, and 33d Street and 8th Avenue.


Mother Sued Over Payment For Son's Liver Transplant
LEAD: The Pittsburgh hospital where 7-year-old Ronnie DeSillers died last spring while awaiting his fourth liver transplant is now suing the boy's mother for $261,189 in unpaid bills.


Small Bank's President Looks to Foreign Cash
LEAD: Leeds Hackett said yesterday that he realized that a collapse in the stock market and a falling dollar did not herald the best time to open a small bank aimed at helping foreigners invest in the United States.


Layoffs Are Seen At Chrysler Plant
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation plans to lay off more than 1,700 workers at the automaker's plant in Newark, Del., a union official said.
A Chrysler spokesman in Detroit said, ''We informed the union there is a possibility.
The assembly plant schedules are always in review.
Nothing is etched in stone.''


FOOTE MINERAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOOTE MINERAL CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,631,000
10,250,000
Net loss
b22,500,000
c2,203,000
9mo sales
33,279,000
31,698,000
Net loss
b23,979,000
c1,626,000
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $1,326,000 and $4,094,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, and losses from disposition of discontinued operations of $3,043,000 for the quarter and $2,903,000 for the 9 months.


CANADA'S ECONOMY UP
LEAD: Canada's leading composite indicator rose nine-tenths of 1 percent in Au-gust, mainly because of manufactur-ing, after a July gain of eight-tenths of 1 percent, the Government said to-day.


FIRST AMFED reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMFED
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
758,000
1,093,000
Share earns
.47
.69
Yr net inc
3,247,000
4,250,000
Share earns
2.04
2.68


EXCHANGES OPEN TODAY
LEAD: Stock and commodity exchanges in New York and Chicago will be open today, Veterans Day.
In New York most leading banks will be closed, so foreign-exchange markets will be vir-tually inactie in the United States.
In the credit markets, Treasury issues will not be traded, but corporate, mu-nicipal and futures issues will be.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Ellisville Journal; Can-Do Classic in Midwestern Town By ANDREW H. MALCOLM
LEAD: For 59 of her 60 years Helen Myers has loved books.


Madeline Levine, Professor, 85
LEAD: Madeline Levine, a retired professor of early childhood education at New York University, died of Parkinson's disease Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
She was 85 years old and lived in Manhattan.


G.E. Credit Notes
LEAD: The General Electric Credit Corporation is offering $300 million of 8 3/4 percent notes due in 1992 for 99.562 to yield 8.86 percent through underwriters led by its affiliate, Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.
The triple-A-rated notes are not callable and yield about six-tenths of a percentage point more than five-year Treasury notes.


DIBRELL BROTHERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIBRELL BROTHERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
93,200,000
56,700,000
Net inc
3,308,016
2,448,040
Share earns
.96
.69


HYDRAULIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HYDRAULIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,058,000
16,296,000
Net inc
3,103,000
2,507,000
Share earns
.65
.59
9mo rev
51,037,000
45,025,000
Net inc
7,439,000
6,097,000
Share earns
1.66
1.44


E.P.A. Plans Flexible Deadlines on Air Pollution
LEAD: The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency said today that the agency would propose a new plan that would set flexible deadlines for cities to meet Federal standards for ozone and other forms of air pollution.


Exchange Employees Begin Strike
LEAD: Hundreds of employees went on strike at the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, seeking improved pension benefits.


A Choreographer's Full Life
LEAD: There will be new works with new music and new sets on the program when the Nina Wiener Dance Company opens tonight for a week at the Brooklyn Academy of Music opera house.
That is the stuff, after all, of major New York seasons.


Phillies' Bedrosian Cy Young Winner
LEAD: In the closest voting in the history of the National League Cy Young Award, Steve Bedrosian of the Philadelphia Phillies won the 1987 honor yesterday and in the process became the 59th player to earn $1 million or more this year.


INTELLICORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTELLICORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,059,000
4,084,000
Net loss
649,000
850,000


BASS GROUP MEETS WITH BELL &amp; HOWELL Special to The New York Times
LEAD: A group led by the Fort Worth financier Rob-ert M. Bass said it had met with offi-cials of the Bell &amp; Howell Company to discuss the investment in the com-pany by the Mawell Communica-tions Corporation.
The British compa-ny, headed by the publisher Robert Maxwell, has said it would seek to buy more that 50 percent of Bell &amp; Howell, an information services com-pany based in Skokie,


DISC TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DISC TECHNOLOGY CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
882,000
242,000
Net loss
1,975,000
773,000
9mo rev
2,235,000
1,589,000
Net loss
4,076,000
1,674,000
The company said it recorded certain non-recurring charges totaling about $1 million re-evaluation of certain inventory and reserves related to equipment that will not be transferred when the company relocates its manufacturing operations.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a headline in some copies on Saturday about a man charged with harboring illegal aliens misstated his occupation.
He is an investigator for the Brooklyn District Attorney's office.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
9.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.56
6.82
5.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.66
5.68
n.a.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.19
6.19
n.a.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.61
8.61
n.a.
30-YR.


Real Men May Use Umbrellas in Navy
LEAD: After almost two decades of debate, the Navy has decided that its men may carry umbrellas while in uniform.


Los Angeles Begins $125 Million Offering
LEAD: Los Angeles yesterday offered its first issue of waste-water system revenue bonds, a new category of debt for the city.


INTERSTATE GENERAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERSTATE GENERAL (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,056,000
12,987,000
Net inc
2,753,000
2,455,000
Share earns
.28
.25
9mo rev
30,360,000
31,559,000
Net inc
7,091,000
4,795,000
Share earns
.74
.60
Shares outst
9,541,000
7,900,000


Fire, Unreported for Half-Hour, Kills 6
LEAD: Six people, including a 23-year-old woman and her three children, were killed this morning when they were overcome by smoke from a fire that had gone unreported for 30 minutes, the authorities said.


Boy,3, Shot to Death; Mother's Friend Seized
LEAD: The body of a 3-year-old boy who had been shot numerous times in the head and stomach was found early yesterday in a Brooklyn apartment where his mother and her boyfriend had been smoking crack, the police said.


SCITEX CORP LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCITEX CORP LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
40,817,000
33,029,000
Net inc
b986,000
c6,912,000
Share earns
.09
-
9mo rev
111,376,000
85,824,000
Net loss
6,435,000
28,759,000
b-Includes a realized gain of about $888,000 on the sale of the company's 50 percent investment in Contex Graphic Systems Inc.


WINE TALK
LEAD: THESE days, restaurants and rented halls in Manhattan bring to mind caravan stops along the ancient Silk Route between China and the West.
The modern nomadic traders are vintners and their representatives, with visions of holiday sales dancing in their heads.


IOWA RESOURCES INC reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IOWA RESOURCES INC (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
348,543,000
336,928,000
Net inc
45,135,000
b50,021,000
Share earns
2.03
2.25
b-After net from discontinued operations of $7,332,000.
The year-ago net from discontinued operations includes a gain of $5,898,000 on the sale of discontinued operations.


DATA-DESIGN LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA-DESIGN LABORATORIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,959,000
17,255,000
Net inc
1,685,000
b6,162,000
Share earns
.26
.94
b-After a pre-tax gain of $9,414,000 on sale of marketable securities.


Why Stein Plan for Board of Estimate Is Flawed
LEAD: To the Editor:


IPL SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IPL SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,620,000
542,000
Net inc
b636,000
c101,000
Share earns
.12
.02
9mo rev
3,862,000
1,912,000
Net inc
b1,438,000
c611,000
Share earns
.28
.12
b-After tax credits of $270,000 for the quarter and $575,000 for the 9 months.


NEW TALKS TODAY
LEAD: White House and Congressional negotiators are near agreement on an outline of a plan to reduce the deficit by $25 billion to $30 billion, several officials involved in the budget talks said today.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption in some copies on Nov. 3 about foreign Communist leaders who listened to Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speech at the Central Committee meeting in Moscow omitted the identity of the guest shown at the right of President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua.
He was Gus Hall of the American Communist Party.


PANEL URGES SALE OF PUBLIC HOUSING
LEAD: A Presidential commission is recommending that the Federal Government gradually get out of the public housing business and arrange for the sale of public housing to either tenants or private investors.


Patty Duke Re-elected By Screen Actors Guild
LEAD: Patty Duke has won a second two-year term as president of the 70,000-member Screen Actors Guild.


ROCKWOOD NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCKWOOD NATIONAL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,448,000
11,782,000
Net inc
99,000
c6,457,000
Share earns
.01
.65
6mo rev
6,689,000
14,244,000
Net loss
294,000
bc6,349,000
Share earns
-
.64


LUMEX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LUMEX INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,852,000
17,816,000
Net inc
604,000
1,187,000
Share earns
.14
.30
Shares outst
4,213,000
3,918,000
9mo sales
54,487,000
52,114,000
Net inc
1,815,000
3,092,000
Share earns
.43
.79
Shares outst
4,220,000
3,903,000


CINCINNATI MICROWAVE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINCINNATI MICROWAVE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,257,000
24,694,000
Net inc
2,450,000
3,443,000
Share earns
.15
.21
9mo sales
62,595,000
73,481,000
Net inc
8,193,000
11,039,000
Share earns
.51
.67


FIRST CONTINENTAL REAL ESATE INVESTMENT TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST CONTINENTAL REAL ESATE INVESTMENT TRUST (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Net loss
2,548,000
b75,000
Share earns
-
.02
6mo net loss
2,783,000
b639,000
Share earns
-
.16
b-Net income


Refining the Art Of Fingerprinting
LEAD: Despite the myths created by Hollywood, large police departments have traditionally had a tough time identifying suspects based on fingerprints.


KENWIN SHOPS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENWIN SHOPS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,666,950
6,541,636
Net loss
408,852
240,741
9mo sales
20,036,603
20,424,571
Net loss
465,822
248,682


Supreme Court Backs I.R.S. On Refusal to Disclose Data
LEAD: A ruling by the Supreme Court today will make it easier for the Internal Revenue Service to withhold material that individuals or organizations seek under the Freedom of Information Act.


Harold Goldberg, United Jewish Appeal Official, 50
LEAD: Harold Goldberg, associate executive vice chairman of the United Israel Appeal, died of cancer on Monday at New York Hospital.
He was 50 years old and lived in Nanuet, N.Y.


From the Czars to Glasnost, A Russian Princess Endures
LEAD: The faded photographs of the old southern Russian estate, rendered three-dimensional by an antique stereoscope, flipped soundlessly around the cylinder.
Princess Yekaterina A. Meshcherskaya was taking another tour of her childhood in the time of the czars.


TALLEY INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TALLEY INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
59,746,000
46,214,000
Net loss
b22,540,000
c3,490,000
Share earns
-
.35
9mo sales
183,891,000
138,329,000
Net loss
b17,006,000
c9,530,000
Share earns
-
.96


Dollar Ends the Day Higher
LEAD: The dollar rose yesterday on supportive remarks from President Reagan.


UNITIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITIL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,572,919
13,307,851
Net inc
454,901
518,480
Share earns
.60
.70
9mo rev
49,197,454
41,008,926
Net inc
1,934,759
1,831,492
Share earns
2.64
2.49


Keeping Cozy
LEAD: 1.
Sweaters for Less rrA new wool sweater for $18?
You'll find it at Repeat Performance, the thrift shop benefiting the New York City Opera.
The blue crew-neck sweater shown here is from a collection that was donated by a Fifth Avenue store.
Repeat Performance is at 220 East 23d Street.  2.
Functional Ceramics  This decorative porcelain honey jar costs $50 and is among a collection of ceramic pieces - including teapots and coffeepots -that can be found at Potters' Gallery, 168 Thompson Street, between Houston and Bleecker Streets.


2 More Top Aides Quit Arizona Chief's Staff
LEAD: Two more top aides left Gov.
Evan Mecham's staff Monday.
One, facing extortion charges, resigned shortly after his trial date was set, and the other took a leave of absence to head the Mr.
Mecham's fight against a special election to oust him from office.


Bridge: Some Jump Shift Responses Have Fallen From Fashion
LEAD: An obvious bid that has become unfashionable is the direct jump shift in response to a suit opening, hinting at a slam.


Islanders Capitalize on 3 by LaFontaine
LEAD: There are drawbacks to making history, among them having to explain it, being required to assess it and forever being asked to relive it.
For the last three days, Pat LaFontaine, microphones stuck in his face and television cameras blinding his eyes, has wanted to do nothing so much with history as make it a thing of the past.


Italian Chefs Come to U.S. Bearing Regions' Bounty
LEAD: FROM neighborhood pizza parlors to big brassy dinner clubs, Italian restaurants have been among America's favorite dining-out choices throughout much of this century.
But the very words ''Italian restaurant'' have meant different things at different times to different people.
The most recent change is producing some of the most interesting and exciting eating places in years.


IROQUOIS BRANDS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IROQUOIS BRANDS LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
17,043,000
17,566,000
Net loss
584,000
c169,000
Share earns
-
.18
9mo sales
58,265,000
52,939,000
Net loss
b234,000
c819,000
Share earns
-
.87


'A Feeling of Self-Control'
LEAD: A former smoker, a writer who has gone two and a half years without a cigarette, offered this description of her efforts to quit, in hopes that others can better appreciate what it takes.
She asked not to be identified.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Bunge Advances: Seventh-seeded Bettina Bunge of Switzerland overcame Larisa Savchenko of the Soviet Union, 6-2, 6-1, yesterday in the first round of the $150,000 Virginia Slims of Chicago.
Savchenko's doubles partner, Natalya Zvereva, survived her first-round test by eliminating Betsy Nagelsen, 6-3, 6-2.


Some of the Best To Miss Cup Races
LEAD: The seven Breeders' Cup races at Hollywood Park Nov. 21 drew 106 preliminary entries yesterday, but several of the nation's very best runners were not among them.


Insider Purchases Soaring
LEAD: Executives are putting their money where their mouths are.
Ever since Oct. 19, the day the stock market plunged 508 points, they have been insisting that their companies are fundamentally sound.
Now a survey shows that executives have been putting their own money into their companies' stock at an unprecedented rate.


An Early Chance to End the Courting
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association's one-week period for the early signing of basketball players begins today, offering high-school stars an opportunity to make early commitments to colleges deeply interested in tapping and refining their abilities to dribble, pass, rebound and shoot.


INTERNATIONAL ALUMINUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL ALUMINUM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
48,559,000
43,950,000
Net inc
3,302,000
1,992,000
Share earns
.72
.44


38 Arrested in Inquiry Of Hells Angels Gang
LEAD: Thirty-eight members of the Hells Angels in five states were arrested today on charges related to drugs, weapons, explosives and conspiracy to murder members of a rival gang, the Justice Department said.


U.S. Indicts 7 in a Police Case
LEAD: Seven present and former Boston police detectives have been indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges of taking bribes in exchange for overlooking violations at certain restaurants and nightclubs, the authorities announced today.


KOLLMORGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KOLLMORGEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
70,609,000
73,198,000
Net inc
b1,538,000
c4,088,000
Share earns
.15
-
9mo sales
217,009,000
248,387,000
Net loss
b832,000
5,821,000
b-After a tax credit of $265,000 for the quarter and 9 months.


Deaver Jury Told of Conflict Over Reagan Visitor
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, the former White House chief of staff, testified today that he ''hit the overhead'' when he learned that he had failed twice in 1985 to have the visit of a middle-level South Korean trade official struck from President Reagan's appointment schedule.


DURAKON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DURAKON INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
28,722,000
22,098,000
Net inc
1,967,000
1,545,000
Share earns
.32
.26
9mo sales
78,535,000
60,033,000
Net inc
4,585,000
3,190,000
Share earns
.74
.57
Shares outst
6,214,000
5,559,000


Market Plan For Mexico
LEAD: Brokerage houses, the central bank and the Government's development bank are working on a rescue plan to stabilize the Mexican stock market, one of the world's fastest-rising trading arenas until last month's plunge, analysts said today.


The Short Life of a Former Foster Child
LEAD: For a brief time two years ago, Reggie Brown, known as Gizmo to his friends, emerged from the ranks of the anonymous young homeless to enjoy an unlikely celebrity.
His tragic odyssey through the foster-care system had cast him as a plaintiff in a lawsuit that held out the promise for sweeping changes in what happens to children after they become too old for foster care.


Allied Names President
LEAD: As expected, the Allied Stores Corporation has appointed Robert H. Morosky, who resigned as a top official of The Limited Inc. in June, as its president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Morosky, 46 years old, will join Allied on Nov. 30.
The Campeau Corporation of Toronto purchased Allied Stores in December in a $3.5 billion leveraged buyout and sold most of its division.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: IMAGINING ARGENTINA. By Lawrence Thornton. 214 pages. Doubleday. $16.95.


Sales to Soviet Bloc Charged
LEAD: Representative Duncan L. Hunter, Republican of California, said today that in the last seven years, the Toshiba Company of Japan, whose subsidiary had violated export control laws by selling silent propellers to the Soviet Union, and other Japanese companies have been ''heavily involved in illegally enhancing the microelectronic capability of Warsaw Pact nations.


FLOW GENERAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLOW GENERAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
54,198,000
47,098,000
Net loss
868,000
463,000


EUROPE-PRETORIA TRADE
LEAD: European Community imports from South Africa were one-third lower in the first quarter of 1987 than in the 1986 period last year, according to community figures released today.
The fall reflects trade in general, an European Community commission report said, and not just restrictions on imports of iron, steel and gold coins from South Africa, which com-munity foreign ministers agreed to September 1986.


KOMAG INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KOMAG INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,684,000
5,416,000
Net inc
b2,666,000
154,000
Share earns
.21
.02
Shares outst
12,720,000
9,219,000
9mo sales
32,727,000
12,534,000
Net inc
b5,788,000
c1,823,000
Share earns
.54
-
Shares outst
10,681,000
8,984,000


House Votes Bill to Require Simultaneous Poll Closings
LEAD: The House, concerned that television network projections of election winners discourage voter turnout in Western states, voted 208 to 189 today to require a simultaneous poll-closing time of 9 P.M., Eastern standard time, in Presidential general elections.


AIDS PANEL HEAD SAYS RIFT IS OVER
LEAD: The chairman of a Presidential commission on AIDS said today that the panel had put controversy behind it and would finish an interim report by its Dec. 7 deadline.


Washington Talk: Briefing; On Second Thought . . .
LEAD: When two supporters of Governor Cuomo filed papers last month with the Federal Election Commission, establishing a draft committee in an effort to persuade the Governor to run for President, they didn't realize what they were getting into.


CONNECTICUT ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONNECTICUT ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,654,000
17,579,000
Net loss
2,057,000
2,496,000
9mo rev
111,425,000
111,063,000
Net inc
3,765,000
b4,879,000
Share earns
1.07
1.40
b-Includes a cumulative effect from a change in accounting principles of $1,911,000.


Claire Boothe Luce Saw Herself as a Failure
LEAD: To the Editor:


AMERICAN BILTRITE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN BILTRITE INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
34,932,000
29,343,000
Net inc
497,000
c1,043,000
Share earns
.23
.48
9mo sales
102,350,000
80,313,000
Net inc
b2,819,000
c4,267,000
Share earns
1.32
1.93


MAYFAIR SUPER MARKETS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAYFAIR SUPER MARKETS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 29
1987
1986
Sales
123,903,000
112,943,000
Net inc
2,836,000
1,546,000
Share earns
.36
.20
Yr sales
488,101,000
431,591,000
Net inc
9,795,000
6,784,000
Share earns
1.25
.87


RSI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RSI CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,947,000
11,659,000
Net inc
2,271,000
b1,064,000
Share earns
.30
-
Yr rev
87,067,000
57,440,000
Net inc
8,878,000
919,000
Share earns
1.18
.12
b-Net loss


MS CARRIERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MS CARRIERS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,772,812
8,939,203
Net inc
1,362,466
1,094,856
Share earns
.26
.22
Shares outst
5,290,000
4,890,000
9mo rev
32,995,609
25,089,109
Net inc
3,386,935
2,786,997
Share earns
.65
.67
Shares outst
5,200,623
4,187,254


Herzog Confers With Reagan
LEAD: President Chaim Herzog of Israel met with President Reagan and addressed a joint meeting of Congress today during the first official visit of an Israeli President to the United States.


Bulls Defeat the Hawks
LEAD: Michael Jordan of the Bulls was all alone at the basket as he slammed one in against the Hawks in the first half last night at Atlanta.
Chicago won, 105-95.
Page B14. (AP)


Mikhail I. Tsarev, Actor and Director, 83
LEAD: Mikhail I. Tsarev, a leading actor who was director of Moscow's Maly Theater for 37 years, has died at age 83, the official Soviet news agency Tass reported today.


DE LAURENTIIS ENTERTAINENT GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DE LAURENTIIS ENTERTAINENT GROUP (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
17,957,000
24,672,000
Net loss
4,987,000
b1,570,000
Share earns
-
.16
6mo rev
25,555,000
30,776,000
Net loss
20,525,000
557,000
b


INTERLEAF INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERLEAF INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,732,000
8,578,000
Net inc
b1,309,000
c251,000
Share earns
.11
-
6mo rev
23,265,000
14,983,000
Net inc
b2,032,000
c1,405,000
Share earns
.17
-


Boy Brings Loaded Gun to School
LEAD: A 6-year-old boy, assigned to bring something for show and tell in his first-grade class, arrived at a Manhattan elementary school on Monday with a loaded .25-caliber semiautomatic pistol tucked in his belt, officials said yesterday.


Talks on Nuclear Testing Begin in Geneva
LEAD: Robert Barker, left, head of the American delegation in Geneva for negotiations on nuclear testing, greeting Igor Palenykh, his Soviet counterpart, during meeting at the U.S.
Mission.
The session yesterday marked the first meeting of both full delegations.


The Supercomputer Rivalry
LEAD: No sooner had the Massachusetts Institute of Technology started shopping for a supercomputer earlier this year than its technical experts reached a quick conclusion: Japan's first offerings were at least as capable as America's fastest processors.
Last week, after behind-the-scenes pressure from three Federal agencies and the White House for M.I.T.


ICH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ICH CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b53,237,000
c39,452,000
Share earns
.93
.74
9mo net inc
b98,817,000
c105,500,000
Share earns
1.65
2.09
Shares outst
52,266,000
49,435,000
b-After capital gains of $19,628,000 for the quarter and $30,946,000 for the 9 months; the 9 months also includes an extraordinary loss of $33,000 from early retirement of debt.


Griffin Puts Yanks On Trade Veto List
LEAD: The Yankees and five other teams seeking a shortstop will receive a rude jolt when they learn that Alfredo Griffin, who has demanded a trade, has included them on a list of teams to which he will not be traded.


TRIMEDYNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRIMEDYNE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,221,000
1,847,000
Net inc
468,000
b224,000
Share earns
.08
-
Yr sales
12,329,000
5,549,000
Net inc
440,000
c773,000
Share earns
.08
-
c-Net loss


Dow Off 22.05 on Dollar Fears
LEAD: Stock prices eroded on Wall Street yesterday amid concern that a falling dollar would drive away foreign investors.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 11, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


Case Raises Questions In Homless Roundup
LEAD: When Mayor Koch began an effort to hospitalize mentally ill homeless people against their will last month, he called it the ''single most important program'' of his administration.
Instead of clarifying the issue, the case of Joyce Brown - the first person picked up under the program aimed at treating homeless people who cannot care for themselves - has sharpened the debate over how government should care for the homeless.


Jordan Leads Bulls Past Hawks, 105-95
LEAD: Michael Jordan scored 29 points for Chicago, and the Bills took advantage of 38 percent shooting by the Atlanta Hawks for a 105-95 victory tonight.


LAWSUIT SETTLED IN TEAMSTER CASE
LEAD: The Labor Department today announced the settlement of a lawsuit filed nearly 10 years ago against the former trustees of the principal pension fund of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.


NBC Leads TV Ratings For 2d Week in Row
LEAD: NBC handily won the ratings race for the second consecutive week, with help Sunday from the first installment of the mini-series ''Billionaire Boys Club,'' according to figures released yesterday by the A. C. Nielsen Company.


Art Center For Tower In Midtown
LEAD: AFTER more than six years of planning and construction, a 32-story office tower at the northwest corner of Lexington Avenue and 57th Street, which will have an opulent marketplace for art and antiques as its centerpiece, is nearly finished.
The antique center opens next week and the office space early next year.


LET THEM EAT GLASTNOST, FRENCH COMMUNISTS SAY
LEAD: In this crumbling bastion of the French Communist Party, where Marx's prophecies are being confounded, the only real hope for Communist comrades is a movement of renewal begun by Mikhail S. Gorbachev in distant Moscow.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in Business Day last Wednesday, about the legal hopes of Texaco Inc. in the Supreme Court, erroneously described shareholder suits related to the litigation with the Pennzoil Company.
While Texaco shareholders have sued company directors for their handling of the dispute, Pennzoil shareholders have not.


Shift in Public Assistance Urged At a Meeting on Minority Children
LEAD: Government officials and scholars, discussing the plight of the state's black and Hispanic children, called today for changing the emphasis of public assistance to focus more on neighborhoods than individuals.


McDonald's Is Urged to Alter Packaging
LEAD: New York State asked the McDonald's Corporation today to take its Big Macs, Chicken McNuggets and other foods out of Styrofoam and serve them in biodegradable materials.


Poles Seize Underground Leader
LEAD: The police have arrested a fugitive leader of the opposition underground, Kornel Morawiecki, the founder of a clandestine group called Fighting Solidarity, for ''using false identity cards,'' the Government's spokesman said today.


DAISY SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAISY SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,585,000
24,999,000
Net inc
458,000
c860,000
Share earns
.03
-
Yr rev
100,860,000
107,149,000
Net loss
b16,276,000
1,081,000
b-After pre-tax charges of $8,300,000 incurred in the second quarter and third quarters to cover fixed asset and inventory writedowns associated with the introduction of the company's new 80386-based product line, provisions for severance and other employee benefits related to staffing changes and provisions to cover t


NASH FINCH CO reports earnings for 16wks to Oct 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NASH FINCH CO (OTC)
16wks to Oct 10
1987
1986
Sales
615,163,256
484,171,648
Net inc
6,027,709
4,554,496
Share earns
.56
.44
Shares outst
10,784,222
10,253,280
40wk sales
1,483,336,113
1,116,499,772
Net inc
12,180,395
9,960,935
Share earns
1.16
.97
Shares outst
10,489,288
10,236,210


Hanson Unit Gains Control of Kidde
LEAD: Hanson Industries, the American arm of Hanson Trust P.L.C., said that more than 24.3 million shares of Kidde Inc. common stock had been accepted for exchange under the offer that expired Monday.


SAVANNAH FOODS &amp; INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAVANNAH FOODS &amp; INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
227,494,000
172,698,000
Net inc
4,059,000
2,733,000
Share earns
.61
.41
9mo sales
646,056,000
475,824,000
Net inc
9,824,000
7,520,000
Share earns
1.48
1.13


AON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b26,662,000
c55,774,000
Share earns
.41
.84
9mo net inc
b128,698,000
c201,554,000
Share earns
1.94
3.02
b-After investment losses of $18,553,000 for the quarter and $11,489,000 for the 9 months.


GENERAL DEVELOPMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL DEVELOPMENT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
125,960,000
89,794,000
Net inc
5,928,000
5,447,000
Share earns
.66
.61
Shares outst
8,948,000
8,947,000
9mo rev
343,902,000
286,906,000
Net inc
17,524,000
16,291,000
Share earns
1.96
1.96
Shares outst
8,948,000
8,300,000


A Time to Recognize Women Are Veterans Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


Standard Brands Recapitalization
LEAD: The Standard Brands Paint Company, which rejected a takeover bid last month, said it had begun a $193 million recapitalization plan that would increase the company's debt and adopted a poison-pill style shareholder rights plan to deter an unfriendly takeover.


TV Reviews; 'Divided Union,' Series On Civil War, on A&amp;E
LEAD: IN the midst of a ''Celebration of America'' campaign, cable's Arts &amp; Entertainment Network is presenting, beginning tonight at 9 o'clock, a five-part series entitled ''The Divided Union.'' As a co-production of A&amp;E and Peter Batty Productions, this account of the Civil War is one of those sometimes confusing television exercises that mixes comments by historians and genuine archival photographs with ''actual re-enactments'' of battles, filmed on locations from Fort Sumter to Appomattox.


Gore Everybody's Ox
LEAD: After two weeks of push and shove, the pieces of a credible budget deficit-reduction deal lie scattered on the negotiating table in Washington.
What White House and Congressional negotiators need to put it together is the courage not to compromise too readily and settle for too little.


Judge Weighs Texaco Plea
LEAD: A Federal judge reserved decision today on whether to grant Texaco Inc.'s request to disband one of the two creditors committees in its Chapter 11 bankruptcy case.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Deficit of Another Sort
LEAD: Representative Guy Vander Jagt of Michigan, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, mailed a solicitation letter to potential donors last week in which he admitted that the committee was ''seriously behind in our fund-raising.''


RESTRAINT DEVICES CHOSEN BY POLICE
LEAD: New York City police officials, seeking to equip the department with something more powerful than a nightstick but less deadly than a gun, have chosen five devices to be used in dangerous situations.


HCC INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HCC INDUSTRIES INC
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Sales
6,790,000
8,223,000
Net loss
528,000
c362,000
6mo sales
15,885,000
17,790,000
Net loss
b493,000
c546,000
b-Includes a loss of $39,000 from settlement of an EPA Superfund claim.


HASTINGS MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HASTINGS MANUFACTURING CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,449,842
16,471,380
Net inc
261,757
347,463
Share earns
.62
.83
9mo sales
49,322,896
47,231,114
Net inc
991,816
634,669
Share earns
2.36
1.51


BORDEN ACQUIRES 8 SMALL CNCERNS
LEAD: Borden Inc. said that it had ac-quired eight small companies at a total cost of $55 million.
Since March 1986, Borden has invested more than $1 billion in 39 acquisitions, which ac-count for $2 billion of its $6.5 billion in 1987 projected annual sales.


First Interstate
LEAD: First Interstate Bancorp is offering $150 million of 9 3/8 percent notes due in 1992 for 100 through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.
The notes, rated Aa-3 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, are not callable and yield about 1 1/8 percentage points more than Treasury issues of similar maturity.


Elusive Rebels Are Spreading Fear Across Peru
LEAD: Decorating the walls of the University of San Marcos here, revolutionary graffiti, informational bulletin boards and huge mural paintings of Mao and Marx testify to the presence of Shining Path guerrillas in Peru's oldest center of learning.


LSI LIGHTING SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LSI LIGHTING SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,052,000
6,829,000
Net inc
759,000
383,000
Share earns
.25
.13


A Menu of Laws
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-15


ELIE WIESEL IN PLEA TO GERMANS
LEAD: Speaking, he said, from the ''very rostrum'' from which his death and that of his people were ''decreed and predicted,'' Elie Wiesel, chronicler of the Nazi crimes, appealed to German youths today to ''fight forgetfulness'' about their past.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD: Noon Dance


HEALTH CARE PROPERTY INVESORS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTH CARE PROPERTY INVESORS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,059,000
7,537,000
Net inc
3,581,000
3,757,000
Share earns
.44
.46
9mo rev
29,115,000
19,469,000
Net inc
10,426,000
9,207,000
Share earns
1.28
1.32
Shares outst
8,152,218
6,949,340


Market Place; G.M.'s Allure: Hefty Dividend
LEAD: YEARS ago, the mighty General Motors Corporation was regarded as the quality leader and low-cost producer in the automobile industry.
But times have changed.
Nowadays, many analysts see as G.M.'s chief attraction its hefty dividend yield of slightly more than 8.5 percent.


Southland Buyout Hits Snag
LEAD: The owner of the 7-Eleven chain, the Southland Corporation, said today that it could not proceed with its plan to become a private company because of the unreceptive climate for high-risk bonds.


Waves of Panic Buying Push Copper Prices Up
LEAD: Waves of panic buying sent copper futures soaring yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange amid fears that supplies were drying up.


Dollar Drop For Months Is Predicted
LEAD: The dollar's value is likely to continue to decline for at least the next few months, many economists and participants in the foreign-exchange markets say.


A Salt Substitute for America's Roads
LEAD: First comes the snow; then, instantly comes the salt.
In a typical winter, highway departments spread about 10 million tons of it to keep roads safe and dry.
Homeowners spread more on driveways and sidewalks.
The corrosive effects are well known but for years they've been dismissed with the argument that at $25 per ton, salt is far cheaper than any alternative.


Transplant Patient Alert
LEAD: The 3-year-old girl who received five organs in a transplant operation Nov. 1, was reported awake, alert and resting comfortably today after undergoing further surgery this week.
Tabatha Foster, of Madisonville, Ky., remained in critical but stable condition at Children's Hospital, s spokesman said.


DATA MEASUREMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA MEASUREMENT
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,159,236
1,713,531
Net inc
17,415
64,749
Share earns
.02
.08
Shares outst
1,088,485
844,315
9mo sales
6,941,512
6,091,911
Net inc
400,836
370,920
Share earns
.42
.44
Shares outst
950,993
844,315


2 Arab Schoolgirls Wounded By an Israeli Driver in Gaza
LEAD: An Israeli driver shot and wounded two Palestinian schoolgirls in Gaza City today when he fired a pistol to ward off protesters who surrounded his car and showered it with rocks, an army spokesman said.


Afghan Guerrillas May Be Pressed to Share Power
LEAD: President Reagan is scheduled to meet with Afghan guerrilla leaders Thursday amid growing signs that they may have to make a political compromise to get Soviet troops out of their country.


Suitor Reviews Offer for Telex
LEAD: Asher B. Edelman said yesterday that he was reviewing all aspects of his $65-a-share buyout offer for the Telex Corporation because of the uncertain market for the high-yield junk bonds to be used for financing the takeover.
On Tuesday, the Southland


DRYCLEAN-USA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DRYCLEAN-USA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,544,000
3,143,000
Net inc
545,000
346,000
Share earns
.19
.17
9mo rev
13,450,000
10,192,000
Net inc
1,658,000
1,144,000
Share earns
.59
.57
Year-ago third quarter and 9-month results are pro forma; certain subsidiaries of the company had elected to be treated as S corporations during most of 1986 and, accordingly, the taxable income for such companies was taxed directly to their respective shareholders.


METROPOLITAN FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*METROPOLITAN FINANCIAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,452,000
c3,514,000
Share earns
.47
.67
9mo net inc
b10,224,000
c18,087,000
Share earns
1.95
3.90
b-After an extraordinary loss of $4,269,000.


Tax Burden Is Found to Rise for Poor in U.S.
LEAD: The poorest one-tenth of Americans will pay 20 percent more of their earnings in Federal taxes next year than they did in 1977 and the richest will pay almost 20 percent less, the Congressional Budget Office says.


PETROLEUM EQUIPMENT TOOLS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PETROLEUM EQUIPMENT TOOLS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,799,000
4,727,000
Net loss
4,597,000
7,623,000
9mo rev
18,285,000
23,724,000
Net loss
14,159,000
16,106,000
The latest 9 months' results were adjusted to reflect a reduction of depreciation expenses of $2,758,000.


The Third Time, With Charm
LEAD: President Reagan's choice of Anthony Kennedy for the Supreme Court, formally announced yesterday with pride but in an appropriately lowered voice, marks a victory for an orderly nomination and confirmation process.
Mr.
Reagan at last showed appreciation that, given the Constitution and political reality, he has the first word - and that the


DURHAM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DURHAM CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,853,000
c6,470,000
Share earns
.46
.76
9mo net inc
b13,662,000
c17,875,000
Share earns
1.61
2.09
b-Includes investment gains of $1,881,000 for the quarter and $6,585,000 for the 9 months.


Military Magistrate Confines the Private Who Fled to Russia
LEAD: A military magistrate ruled today that an Army soldier who defected to the Soviet Union earlier this year should be detained at the Philadelphia Naval Yard.


POSTAL INSTANT PRESS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POSTAL INSTANT PRESS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,115,000
5,181,000
Net inc
1,149,000
1,022,000
Share earns
.28
.25
The company said this years first quarter net was adversely affected by unusual expenses relating to the proposed $18.50 a share takeover bid by Kane-Miller Corp., which was rejected.


INTERWEST CORP reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERWEST CORP (AMEX)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
129,474
68,526
Net loss
1,249,689
400,737


KANSAS CITY POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KANSAS CITY POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
699,208,000
695,979,000
Net inc
94,493,000
126,324,000
Share earns
2.61
3.42


Talking Deals; Horse Trading For Bankers
LEAD: IN 1982, riding the wake of a rush to deregulation, the Reagan Administration proposed legislation that would have opened a brave new world to the nation's 14,000 commercial banks by permitting them to enter three previously forbidden industries - securities underwriting, insurance and real estate.


Books of The Times
LEAD:  THE LIFE OF KENNETH TYNAN. By Kathleen Tynan. Illustrated. 597 pages.


Government Clears British Air Merger
LEAD: British Airways, Britain's biggest airline, received the Government's conditional approval today to acquire British Caledonian Airways, the No. 2 carrier.


Europeans Are Amused By Moral Stance in U.S.
LEAD: The cultural chasm that sometimes seems to separate the United States and Europe has widened a bit as the scrutiny of American public figures pushes deeper into the most intimate corners of their personal lives.


HEMOTEC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEMOTEC INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,133,000
1,003,000
Net loss
117,000
57,000
9mo sales
3,441,000
3,063,000
Net inc
76,000
b66,000
Share earns
.03
.03
b-Includes a tax credit of $27,000.


Metro Matters; 46 Suggestions On How to Save New York City
LEAD: ''New York becomes harder and harder to live in,'' Irving Howe writes.


PENN TREATY AMERICAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENN TREATY AMERICAN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,487,257
2,440,665
Net inc
566,632
420,136
Share earns
.28
.20
9mo rev
9,533,246
7,847,184
Net inc
1,768,730
1,318,053
Share earns
.87
.64
Year-ago results are pro forma; the company became publicly owned in September.


ASEA Merger Gets Approval
LEAD: Shareholders of Switzerland's BBC Brown Boveri &amp; Company and ASEA A.B. of Sweden approved the proposed merger of the two companies to form the world's largest electrical engineering group.


Thousands of Pupils Living in Hotels Skip School in New York
LEAD: Only half of the approximately 6,000 school-age homeless children living in hotels in New York City are known to be attending school, according to school officials.


Bid for Duro-Test Lifted
LEAD: The TCA Acquisition Corporation, a subsidiary of TCA-IV Limited Partnership, yesterday increased to $14 a share its bid for all outstanding shares of the Duro-Test Corporation.
Earlier this month, Duro-Test rejected a $13-a-share offer by TCA Acquisition, which at the time was working with Prof.
William P.


Copper Prices Raised Again
LEAD: Copper producers raised their prices yesterday for the second consecutive day, taking their lead from the surging prices on the world's metal exchanges.


INFORMATION RESOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INFORMATION RESOURCES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
26,077,000
23,824,000
Net loss
2,367,000
b2,637,000
Share earns
-
.16
9mo sales
80,312,000
66,916,000
Net inc
225,000
7,337,000
Share earns
.01
.44


Corrections
LEAD: A review on Oct. 22 about Harry Shearer's act at Caroline's misidentified a target of Mr.
Shearer's impersonations.
The Los Angeles cable-television personality impersonated by Mr.
Shearer in his act is Richard Blackwell.


Next We'll Need to Have Art Officially Defined; Might Shift Market
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Dance: Chinese Performers
LEAD: WHEN the curtain rose Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater and performers stepped smartly onstage to a peppy tune, one could almost have been watching a circus parade or the opening ensemble of a television variety show.
Instead, this was the start of a program called ''Chinese Festival of Song and Dance,'' and its participants constituted the first performing-arts group from China to visit the United


ACMAT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACMAT CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,180,532
4,606,613
Net inc
b1,386,939
c127,598
Share earns
.46
.04
9mo rev
12,047,135
12,985,573
Net inc
b3,723,447
c681,943
Share earns
1.24
.23
b-Includes a gain of $1 million from a stock sale by an affiliate for both the quarter and 9 months, and the 9 months also includes a tax credit of $340,100.


INTERMARK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERMARK INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
144,135,000
122,077,000
Net loss
756,000
c529,000
Share earns
-
.07
6mo rev
308,372,000
262,249,000
Net loss
b5,356,000
c2,075,000
Share earns
-
.25


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''The experience of the last several months has made all of us a bit wiser,''  - President Reagan,


Further Inquiry Due in Death of Girl
LEAD: Prosecutors investigating the beating death of 6-year-old Elizabeth Steinberg said yesterday that they would not seek an indictment for at least 30 days against the girl's adoptive mother, Hedda Nussbaum, to give investigators more time to look into her role in the child's death.


Bargain With Terror?
LEAD: Last Sunday a bomb planted by the Irish Republican Army blew up a community hall in Enniskillen, Northern Ireland.
Eleven people were killed and more than 60 injured.


'Thy Name Is Man!'
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Sikh Leader Slain in London
LEAD: Two gunmen burst into a London school today and opened fire on a mixed Hindu and Sikh congregation, killing a moderate Sikh leader and wounding three others, the police said.
The police were questioning two men held by members of the congregation after the incident, which occurred during a religious service in the Southall district.


PORTAGE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PORTAGE INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,956,000
6,326,000
Net inc
280,000
332,000
Share earns
.13
.29
9mo sales
16,307,000
17,209,000
Net inc
712,000
733,000
Share earns
.40
.64


Jets Hail the Taxicab Squad
LEAD: The revival of the taxi squad in the National Football League, a residue of the recent players strike, will be a boon to the Jets this week.


RMS INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RMS INTERNATIONAL (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,457,215
3,040,622
Net inc
90,989
b170,077
Share earns
.06
-
9mo sales
9,511,079
9,285,152
Net loss
26,256
165,606
b-Net loss


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Allegheny and Western Energy Corp., Charleston, W.Va., an oil and gas exploration concern, said Anthony F. Altmann had resigned as president and a director to pursue other interests.
Assuming his title of president will be John G. McMillian, chairman and chief executive of the company.


ARROW AUTOMOTIVE INDUSRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARROW AUTOMOTIVE INDUSRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Sales
27,646,000
26,547,000
Net inc
132,000
85,000
Share earns
.05
.03


Southland Stock Edges Up After Tuesday's Slide
LEAD: Shares of the Southland Corporation edged up yesterday by $2.50, to $54, after plummeting $16.25 on Tuesday.


SANDWICH CHEF INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANDWICH CHEF INC
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Sales
7,875,224
7,495,509
Net inc
76,811
58,077
Share earns
.07
.05


Concert: Soviet Emigre, Vladimir Feltsman
LEAD: BECAUSEBECAUSE of the circumstances of his arrival in the United States, after spending eight years trying to emigrate from the Soviet Union, Vladimir Feltsman finds himself something more than a pianist.
Like it or not, for a while he will have to bear the burden of being a political hero as well.


A Vast Drought Disaster Theatens Ethiopia Again
LEAD: Ethiopia, once again crippled by drought, is on the brink of a famine that could rival the calamity that took hundreds of thousands of lives barely three years ago, relief officials and Western donors say.


The Park Avenue Armory Is Home To a 10-Room Villa for 'Tamara'
LEAD: A MILITARY headquarters, a shelter for the homeless, a showcase for antiques a tennis arena - the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue at 67th Street serves many functions during the year.
This week the massive 19th-century brick structure is helping preview audiences in the more blithe task of suspending disbelief: Ten rooms on three floors of the south wing have been transformed into the interiors of an Italian villa, the set for the play ''Tamara,'' by John Krizanc, which is to open Dec.


VOICEMAIL INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VOICEMAIL INTERNATIONAL INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
986,397
1,706,683
Net loss
627,485
202,196
9mo rev
3,730,719
5,376,814
Net loss
1,453,715
549,431


Mexico Talks With Canada
LEAD: Mexico and Canada may negotiate a new trade agreement similar to the one that Mexico just signed with the United States, legislators from both countries said today.
Speaking at talks that began here on Tuesday, the legislators said that existing bilateral trade arrangements should be extended.


CIPRICO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CIPRICO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,419,000
2,448,000
Net loss
622,000
b155,000
Share earns
-
.07
Yr sales
8,273,000
10,060,000
Net loss
747,000
b859,000
Share earns
-
.38
b-Net income


Olga Bellin; Actress, 54
LEAD: Olga Bellin, a veteran stage, film and television actress, died Sunday of cancer.
She was 54 years old and lived in Manhattan.


BIRD'S 42 LEAD 4-0 CELTICS
LEAD: Larry Bird scored 42 points, including 10 in the fourth period, and the unbeaten Celtics earned their fourth victory tonight, downing the Indiana Pacers 120-106.


Man in the News; Restrained Pragmatist Anthony M. Kennedy
LEAD: In the modern world of family turmoil, the life of Judge Anthony McLeod Kennedy seems almost like a living Norman Rockwell portrait of provincial constancy and familial loyalty.
He has been married to the same woman for 24 years, has sent all three of his children to his alma mater, Stanford University, and lives in the same white colonial-style house in Sacramento, behind a camelia bush and a neat row of gardenias, where he was born 51 years ago.


HEARTLAND EXPRESS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEARTLAND EXPRESS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,900,627
5,531,811
Net inc
1,005,820
737,267
Share earns
.20
.15
9mo rev
18,588,178
16,363,664
Net inc
2,755,734
2,443,226
Share earns
.55
.49


SRI LANKA REBELS SAID TO SLAY 15
LEAD: Tamil militants killed 15 ethnic Sinhalese fishermen in eastern Sri Lanka today as they were going to market to sell their catch, military officials said.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-21


HALSEY DRUG reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HALSEY DRUG
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,898,000
1,896,000
Net inc
161,000
158,000
Share earns
.03
.03
9mo sales
8,297,000
6,425,000
Net inc
226,000
86,000
Share earns
.05
.02


Summit Plans: Will Gorbachev Stay Longer?
LEAD: A Soviet advance team told American officials today that it had no indication Mikhail S. Gorbachev intended to stay in the United States beyond two and a half days, a White House official said.


Ortega Attacks U.S. but Calls for Talks
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua combined a sharp attack on the United States today with a renewal of an offer to negotiate directly with the Reagan Administration on security issues.


FIRST CENTRAL FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST CENTRAL FINANCIAL (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,261,797
3,266,075
Net inc
b722,936
308,219
Share earns
.12
.06
Shares outst
6,184,459
4,816,639
9mo rev
11,699,329
7,502,063
Net inc
b1,776,325
c681,749
Share earns
.29
.14
Shares outst
6,184,459
5,026,773


Heating Oil Prices Rise On Fear of Short Supply
LEAD: Heating oil futures prices rose more than 1 cent a gallon yesterday, to 57.03 cents in the December contract, on fears that the nation's inventories will not be adequate to meet the approaching winter demand.


PRICE-STERN-SLOAN PUBLISHERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRICE-STERN-SLOAN PUBLISHERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
19,752,000
12,679,000
Net inc
2,083,000
1,633,000
Share earns
.51
.40
9mo sales
31,358,000
23,690,000
Net inc
1,734,000
1,499,000
Share earns
.43
.39
Shares outst
4,112,000
3,821,000


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q.The shingles on our house are dark and weather-beaten.
We are uncertain as to how to paint them and how often to do it.
Can you help?
A.Assuming they are wood shingles or shakes, they should be stained or treated with a clear wood preservative.
Using a paint on shingles almost always results in peeling and flaking.


TALKS MOVE CLOSER TO A DEFICIT PLAN
LEAD: Negotiators from the White House and Congress inched closer today to agreement on a plan to reduce the deficit by $25 billion to $30 billion.


ORANGE-CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORANGE-CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
29,504,000
6,546,000
Net inc
180,000
435,000
Share earns
.03
.15
Shares outst
6,674,000
2,993,000
Yr sales
113,927,000
59,196,000
Net inc
b4,598,000
c840,000
Share earns
.80
-


Only More Beds Can End the Gridlock in New York's Hospitals
LEAD: To the Editor:


Iran Panels in Congress Seek to Retrieve Files
LEAD: Without any real hope of success, the Congressional committees on the Iran-contra affair are taking a final stab at retrieving files that were erased from the White House computer, according to committee members and staff assistants.


Cleaning the Drug Slate
LEAD: Since the collapse of Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg's Supreme Court nomination, some Congressional aides and civil liberties lawyers have been discussing an idea: Why not do for those who experimented with illegal drugs in their youth what the Government has more recently done for illegal aliens and draft dodgers - declare an amnesty?


Slow Day For Bonds
LEAD: Activity in the credit markets was subdued yesterday because the New York cash market for Treasury securities was closed for Veterans Day.


ETHIGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ETHIGEN CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,814
36,381
Net loss
661,170
565,922


LEISURE TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEISURE TECHNOLOGY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
45,088,000
25,159,000
Net inc
2,666,000
b2,176,000
Share earns
.47
-
6mo rev
80,174,000
44,850,000
Net inc
4,447,000
b1,516,000
Share earns
.75
-


STAGE: 'TWO FRIDAYS'
LEAD: THE American Jewish Theater is inaugurating its comfortable new home on 28th Street with ''Two Fridays,'' a matched pair of one-act plays about reconciliation between the generations.


MERCANTILE STORES CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCANTILE STORES CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
526,420,000
490,620,000
Net inc
37,967,000
27,350,000
Share earns
1.03
.74
9mo sales
1,447,166,000
1,355,135,000
Net inc
83,043,000
63,120,000
Share earns
2.25
1.71


Fragrance to Fill the Air
LEAD: ''THIS is the most sophisticated manner in which to fragrance your house, because it is sight unseen,'' said Ann Pellegrino, the owner of Scentsitivity, a store that sells all kinds of scents.


WISER OIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WISER OIL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,574,000
6,162,000
Net inc
174,000
b925,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
23,219,000
25,107,000
Net inc
1,676,000
858,000
Share earns
.18
.09
b-Net loss


Whither Ginsburg?
LEAD: President Reagan never formally submitted Judge Ginsburg's nomination to the Senate.
Thus it does not fit into any of the categories in which Supreme Court nominations are recorded in the annals of Congress: ''confirmed,'' ''rejected,'' ''withdrawn,'' ''postponed'' and ''not acted upon.''


Not Only the Budget Worries Money Managers
LEAD: Even if the budget negotiators in Washington agree to a compromise, the stock market may only get a temporary lift from the money managers whose purchases had been such a propellant this summer.


Next We'll Need to Have Art Officially Defined; Navajo Weavers
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Homeless Veterans, New Shelter Brings Pride
LEAD: For Ronald Saladino, an unemployed electrician and a resident of the city's first shelter for homeless veterans, it is the comradeship, the ''buddy system'' as he calls it, that keeps him from feeling he has hit bottom.


Business Under Fire as Brazil Drafts Constitution
LEAD: Brazilian private-sector organizations have started an urgent campaign to temper what they view as the nationalist and antibusiness tone of a new constitution that is being drafted here.


Market Inquiry In Hong Kong
LEAD: Ian Davison, a former chief executive of Lloyd's of London, was appointed to head a committee examining the British colony's stock and futures exchanges in the wake of the recent stock market turmoil, the Government said today.
Financial Secretary Piers


MORE STATES JOIN BAPTIST REVERSAL
LEAD: Three more Southern Baptist state conventions have joined Georgia and North Carolina in turning away leadership bids by fundamentalists, who have enjoyed nearly a decade of control of the nation's largest Protestant denomination.


ECOGEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ECOGEN INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,350,000
631,000
Net loss
175,000
289,000
9mo rev
3,008,000
1,941,000
Net loss
b4,451,000
835,000
b-Includes a $2.8 million non-cash charge.


PRIME MOTOR INNS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIME MOTOR INNS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,132,000
-
Net inc
858,000
-
Share earns
.21
-
9mo rev
12,392,000
-
Net inc
2,677,000
-
Share earns
.66
-
No comparative figures are available because the partnership started operations in December 1986.


PICTURETEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PICTURETEL CORP
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Revenue
600,613
466,051
Net loss
1,302,509
904,094


The Questions Posed by an Exodus
LEAD: Japanese automobile companies recently received a letter from a Commerce Department official asking for work.


Squaring Off
LEAD: Butch Lewis, the adviser and promoter for Michael Spinks, said that Mike Tyson's managers made it definite this week that they would never agree to a Tyson-Spinks heavyweight title bout if Lewis had a role as a promoter.


Passing Along A Garden's Bounty
LEAD: LAST spring I made a trip to Greenville, Miss., where I grew up.
I stayed with some friends who lived in the old part of the town, where the houses are large and the lots small.


AUTOMATIX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUTOMATIX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,608,000
5,152,000
Net loss
1,119,000
1,990,000
9mo rev
8,523,000
13,945,000
Net loss
2,768,000
5,656,000


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


ACCEL INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACCEL INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,446,000
c1,377,000
Share earns
.48
.27
9mo net inc
b5,256,000
c3,180,000
Share earns
1.01
.61
b-Includes gains from stock transactions of an unconsolidated subsidiary of $1,324,000 and $2,107,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, and gains on investments of $169,000 for the quarter and $698,000 for the 9 months.


INSPEECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSPEECH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,522,000
4,407,000
Net loss
b1,418,000
c389,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Includes a net writedown of securities investments of $2.5 million.
c-Net income and after a tax credit of $199,000.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary Oct. 29 of a former concert pianist who helped develop day-care programs misidentified her.
She was Naomi Henry Thebner.


PHOENIX AMERICAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHOENIX AMERICAN INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,163,910
5,838,817
Net inc
908,837
475,311
Share earns
.14
.07
Shares outst
6,541,681
7,129,201


C.P.A. Fights Florida Soliciting Ban
LEAD: A certified public accountant in Florida has sued the state's Board of Accountancy, seeking to overturn two laws that prohibit him from soliciting clients or quoting prices for audits.


Sixers Sign Robinson
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers came to terms with Cliff Robinson yesterday, signing the forward to a two-year contract, said General Manager John Nash.
Other terms of the contract were not disclosed.
The agreement settled a dispute that kept Robinson from playing in eight exhibition games and the season opener.


Smaller Trade Gap Seen for September
LEAD: The trade deficit for September will be announced today, and the amount is likely to be lower, but not by much, than the $15.7 billion deficit for August that helped to set off the stock market collapse last month.


Aiding Salmon Conservation
LEAD: IF you'd enjoy good food and a chance to chat with some of this country's most dedicated Atlantic salmon anglers and conservationists, you should plan to attend the Atlantic Salmon Federation's annual dinner at the Plaza Hotel, 59th Street and Fifth Avenue, Nov. 19.


IMEX MEDICAL SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMEX MEDICAL SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,076,271
731,630
Net inc
31,826
12,163
Share earns
.01
-


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
9.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
n.a.
6.56
5.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
n.a.
5.66
5.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
n.a.
6.19
5.50
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
n.a.
8.61
7.15
30-YR.


RUSS BERRIE &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RUSS BERRIE &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
86,902,000
73,142,000
Net inc
12,792,000
11,611,000
Share earns
.85
.78
Shares outst
15,011,000
14,852,000
9mo sales
209,667,000
172,441,000
Net inc
25,814,000
21,610,000
Share earns
1.72
1.46


HITK CORP reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HITK CORP
(
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b242,800
c21,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo net loss
b302,500
c1,721,700
Share earns
-
.54
b-Includes realized gains on investments of $322,800 for the quarter and $403,500 for the 6 months.


Two M.T.A. Rail Lines Plan Smoking Limits
LEAD: The Long Island Rail Road is to announce a plan today to eliminate smoking on trains that operate on its five shortest branches.
These trains constitute more than 300 of the 700 daily trips on the L.I.R.R.


Cairo Journal; People Not Ready to Ride in a Hole in the Ground
LEAD: If news is made by things that seem so strange as to be anomalies, then Cairo's newly opened subway, just under three miles long and the first in all Africa and Arabia, is news.
Good news, even.


Quaker Holder Loses Vote
LEAD: Shareholders of the Quaker Oats Company tonight overwhelmingly rejected a shareholder proposal for the company to stop charitable contributions to organizations that promoted or performed abortions.
The shareholder, Shirley


Combustion Engineering in Soviet Joint Venture
LEAD: Combustion Engineering Inc. agreed today to form a joint venture with the Soviet Union to make equipment for the petroleum industry.


SOUTHERN MINERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN MINERAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
602,400
361,900
Net inc
259,200
95,100
Share earns
.64
.24
9mo rev
1,679,300
1,343,400
Net inc
263,900
392,400
Share earns
.66
.98


CABARET: ANDREA MARCOVICCI
LEAD: ANDREA MARCOVICCI, the singer and actress who made her first New York nightclub appearance in 10 years on Tuesday at the Algonquin Hotel, calls herself a torch singer.
To Miss Marcovicci, the term does not imply the masochism epitomized by Helen Morgan, Libby Holman or even Billie Holiday.
Instead it is synonymous with a longstanding tradition of movie love song evocative of a genteel, high-styled romantic sensibility.


3 Banks in West Fail
LEAD: Three banks in the Western United States have failed, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation announced today, bringing the year's total to 159.
The F.D.I.C. said it was seeking to arrange a takeover for the Middle Park Bank of Granby, Colo., and its affiliate, the Bank of Winter Park in Winter Park, Colo., which had assets of $35.4 million and $25.9 million, respectively.


Designers Work On Bellevue Rooms
LEAD: DEBORAH QUINTAL designs interiors for country clubs and grand Manhattan apartments.
Bonnie Roche, an architect, rebuilds rooms for clients like Paloma Picasso.
And Richard Knapple coordinates lavish settings for Bloomingdale's.


Smurfs Join Kean at Opening Of Jersey City Shopping Mall
LEAD: New York got more competition from New Jersey today as a new shopping mall, Hudson County's first, opened on the Hudson waterfront here, a 10-minute PATH ride from lower Manhattan.


WESTERN ENERGY RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN ENERGY RESOURCES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
97,889
52,877
Net loss
31,356
498,884
9mo rev
190,131
198,577
Net loss
106,061
621,679
The company noted that significant portion of the loss in 1986, amounting to $461,000, was due to impairment charges on its oil and gas properties when product prices were significantly lower in 1986.


Catering to a Couch Potato's Every Need
LEAD: The tom-toms are beating a new trend-watching message: the hot place to be this year is at home.
The young and the stylish, now the professional and the tired, are spending supine evenings in front of the television. ''Couch Potatoes'' like these are rapidly gaining attention as the new ''in'' crowd, and they are inspiring a raft of novelty items.


CLEMENS CHOSEN TOP PITCHER
LEAD: Roger Clemens, who produced a series of impressive pitching statistics despite missing a month of spring training in a contract squabble, won the American League Cy Young award yesterday for the second consecutive year.


JACLYN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACLYN INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
23,519,000
16,479,000
Net inc
1,248,000
684,000
Share earns
.50
.28
The share earnings are adjusted for a 4-for-3 stock split in June.


The U.N. Today; Nov. 12, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


SEQUENT COMPUTER SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEQUENT COMPUTER SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,758,000
5,570,000
Net inc
b816,000
201,000
Share earns
.10
.04
9mo rev
26,377,000
12,782,000
Net inc
b2,873,000
c1,458,000
Share earns
.40
-


Fine Weaving That's Functional
LEAD: TODAY Lisa Wagner, right, opens Treadles, a shop that features handwoven goods - rugs, blankets, placemats, napkins and pillows -made by 70 artisans.
The idea came to her two years ago, when she took up weaving as a hobby and noted that except in museums, fine weaving was not easily available. ''Weavers tend to work in isolation,'' said Ms.


ITT and Units Settle Fraud Suit
LEAD: The ITT Corporation and its loan subsidiaries have agreed to settle a fraud and racketeering suit by refunding up to $2.6 million to about 50,000 Arizona borrowers and to pay additional penalties to end a potential Government case against them, officials said.
The companies, accused of raising profits by packing unneeded and largely useless insurance into consumer loans, did not admit or deny guilt.


Europeans Disagree On U.S. Budget Cut
LEAD: European officials and economists welcomed the news from Washington today that an announcement on reducing the budget deficit might be imminent, but they differed over whether a cut of about $25 billion would calm the turbulent financial markets.


Heroes, and Stale Heroics
LEAD: Last weekend's bloodless ouster of Tunisia's President-for-Life Habib Bourguiba was the final stanza of a sadly commonplace saga.
When Tunisia wrested independence from France in 1956, Mr.
Bourguiba was rightly acclaimed as liberator.
But like the sampling of leaders shown above, he came to regard himself as permanently indispensable.


South Africa Acknowledges Its Troops Aided Angolan Rebels
LEAD: South Africa acknowledged for the first time today that its troops have fought in southern Angola on the side of anti-Government rebels.


Battered Enough
LEAD: New York City's Department of Correction has stationed two officers outside Hedda Nussbaum's private room to guard her 24 hours a day.
Has it really been necessary also to shackle and chain her by one leg to her hospital bed?


Hayes Theater for Sale
LEAD: The Helen Hayes Theater, one of the smallest on Broadway and one of the few still wholly independently owned, will be sold at an international real estate auction on March 24, according to a statement released jointly by Christie's and Cushman &amp; Wakefield, which are holding the sale.


WEDCO TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEDCO TECHNOLOGY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,492,000
3,774,000
Net inc
b1,184,000
c3,000
Share earns
.37
-
6mo rev
10,292,000
7,504,000
Net inc
b2,228,000
c90,000
Share earns
.69
.03


'Fatal Attraction' First At the Box Office Again
LEAD: ''Fatal Attraction'' held the No. 1 spot for weekend box-office receipts for the eighth straight week despite a wave of new movies.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Next We'll Need to Have Art Officially Defined; Good for Van Gogh
LEAD: To the Editor:


Robb Forgoes National Contest to Run for Senate
LEAD: Former Gov.
Charles S. Robb of Virginia has left as many political questions unanswered as he has answered by deciding to run for the United States Senate next year instead of seeking a spot on the national Democratic ticket.


Koch Panel Urges Adding Services to Deal With AIDS
LEAD: Predicting 110,000 New Yorkers will be suffering from AIDS or AIDS-related complex by 1991, a mayoral panel has prepared a series of proposals to prevent the spread of the epidemic and to provide care and other services to the infected.


Don't Hit the Brakes On Deficit Suddenly
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stage: By Durang, 'Laughing Wild'
LEAD: JACKIE MASON puts theatergoers in a laughing mood by reassuring them that they will get no ''theater'' in his show - just jokes, lots of them, that circumscribe the world according to the comedian at center stage.
Although Christopher Durang's new comedy at Playwrights Horizons is mostly in the form of stand-up monologues and might also be titled ''The World According to Me!,'' the laughter does not come nearly so easily.


WICHITA RIVER OIL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WICHITA RIVER OIL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
559,587
177,000
Net inc
309,039
21,169
Share earns
.14
.04
9mo rev
2,065,157
683,000
Net inc
766,600
222,536
Share earns
.34
.45


JURORS IN ARIZONA GIVEN GREEN LIGHT
LEAD: The Arizona Supreme Court has ruled that Attorney General Bob Corbin and a state grand jury may continue their investigations of Gov.
Evan Mecham's unreported $350,000 campaign loan.


MARTIN LAWRENCE LTD EDIIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARTIN LAWRENCE LTD EDIIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,835,000
2,419,000
Net inc
765,000
215,000
Share earns
.11
.05
Shares outst
6,882,000
4,246,000
9mo rev
16,465,000
7,426,000
Net inc
2,073,000
647,000
Share earns
.36
.15
Shares outst
5,766,000
4,244,000


Advertising; New Tool In Airline Campaigns
LEAD: THOSE airline-performance report cards issued Tuesday by the Department of Transportation seem like just the kind of ammunition a carrier's ad agency might cherish - if its client did well.


ESCALADE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESCALADE INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
17,857,000
15,375,000
Net inc
1,492,000
1,252,000
Share earns
.48
.42
9mo sales
45,869,000
37,110,000
Net inc
3,095,000
2,535,000
Share earns
1.01
.85


Speech Speak
LEAD: For as long as politicians have given speeches, they have used the contrapuntal phrase, a rhetorical technique defined in Safire's Political Dictionary as ''rhetorical antithesis'' or ''an inversion or substitution of words for emphasis.''


PERINI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PERINI CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
209,639,000
208,492,000
Net inc
2,010,000
819,000
Share earns
.44
.25
9mo rev
535,271,000
582,724,000
Net inc
5,280,000
b2,435,000
Share earns
1.62
.75


When Bird Flies In
LEAD: LARRY BIRD was in town the other day, and left, but chances are he'll be heard from again.


Hockey Notebook; Flyers Weak on Power Play
LEAD: The Flyers are discovering how costly Tim Kerr's absence is to the team in general and their power play in particular.


EYE CARE CENTERS OF AMERICA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EYE CARE CENTERS OF AMERICA INC
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
9,363,000
2,324,000
Net loss
330,000
819,000


LASER PRECISION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LASER PRECISION CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,854,144
4,580,095
Net inc
b142,404
c584,680
Share earns
.05
.21
Shares outst
3,482,994
2,729,345
9mo sales
12,747,018
10,895,704
Net inc
b111,094
c823,749
Share earns
.04
.31
Shares outst
3,421,101
2,608,976


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: SQUEAKY, wobbly stairs aren't just a nuisance.
They can be hazardous if trouble spots are allowed to worsen.
Squeaks are caused by stair parts rubbing against each other.
You can silence many staircase noises merely by applying powdered graphite or some other dry lubricant to reduce the friction.
But stair parts shouldn't move at all, and while lubricating them may mask the symptoms, it is not a cure for the disease.


Islanders Managing to Thrive
LEAD: Of late, it's getting increasingly hard to tell which is more difficult for the Islanders: to maintain a lead in the third period or a straight face in the locker room after losing one.


Portrait of Home, in Paint, Clay or Fabric
LEAD: ''THE ornament of a house is the friends who frequent it,'' said Ralph Waldo Emerson.
But for a growing number of homeowners, the ornament is the house itself - depicted in a watercolor, on a needlepoint pillow, on cocktail napkins or sculptured in clay.


Next We'll Need to Have Art Officially Defined
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Denver, Printemps Opens Its First American Branch Store
LEAD: ''Are we still in Denver?'' a young woman asked as she joined a crowd of shoppers on the main floor of Printemps, Denver's new - and only - specialty department store.
Many others were asking the same question.


Joint Venture For Tri-Star
LEAD: Tri-Star Pictures said yesterday that it had reached an agreement with Frank Price, the former head of Universal Pictures and Columbia Pictures, to form a joint venture for the development, production and distribution of motion pictures.
The pictures will be financed and marketed by Tri-Star.  $


Arabs Smooth Way to Resume Ties With Egypt
LEAD: Arab heads of state cleared the way today for virtually all Arab governments to restore diplomatic relations with Egypt.


FIND/SVP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIND/SVP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,470,000
2,153,000
Net loss
225,000
21,000
9mo rev
7,052,000
6,184,000
Net loss
767,000
b313,000
b-Net income and share earnings equal less than one cent.


Israel Examines Death of Arab Held by Shin Beth
LEAD: Israel's Attorney General ordered an investigation today into the death of a 23-year-old Palestinian after his arrest by the Shin Beth internal security service in July.


Water Quality Drop Doubted
LEAD: Water quality as measured in the nation's lakes and estuaries appears to have dropped in the last two years, but the Environmental Protection Agency says it may be premature to conclude that the decline is real.


Kasparov And Karpov Draw Again
LEAD: The 12th game of the world chess championship between the champion, Gary Kasparov, and the challenger, Anatoly Karpov, ended in a draw today after just 21 moves.


They're First to Fight But Second to Sing
LEAD: A directive that the Navy's theme song be played before the ''Marine Corps Hymn'' at all Marine ceremonies has hit a sour note with some marines.


Paper Capacity to Rise
LEAD: American paper manufacturers are expected to increase their production capacity by 3 percent in 1987 and 2.5 percent over the next three years, according to a paper industry trade group.
The American Paper Institute said yesterday that a survey of manufacturers indicated primary paper and paperboard production capacity should reach 78 million tons this year, an increase of 2.24 million tons from 1986.


HEALTH CARE REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTH CARE REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,570,092
1,902,790
Share earns
.45
.40
Shares outst
5,744,312
4,752,513
9mo net inc
7,559,068
5,512,365
Share earns
1.34
1.24
Shares outst
5,652,680
4,449,855


SYNERGEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYNERGEN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,429,440
1,868,100
Net loss
b130,100
c4,400
9mo rev
4,907,300
4,591,900
Net loss
123,000
c534,500
Share earns
-
.07
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $2,100.


UNICORP AMERICAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNICORP AMERICAN CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,765,000
18,048,000
Net loss
b5,267,000
c3,955,000
Share earns
-
.33
9mo rev
25,463,000
39,727,000
Net loss
3,931,000
c8,713,000
Share earns
-
.76


Goodyear Names Head Of Its Pipeline Project
LEAD: The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company yesterday selected Robert W. Milk, an executive from its headquarters in Akron, Ohio, to head its Celeron Corporation unit and prepare the 1,750-mile All American Pipeline for sale.


Frey Replaces Green
LEAD: Jim Frey, who three years ago managed the Chicago Cubs to the National League East Division championship, their first title since 1945, was named the team's director of baseball operations yesterday.
Frey, after spending last season as a broadcaster of Cub games, largely replaces Dallas Green, who resigned last month as president and general manager.


Building Was the Site Of La Guardia's Birth
LEAD: When the town house at 177 Sullivan Street collapsed yesterday, a small piece of New York history was destroyed with it.


HEMACARE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEMACARE CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
864,976
761,586
Net loss
89,173
93,458
9mo rev
2,380,716
2,154,359
Net loss
393,047
131,807


PERFECTDATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PERFECTDATA CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
996,000
1,058,000
Net loss
43,000
174,000
6mo sales
1,956,000
2,042,000
Net loss
193,000
463,000


SAMNA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAMNA CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,204,000
1,974,000
Net inc
511,000
c439,000
Share earns
.20
-
Shares outst
2,542,407
1,939,331
9mo rev
8,376,000
5,293,000
Net inc
b1,428,000
c1,011,000
Share earns
.66
.52
Shares outst
2,180,382
1,939,331


Changed Jordan Paces Bulls
LEAD: As the fans entered the Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight, the talk focused on Michael Jordan and how many points he would score against the Nets.


TEMPEST TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEMPEST TECHNOLOGIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,964,000
4,490,000
Net inc
1,107,000
450,000
Share earns
.16
.06
6mo rev
13,045,000
6,298,000
Net inc
2,138,000
734,000
Share earns
.31
.10


Trade Surplus Falls in Japan
LEAD: Japan's unadjusted trade surplus declined for the sixth consecutive month in October.


CMS ENHANCEMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CMS ENHANCEMENTS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
33,537,000
15,042,000
Net inc
313,000
372,000
Share earns
.04
.05
Shares outst
7,366,070
7,090,146


Bahrain Exchange Set
LEAD: Bahrain hopes to open its first stock exchange during the first quarter of 1988, Fawzi Behzad, stock exchange adviser at the Ministry of Commerce and Agriculture, said today.
The exchange, which will replace a telephone market for local shares, was announced in August 1986 as part of a package of measures to strengthen Bahrain's economy.


WINSTON FURNITURE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WINSTON FURNITURE (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,945,000
6,147,000
Net loss
b451,000
24,000
9mo sales
23,674,000
21,536,000
Net inc
374,000
499,000
Share earns
.45
.75
Shares outst
822,400
666,667


Ruder Seeks Insider Law
LEAD: David S. Ruder, in his first public appearance in New York since his appointment as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, urged Congress yesterday to adopt broad legislation defining insider trading.


RAYCOMM TRANSWORLD INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAYCOMM TRANSWORLD INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,861,000
16,214,000
Net inc
147,000
b238,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
32,348,000
31,579,000
Net inc
154,000
b577,000
Share earns
.02
-


Eastern Air Eliminates 3,500 Jobs
LEAD: Eastern Air Lines Inc., in a drastic move to cut costs, said yesterday that it would lay off 3,500 employees, or 9 percent of its payroll.


RECOTON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RECOTON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,788,000
7,021,000
Net loss
261,000
b232,000
Share earns
-
.09
9mo sales
20,866,000
20,361,000
Net loss
494,000
b902,000
Share earns
-
.33
b-Net income


CONNORS JOINS MASTERS
LEAD: Boris Becker and Jimmy Connors were named yesterday as the fifth and sixth players to qualify for the $500,000 Masters Tournament to be held at Madison Square Garden during the first week of December.


MARGAUX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARGAUX INC
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Revenue
6,307,000
1,492,000
Net inc
559,000
b1,997,000
Share earns
.08
-
6mo rev
11,817,000
3,268,000
Net loss
297,000
4,189,000
b-Net loss  The latest second quarter included a one-time gain of $410,000 for manufacturing rights on products no longer made by Margaux, and $290,000 from the sale of investments.


Cash Troubles at GATT
LEAD: The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade narrowly averted a cash crisis when Italy announced it had paid its 1987 contribution of about $2 million to the trade body, a GATT spokesman, David Woods, said today.
Arthur Dunkel, Director General of the 95-nation GATT, told delegates, however, that 27 million Swiss francs, or $19.7 million, were still owed by two dozen countries and that there was enough money in the bank to pay salaries and expenses only until Dec.


EDISON BROTHERS STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EDISON BROTHERS STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
234,300,000
216,800,000
Net inc
5,100,000
7,100,000
Share earns
.50
.70
9mo sales
626,100,000
625,100,000
Net loss
5,700,000
b16,300,000
Share earns
-
1.60


NOVO INDUSTRI A/S reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOVO INDUSTRI A/S (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
180,000,000
143,000,000
Net inc
17,000,000
19,000,000
Share earns
.67
.73
9mo sales
516,000,000
444,000,000
Net inc
47,000,000
55,000,000
Share earns
1.87
2.14


RESOURCE ENGINEERING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RESOURCE ENGINEERING (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
14,609,000
9,369,000
Net inc
778,000
329,000
Share earns
.11
.05
Shares outst
7,275,000
5,977,000
9mo rev
38,688,000
25,354,000
Net inc
2,106,000
625,000
Share earns
.32
.10
Shares outst
6,546,000
5,938,000


LIFELINE SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIFELINE SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,282,000
4,046,000
Net inc
144,000
206,000
Share earns
.04
.06
9mo sales
12,973,000
12,381,000
Net inc
b700,000
b689,000
Share earns
.21
.20


College Football Notebook; For Syracuse, Sugar Is Sweet
LEAD: Jake Crouthamel, the Syracuse athletic director, said yesterday that the undefeated Orange would have to receive a very good offer from the Orange Bowl, Fiesta Bowl or some other bowl to prevent him from accepting a Sugar Bowl bid if it is forthcoming.


TV Review; Cinemax 'Blues Session,' Program With B. B. King
LEAD: Pay cable has been doing extremely well - for itself and its customers - by comedy and music specials.
The latest example of truly first-rate entertainment comes from Home Box Office's Cinemax service.
The hourlong program is called ''A Blues Session: B. B. King and Friends'' and it can be seen tonight at 11:30.


Remember Pat Caddell, Boy Star? So Do Capital's Insiders, and How!
LEAD: Patrick H. Caddell, once the boy wonder of political polling, used to be quoted regularly by the press, lauded by his colleagues and courted by politicians.
He was credited with helping George McGovern win the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1972, with helping Jimmy Carter win the White House in 1976 and with aiding Senator Gary Hart in the Iowa caucus and the New


Ballet: Joffrey In 'Clowns'
LEAD: WELL, you can go home again.
The Joffrey Ballet took one of its biggest gambles Tuesday night by reviving ''The Clowns,'' a much-talked-about work created by Gerald Arpino in 1968 and one that seemed inextricably tied to the Ghost of the Joffrey Past.


2 More Hopefuls Take Loans
LEAD: Two more Democratic Presidential hopefuls, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri and Senator Paul Simon of Illinois, are borrowing money from banks to finance their campaigns, aides said today.


LANDMARK AMERICAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANDMARK AMERICAN CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,647,820
7,088,816
Net inc
1,118,924
1,886,024
Share earns
.23
.46
9mo rev
13,486,780
8,004,118
Net inc
3,066,074
1,945,605
Share earns
.62
.47


New Rightist Activity Worries Some Koreans
LEAD: As the South Korean election nears, there is rising concern here about new extreme right-wing groups that charge that the Government is soft on Communism and vow to take action themselves.


MINISTER AND CIVIL RIGHTS LEADER
LEAD: The Rev.
Channing E. Phillips, a civil rights leader and the first black to be placed in nomination for the Presidency of the United States by a major political party, died of cancer yesterday at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 59 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Mafia Trial of 466 in Sicily Begins Deliberations
LEAD: After hearing testimony and arguments for 21 months, a Palermo jury began deliberations today in the largest Mafia trial ever conducted, weighing charges against 466 defendants, who are said to include some of Sicily's top underworld bosses.


GRAHAM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAHAM CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,062,000
11,502,000
Net loss
535,000
c897,000
9mo sales
41,875,000
37,221,000
Net loss
b1,440,000
c3,659,000
b-Includes a loss of $450,000 from discontinued operations.


GIANT GROUP LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GIANT GROUP LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
22,766,000
22,514,000
Net inc
5,046,000
b3,945,000
Share earns
1.04
.98
Shares outst
4,859,000
9,934,000
6mo sales
62,268,000
62,787,000
Net inc
8,848,000
b7,382,000
Share earns
1.82
1.90
Shares outst
4,863,000
3,670,000


Aggressive, At Least for A Flower
LEAD: Though the Payson van Gogh does not rank among the greatest paintings of its period in France, it is a very beautiful picture.
A dense, up-front horizonless image in which every stroke tells, ''Irises'' has a confrontational quality.


Tide Is Out for Risky Debt
LEAD: The last month has been a tough time for the junk bond market as the drop in the stock market and fears of a recession discouraged many buyers.
That anxiety culminated Tuesday in the withdrawal of a proposed $1.5 billion financing for the Southland Corporation.


WEAREVER-PROCTORSILEX reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEAREVER-PROCTORSILEX (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
78,395,000
74,620,000
Net inc
b3,121,000
c2,421,000
Share earns
.52
.45
Shares outst
5,991,326
5,377,205
9mo sales
179,502,000
166,553,000
Net inc
b4,225,000
c2,952,000
Share earns
.70
.62
Shares outst
6,049,705
4,715,643


Papers Near Audit Accord
LEAD: Newspaper publishers, advertisers and advertising agencies are nearing final agreement on the first comprehensive overhaul in 73 years of the closely watched and highly sensitive ground rules for auditing newspaper circulation figures.


BARR LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARR LABORATORIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,687,000
13,394,760
Net inc
869,223
1,017,000
Share earns
.12
.16


A Report Sees No Major Troop Cuts
LEAD: A study under review by the Reagan Administration concludes that it may not be possible to reach an important new agreement on conventional arms with the Soviet Union that will yield major military benefits for the West The study, which was prepared for the Air Force by the Rand Corporation, an independent research center that receives Federal funds, comes as Western nations and Soviet-bloc nations are preparing for new talks on reducing conventional arms in Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals.


ICM PROPERTY INVESTORS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ICM PROPERTY INVESTORS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
453,000
b875,000
Share earns
-
.15
9mo net inc
554,000
3,364,000
Share earns
.10
.58
b-Net income


INTERMARK GAMING INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERMARK GAMING INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,918,987
77,046
Net inc
b315,233
c642,999
Share earns
.07
-
9mo sales
4,818,479
367,787
Net inc
b622,641
c1,062,359
Share earns
.17
-


KATY INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KATY INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
48,248,000
89,161,000
Net loss
b1,560,000
c8,966,000
9mo sales
204,173,000
272,045,000
Net inc
b5,494,000
cd11,593,000
Share earns
.64
-
b-After tax credits of $202,000 for the quarter and $2,402,000 for the 9 months.


Japan Warns U.S. on Tariffs
LEAD: Japan warned the United States today to remove the $165 million of tariffs still imposed on its electronic goods or face a GATT dispute panel.


Tom Manning; F.B.I. Official, 65
LEAD: Tom Manning, who played a key role in the Federal Bureau of Investigation role in the D. B. Cooper airliner hijacking in 1971, died Tuesday.
He was 65 years old.


Baker Seems to Be Vindicated, But the Cost Is Proving High
LEAD: President Reagan's announcement today that he would nominate Judge Anthony M. Kennedy to the Supreme Court comes as a vindication of sorts for Howard H. Baker Jr., the beleaguered White House chief of staff.
But it has been a costly vindication.


TPI ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TPI ENTERPRISES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
793,000
635,000
Net inc
b1,178,000
c3,969,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo sales
2,252,000
1,821,000
Net loss
b13,407,000
c684,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $437,000 and $495,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively; the quarter also includes net from discontinued operations of $575,000, and the 9 months include a loss from discontinued operations of $15,748,000.


Two Key Opposition Leaders in Bangladesh Seized
LEAD: The Government placed Bangladesh's two most prominent opposition leaders under house arrest today in an attempt to stop the spread of anti-Government riots in Dhaka and elsewhere.


Wrigley Field Journal; Night Ball Debate: Heat But (So Far) No Light
LEAD: The sparks are flying at old Wrigley Field again, and the hubbub has nothing to do with Cubs' hitting or pitching, which even the most dutiful fans admit doesn't cause this big a stir most seasons anyway.


COMPUTER IDENTICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER IDENTICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,260,000
2,515,000
Net loss
270,000
554,000
9mo sales
9,440,000
6,609,000
Net loss
1,839,000
1,932,000


MARGO NURSERY FARMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARGO NURSERY FARMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,212,000
1,143,000
Net inc
46,000
103,000
Share earns
.03
.11
Shares outst
1,705,000
900,000
9mo rev
3,493,000
3,611,000
Net inc
137,000
441,000
Share earns
.09
.49
Shares outst
1,569,998
900,000


ENDEVCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENDEVCO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
33,553,000
26,629,000
Net inc
544,000
620,000
Share earns
.07
.09
9mo rev
85,709,000
92,022,000
Net inc
1,200,000
2,380,000
Share earns
.16
.39
Share earnings are adjusted for a 10 percent stock dividend paid Oct.


RADIATION SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RADIATION SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,294,000
8,758,000
Net inc
504,000
710,000
Share earns
.09
.13


2 American Agencies Buying Stakes Abroad
LEAD: Scali, McCabe, Sloves and Grey Advertising are acquiring majority positions in foreign agencies.


WEIMAN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEIMAN CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,271,000
8,818,000
Net inc
97,000
cd10,000
Share earns
.13
-
9mo sales
28,396,000
27,895,000
Net inc
b133,000
c188,000
Share earns
.17
.25
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $186,000.


NORTH EUROPEAN OIL ROYALTY TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH EUROPEAN OIL ROYALTY TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,389,346
3,855,869
Per share
.53
.47
Yr net inc
15,140,185
20,268,941
Per share
1.84
2.47


Calendar: Workshops, Fairs and Shows
LEAD:  For Youngsters


MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,453,000
1,645,000
Net loss
1,179,000
1,958,000
6mo rev
2,203,000
4,090,000
Net loss
5,344,000
1,818,000


Cholesterol-Altering Drug Found To Reduce Risk of Heart Attack
LEAD: A study of a popular anti-cholesterol drug has shown for the first time that it dramatically reduces heart attacks in men with high levels of cholesterol in their blood.


PYRO ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PYRO ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,422,000
21,167,000
Net inc
1,058,000
260,000
Share earns
.08
.02
9mo rev
83,640,000
79,880,000
Net inc
4,679,000
4,204,000
Share earns
.35
.31


Mets Trade Blocker
LEAD: The Mets traded Terry Blocker, a minor-league outfielder, to the Atlanta Braves yesterday for a player to be named.
Blocker, 27 years old, was the Mets' No. 1 selection in the June 1981 draft.
Last season, playing at Tidewater of the International League, he he was among the league leaders in average (.312, tied for third), hits (164, tied for second), steals (33, tied for fifth), and runs (89, third).


TII INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TII INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 25
1987
1986
Sales
5,458,000
9,518,000
Net inc
167,000
854,000
Share earns
.05
.29


Summations Heard on Robins
LEAD: Representatives of the A. H. Robins Company and of women who say they were injured by its Dalkon Shield birth control device offered final arguments today in a bankruptcy hearing here on the size of a proposed compensation fund.


HUBCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUBCO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,248,438
1,108,682
Share earns
.35
.31
9mo net inc
b4,084,087
3,264,446
Share earns
1.15
.92
b-Includes an after-tax gain of $400,157 from the sale of the Hoboken office, and an after-tax loss of $143,773 from the sale of securities.


Hurricane Pressure
LEAD: To The Home Section:


MUTUAL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MUTUAL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
400,000
331,000
Share earns
.35
.29
Yr net inc
1,659,000
1,308,000
Share earns
1.44
1.14


AIDE WHO ASSAILED GORBACHEV'S PACE OUSTED IN MOSCOW
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin was removed today as head of the Moscow Communist Party organization in the first public dismissal of a senior official who had been promoted by Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


The Other London, Where Chintz Is Out
LEAD: LONDON may be the chintz mecca of the world, but several new shops offer an alternative to the traditional English decorating point of view.
Personal and idiosyncratic, the shops present objects that point to the diversification of contemporary English design.


Mild Rally Lifts Dow 21.05 Points
LEAD: Stock prices rebounded yesterday in trading tempered by the Veterans Day holiday.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 21.05 points, to 1,899.20, and broader indexes were up as well.


RAYTECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAYTECH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
31,115,000
23,556,000
Net inc
936,000
b1,676,000
Share earns
.24
-
9mo sales
98,607,000
87,521,000
Net inc
5,536,000
2,352,000
Share earns
1.48
.80
Shares outst
4,117,178
2,944,806


Transcript of Reagan News Conference on Kennedy Nomination to Court
LEAD: Following is a transcript of a news conference in Washington yesterday at which President Reagan announced his intention to nominate Judge Anthony M. Kennedy to the Supreme Court, as recorded by The New York Times:  REAGAN STATEMENT


WINCHELL'S DONUT HOUSES LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WINCHELL'S DONUT HOUSES LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
38,091,000
-
Net loss
b2,959,000
-
9mo rev
118,832,000
-
Net loss
2,861,000
-
b-Includes a non-recurring $2,225,000 charge, mainly attributable to increased insurance reserves, plus a $560,000 increase in depreciation in the third quarter.


Concert: Soloists With the Jupiter
LEAD: ORCHESTRAS have increasingly turned to programs in which some or all of the pieces feature orchestra members as soloists.
This is presumably good for morale, good for the budget (since members usually cost less than high-profile virtuosos) and maybe even good for the audience, since the musicians are often excellent and the orchestra's esprit de corps is theoretically reinforced.


Bridge: Tournament Sex Bias Case Is Set for Courtroom Today
LEAD: A bridge paradox is to come before a judge in Los Angeles today.
It is the climax of a three-year effort by a Manhattan couple, Robert and Gillian Blanchard, to prevent the American Contract Bridge League from conducting gender-based events, which they claim breach California's Unruh Act, which bars discrimination based on race, sex, religion or national origin.


MICHIGAN ENERGY RESOURCES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICHIGAN ENERGY RESOURCES CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,847,000
19,498,000
Net loss
1,209,000
967,000
9mo rev
88,290,000
100,883,000
Net inc
1,274,000
1,678,000
Share earns
.47
.63


26 Hurt as Jet From New York Hits Turbulence
LEAD: A Pan Am jetliner hit heavy turbulence 33,000 feet over the Atlantic Ocean tonight, but landed safely in Miami after the pilot radioed that 26 people had been injured.


Svetlana Alliluyeva Allowed To Settle Once More in Britain
LEAD: Svetlana Alliluyeva, Stalin's daughter, has been given permission to resettle in Britain from the United States, the Home Office said today.


Van Gogh's 'Irises' Sells for $53.9 Million
LEAD: Van Gogh's glowing ''Irises'' -painted in 1889 during the artist's first week at the asylum at St.-Remy - was sold at Sotheby's in New York last night for $53.9 million, the highest price ever paid for an artwork at auction.
The sale of 100 artworks, in which 75 were sold, totaled $110 million, a record total for an art auction.


Youmans Checks Out
LEAD: Floyd Youmans, the Montreal Expo pitcher, has left an alcohol rehabilitation center he checked into last month and has made ''great progress,'' the club's general manager, Bill Stoneman, said yesterday. ''I've spoken with him and I'm very encouraged,'' Stoneman said. ''He sounded like a totally different man.


With Eagles Winning, Ryan Changes His Tune
LEAD: Buddy Ryan's meaning is often obscured by his folksy Oklahoma drawl.
But he is coming across loud and clear these days as the hard-driving coach of the Eagles, whose regulars have won four straight games and who face the Giants Sunday in Philadelphia.


Handling All The Details
LEAD: THE cost of moving a house depends upon its size and the distance it must travel.
If public thoroughfares are involved, a major expense is the cost of moving electrical, telephone and other wires.


RAGAN, BRAD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAGAN, BRAD INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
52,568,000
45,746,000
Net inc
771,000
439,000
Share earns
.35
.20
9mo rev
137,765,000
134,336,000
Net inc
1,599,000
1,439,000
Share earns
.73
.66


MATHIAS RUST'S PLANE TO TOUR
LEAD: The plane that Mathias Rust landed near Red Square in Moscow has been brought to Paris by the author Paul-Loup Sulitzer, who plans to take it on a tour of France and the United States, a Frenh maga-zine said today. ''For me this plane is a symbol of a feat of peace and free-dom,'' Mr.
Sulitzer was quoted as hav-ing told the magazine, Paris-Match.


Regular Hours Set for Trading
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that it would return to its normal trading hours of 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M today.
A number of smaller stock exchanges also said they would return to their regular hours.


A Day to Skid, Shiver and Await Winter
LEAD: A fast-moving medley of snow, sleet and rain blustered up the East Coast yesterday, disrupting travel and social schedules, playing havoc with Veterans Day parades and sending shivering pedestrians to their closets for warmer clothes.


CANADIENS, WHALERS IN 0-0 TIE
LEAD: Mike Liut of the Hartford Whalers stopped 24 shots and Brian Hayward of the Montreal Canadiens rejected 23 as the Adams Division rivals played to a 0-0 tie tonight.


Yields Are Mixed
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, money market mutual funds and bank money market accounts were mixed for the week ended yesterday.


Nancy Goeschel and Ogden Goelet Wed
LEAD: Nancy J. Goeschel, a landmark preservation specialist in the research department of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, and Ogden Goelet, an adjunct professor of Egyptian language and culture at Columbia and New York Universities, were married yesterday.
Judge Pierre N. Leval of the United States District Court performed the ceremony at his chambers in New


DECORATOR INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DECORATOR INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,126,289
5,422,720
Net inc
207,832
b14,046
Share earns
.20
-
9mo sales
20,849,495
16,764,029
Net inc
562,827
68,233
Share earns
.54
.07


New York City Hospitals to Stop Shackling Inmates to Their Beds
LEAD: Prison inmates held in New York City hospitals will no longer be shackled to their beds under a change in policy announced yesterday by city correction officials.


KENNER PARKER TOYS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENNER PARKER TOYS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
139,134,000
160,467,000
Net inc
b16,534,000
c19,119,000
Share earns
1.49
1.44
Shares outst
11,069,000
13,270,000
9mo rev
348,812,000
385,911,000
Net inc
b31,380,000
c25,205,000
Share earns
2.75
1.88
Shares outst
11,405,000
13,377,000


Dr. Abner H. Rosenthal; Phoenix House Staff Physician, 81
LEAD: Dr.
Abner H. Rosenthal, a physician who practiced family medicine in Queens for nearly 50 years before joining Phoenix House, a drug-abuse services agency, as a staff physician, died of complications Tuesday following a stroke at his home in Flushing, Queens.
He was 81 years old.
Dr.
Rosenthal, a graduate of City College, received his medical degree from the University of Maryland in 1930.


Options' Risks Shown By Stock Market Slide
LEAD: The stock market's collapse on Oct. 19 showed once again the potential volatility of the securities markets.
And it demonstrated to thousands of investors around the country that options can be among the most volatile of all instruments in these markets, even for those who use them in conjunction with other strategies.


INTER-REGIONAL FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTER-REGIONAL FINANCIAL GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,338,000
c11,949,000
Share earns
.43
-
9mo net inc
b9,996,000
d11,673,000
Share earns
1.29
1.51
b-After extraordinary gains of $978,000 for the quarter and $2,895,000 for the 9 months.


Percentage of Jobless Lacking Benefits Is Highest in 30 Years
LEAD: Almost three-quarters of the nation's jobless workers received no unemployment insurance benefits last month, the greatest percentage recorded in more than 30 years, a private research group said today.


Santa Fe Delays Public Sale
LEAD: The Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation, which has received two takeover offers, said today that it was postponing a plan to sell part of its oil and gas operations to the public.
It cited market turmoil.


Building Collapse Kills Baby and Traps 4 in Greenwich Village
LEAD: A five-story building in Greenwich Village collapsed yesterday morning, trapping five residents and causing the death of one of them, a 13-month-old boy.
Officials said the building had been undergoing renovation without proper construction permits and supervision.


BECTON DICKINSON &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BECTON DICKINSON &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
455,502,000
389,580,000
Net inc
b43,102,000
c35,098,000
Share earns
1.05
-
Yr sales
1,581,957,000
1,311,569,000
Net inc
b148,164,000
c121,930,000
Share earns
3.57
2.85


SECURITY AMERICAN FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SECURITY AMERICAN FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,075,148
9,571,922
Net inc
b842,219
c818,168
Share earns
.24
.24
9mo rev
29,436,018
28,914,636
Net inc
b2,451,317
c2,615,295
Share earns
.70
.76


Tempo Enterprises
LEAD: The board of Tempo Enterprises Inc. tenatively approved a takeover offer from Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable television system operator.
The offer provides for an exchange of TCI common stock for Tempo common stock valued at $8 a share.
Tempo shareholders will be given the option of receiving $8 in cash a share for each of their shares or converting to TCI stock.


SCIENCE DYNAMICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCIENCE DYNAMICS CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,148,938
1,613,572
Net inc
28,477
212,269
Share earns
.01
.07
9mo sales
3,459,797
4,386,377
Net inc
222,417
546,110
Share earns
.08
.18


Gunman Shoots 5, Killing 2, And Then Himself, Police Say
LEAD: Three people were shot and killed and three others, including a 3-year-old boy, were wounded in what the police say may have been the result of a murder-suicide in a Staten Island apartment last night, officials said.


Lucas Joins Blazers
LEAD: To bolster a front line that was weakened by the loss of Sam Bowie, the 7-foot-1-inch center who suffered a broken leg in the exhibition season, the Portland Trail Blazers yesterday obtained Maurice Lucas.
The 6-9 Lucas was acquired from the Seattle SuperSonics for a second-round pick in the 1990 draft.


Dollar Up in Slow Day; Trade Report Awaited
LEAD: The dollar rose in world currency markets yesterday in light trading that dealers said was not terribly significant.
Because United States banks were closed in observance of Veterans Day, almost all of the day's activity took place overseas, where there seemed to be some positive reaction to President Reagan's comment on


Market Place; Chip Makers Finding Favor
LEAD: SEMICONDUCTOR stocks rank among the most prominent victims of the recent market collapse, which sliced the value of leading chip makers almost in half.
But some Wall Street analysts suggest the selling has been overdone.


17th Convoy Moves Up Gulf
LEAD: The largest convoy to date of merchant vessels accompanied by American warships sailed up the Persian Gulf today, passing within 35 miles of the spot where an unescorted tanker flying the Panamanian flag was under Iranian attack.


CODENOLL TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CODENOLL TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,188,663
1,609,243
Net loss
298,436
573,528
9mo sales
5,034,445
3,895,654
Net loss
1,322,368
1,984,049


Critic's Notebook; Bottom-Line Economics and the Burial of Opera
LEAD: THE Metropolitan Opera faces its precarious independence with such resourcefulness that one winces a little at all the criticism it's been getting this year.
While the Met earns - has to earn - 70 percent of its income, the box office of the Teatro Communale in Florence earns about 5 percent.
Eighty-five percent of Florence's opera money comes from the ''Man in Rome.


Arafat's Surprise: Role of Palestinians Is Deleted
LEAD: Yasir Arafat adjusted his glasses, brought the English translation of the Arab summit resolutions right up to his face and then squinted to make sure that his eyes were not deceiving him.


LAMSON &amp; SESSIONS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAMSON &amp; SESSIONS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
89,491,000
27,112,000
Net inc
b3,680,000
c2,396,000
Share earns
.40
-
9mo sales
251,650,000
87,387,000
Net inc
b7,010,000
d2,529,000
Share earns
.86
.35


SPEED-O-PRINT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPEED-O-PRINT CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,969,000
1,775,000
Net loss
328,000
181,000
9mo rev
5,684,000
5,005,000
Net loss
706,000
386,000


MERCURY GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCURY GENERAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,830,000
c1,092,000
Share earns
.43
.08
9mo net inc
b17,935,000
c10,801,000
Share earns
1.33
.80
b-After realized investment gains of $302,000 for the quarter and $546,000 for the 9 months.


MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS CORP OF AMERICA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
23,912,000
18,389,000
Net inc
1,845,000
1,533,000
Share earns
.08
.07
Shares outst
23,766,000
19,596,000
9mo rev
68,686,000
52,082,000
Net inc
5,314,000
4,494,000
Share earns
.25
.27
Shares outst
21,626,000
16,586,000


Cabinet Divided on Japan Bids
LEAD: President Reagan's Cabinet is deeply divided over whether the United States should press Japan to permit foreign participation in $62 billion worth of Japanese public works projects, Congressional and Administration officials said today.


SMITH INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SMITH INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
70,783,000
69,273,000
Net inc
b6,219,000
cd64,391,000
Share earns
.27
-
9mo rev
186,405,000
260,774,000
Net loss
b41,080,000
d104,648,000
b-After income of $11,105,000 for the quarter and a loss of $8,807,000 for the 9 months, both from discontinued operations; the 9 months also includes a $21.5 million estimated loss on disposal, and a $9.7 million recognition of cumulative currency translation adjustment.


Breeders Put 20 on Standby
LEAD: Twenty of the 106 horses entered for the seven Breeders' Cup races at Hollywood Park Nov. 21 were assigned standby status yesterday and most are unlikely to start.


MOTOR CLUB OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOTOR CLUB OF AMERICA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,396,000
10,983,000
Net inc
768,000
923,000
Share earns
.35
.41
9mo rev
39,602,000
33,053,000
Net inc
2,338,000
3,467,000
Share earns
1.05
1.54


Air Cleanup: Clash of Aims; Help for One Region May Harm Another
LEAD: For environmental and public health groups seeking to strengthen the Clean Air Act, this seemed to be the year to do it.
It has been 10 years since the last major revisions were made in the antigress seemed to have several compelling reasons for making changes this year.
The first is a Dec. 31 deadline by which cities must lower smog and carbon monoxide to levels deemed necessary to protect human health, as prescribed in the current law.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Cash Advances: Pat Cash of Australia, the Wimbledon champion, made a triumphant return to Britain yesterday with a 7-5, 7-6 victory over Jonas B. Svensson of Sweden in the first round of the $375,000 Benson and Hedges championships at Wembley, England.
Ivan Lendl downed Ronald Agenor of Haiti, 6-2, 6-1, in a match interrupted for 20 minutes because of rain seeping through a hole in the roof at the arena.


ABIOMED INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABIOMED INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
1,072,160
1,317,065
Net loss
161,170
b71,984
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
2,096,069
2,493,602
Net loss
182,564
b99,268
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Dual Role Reported for Blood Protein
LEAD: A discovery that may suggest a surprising and unexpected contributor to coronary heart disease was reported yesterday by scientists of Genentech Inc., a biotechnology company, and the University of Chicago.


Speaker's First Year: Triumph, Turmoil
LEAD: What a roller-coaster ride of a year this has been for the Speaker of the State Assembly, Mel Miller - jolts of sudden victory followed by sudden failure followed by sudden victory.


BIOTECHNICA INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOTECHNICA INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
925,000
1,718,000
Net loss
2,563,000
978,000
9mo rev
3,846,000
5,148,000
Net loss
6,632,000
3,000,000


Iran and Iraq Seem Ready to Send Officials to U.N.
LEAD: Iran and Iraq are apparently preparing to send their Foreign Ministers here for talks with Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar on the Security Council's cease-fire plan for the Persian Gulf war, diplomats here say.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Van Gogh's ''Irises'' was sold at Sotheby's last night for $53.9 million, a record for an artwork.
Page C23.
Building Collapse Kills One  A 13-month-old boy died in the collapse of a Greenwich Village building, which officials said was being renovated illegally.


KERKHOFF INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KERKHOFF INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,247,883
-
Net inc
b513,894
-
Share earns
.27
-
b-Includes a gain of $265,200, primarily from a tax credit.
The company completed its initial public offering in October.


Swiss Creditor Plea On Dome Rejected
LEAD: An Alberta court has rejected a bid by Swiss creditors of Dome Petroleum Ltd. to force quick payment of $1 million (Canadian) plus interest that the company owes them.
The decision by the Alberta Court of Queen's Bench not to resolve the lawsuit in summary fashion gives Dome more time to conclude its $5.2 billion acquisition, or about $3.95 billion in American dollars, by the Amoco Corporation's Amoco Canada Petroleum


WESTERN CAPITAL INVESTMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN CAPITAL INVESTMENT (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,043,000
4,600,000
Per share
.43
.49
9mo net loss
b332,000
b12,846,000
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $6,500,000 and $20,332,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


New York Democrats, Lacking Signs From Cuomo, Prepare to Back Others
LEAD: Convinced that they will receive no signals soon from Governor Cuomo, New York Democratic leaders are preparing to endorse Presidential contenders in the next six weeks.
The three candidates likely to win the most support are Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and Senator Paul Simon, both of


GROUP 1 SOFTWARE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROUP 1 SOFTWARE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,528,000
1,423,000
Net inc
404,000
129,000
Share earns
.12
.04
Shares outst
3,331,056
3,000,000
6mo rev
5,182,000
3,347,000
Net inc
860,000
344,000
Share earns
.26
.11
Shares outst
3,332,993
3,000,000


Taste Test for Giants
LEAD: The Giants' offensive line has been scolded and scrutinized by Coach Bill Parcells.
But today, as snow fell outside, the subject was ice cream.


Reading by a Soviet Poet, Already a Star at Age 12
LEAD: When Nika Turbina was 4 years old, looking out into the night from her home in Yalta, she astonished her mother by intoning: ''Crimson moon, crimson moon, look in through the dark window at me.
The room is black.
The corners are black.
Black houses.
And black - I myself.''


The Bitterness Flares From Under the Smile
LEAD: He was trying hard to be agreeable, maybe even contrite.
But he didn't quite pull it off.


THRIFTY RENT-A-CAR reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THRIFTY RENT-A-CAR (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,913,771
14,365,567
Net inc
1,927,685
1,398,970
Share earns
.34
.28
Shares outst
5,700,000
5,000,000


Accord Near on Aid to Poorest Africa Nations
LEAD: Major aid donors are close to agreement with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund on an emergency package of financial assistance for the poorest African countries that would probably give them more than $1 billion a year in additional aid over the next three years, according to officials involved in the negotiations.


Book Awards Are Pondered
LEAD: Although the literary and publishing communities have had two days to recover from the surprise of seeing ''Paco's Story'' win the 1987 National Book Award for fiction, they continue to express astonishment that the novel by Larry Heinemann beat the widely celebrated and praised novels by Toni Morrison and Philip


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a dispatch on Aug. 24 from Vilnius, U.S.S.R., about protest rallies in the former Baltic nations misidentified a monument in Riga, Latvia, where 5,000 people were reported to have gathered.
The site was the Monument of Liberty, which dates from the period of Latvian independence; it is not a memorial to war victims.


Ewing Tries, But Knicks Fail
LEAD: Right now, the Knicks' only semblance of an offense is embodied in Patrick Ewing.
He is their only consistent, capable scorer, their lone weapon.
So it wouldn't be correct to blame him for lowering his head and ignoring his teammates when the Knicks were desperate.


Excerpts From Meeting In Jordan
LEAD: AMMAN, Jordan, Nov. 11 (AP) -Following, in official translation, are excerpts from the final declaration issued here today at the end of the Arab summit conference:


WASHINGTON REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,672,540
2,660,769
Per share
.29
.29
9mo net inc
7,707,509
7,682,705
Per share
.84
.84


CINCINNATI MILACRON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINCINNATI MILACRON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 10
1987
1986
Sales
214,317,000
229,470,000
Net loss
b3,936,000
c5,046,000
Share earns
-
.21
9mo sales
596,113,000
619,114,000
Net inc
5,315,000
15,944,000
Share earns
.21
.67


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Queens Music


Weather Keeps Attendance Down at Veterans Day Parade
LEAD: Ron Hagell, in beard, marching yesterday with the Manhattan chapter of the Vietnam Veterans of America during the Veterans Day Parade on Fifth Avenue.
Rain, sleet and subfreezing temperatures kept the number of marchers to 1,000. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


PROVIDENT AMERICAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROVIDENT AMERICAN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,318,626
6,546,136
Net loss
b1,214,099
b1,703,497
9mo rev
19,456,655
16,823,847
Net loss
b1,355,554
c2,125,129
b-Includes net realized gain on investments of $13,604 and $93,652 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


U.S. Envoy Cautions Pretoria on Its Future
LEAD: The United States Ambassador declared today that South Africa could not endure into the next century if it turned its back on the West.


Japan Concern Is Punished
LEAD: The Japanese Government decided today to prohibit the Tomei Trading Company from making any exports for a month as punishment for illegal sales of computers and integrated circuits to China, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry said.
A ministry official said the measure, effective Tuesday, followed the conviction on Oct.


China Assignments For Leading Packager
LEAD: The man behind the packaging of Ronzoni, Weight Watchers and 9-Lives, as well as Corningware and Combos, a snack product from M&amp;M Mars, is now going to do a design job for China's airline.


DAXOR CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAXOR CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,040,169
918,835
Net inc
412,619
404,754
Share earns
.08
.08
9mo rev
5,655,294
2,775,129
Net inc
2,983,269
1,223,954
Share earns
.56
.23


The White House's Revenge on Costa Rica
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviet Defector in Debut With the Dallas Ballet
LEAD: A Moscow Ballet dancer who defected here three weeks ago made his debut with the Dallas Ballet Tuesday night.


SCOR US reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCOR US (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,478,000
c2,029,000
Per share
.43
.23
9mo net inc
b13,029,000
c6,323,000
Per share
1.03
.73
b-Includes realized investment gains of $241,000 and $888,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, and extraordinary gains of $49,000 and $158,000 for the same periods, respectively.


SIERRA SPRING WATER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIERRA SPRING WATER (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,950,787
11,905,515
Net loss
296,291
b107,859
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
32,947,849
33,157,063
Net loss
861,347
b272,069
Share earns
-
.03


Cadbury Objection
LEAD: Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C. said it would reject any request for management involvement from the General Cinema Corporation, a United States company that has more than doubled its stake in the British candy and beverage maker.
As yet, it has received no approach from General Cinema, Cadbury said, but it described the share purchase as a highly opportunistic move by an American corporation with a market capitalization little more than half of Cadbury's.


REGIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REGIS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
46,802,000
41,923,000
Net inc
1,765,000
2,313,000
Share earns
.22
.26


SYNAGOGUES DAMAGED BY VANDALS IN CHICAGO
LEAD: Windows were broken and swastikas were painted early Tuesday on nine build-ings, including three synagogues, in what storeowners said was a grim re-minder of ''Kristalnacht'' 49 years ago in Nazi Germany.


KC SOUTHERN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KC SOUTHERN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
126,396,000
111,779,000
Net inc
b7,392,000
c2,974,000
Share earns
.76
.30
9mo rev
372,327,000
340,557,000
Net inc
b11,737,000
cd4,153,000
Share earns
1.21
-


A.T.&amp;T. Expansion
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said it plans to spend about $3 billion next year and a similar amount in 1989 to expand its long-distance telephone network.
The amount represents a $1 billion increase over two years from the $2.5 billion A.T.&amp;T. announced last January that it would spend annually in 1988 and 1989.


HUTCHINSON TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUTCHINSON TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Sales
24,305,000
12,545,000
Net inc
1,058,000
b896,000
Share earns
.27
.23
Yr sales
77,756,000
47,166,000
Net inc
b4,665,000
b2,710,000
Share earns
1.20
.71


Hogeboom to Start
LEAD: Coach Ron Meyer of the Indianapolis Colts said yesterday that Gary Hogeboom would start at quarterback for the first time in four weeks when the Colts play the Dolphins in Miami on Sunday.
Hogeboom suffered a broken rib and a punctured lung in a game against the Jets during the National Football League strike and has since been replaced by Jack Trudeau.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
AVX Corp., Great Neck, L.I., a maker of multilayer ceramic capacitors, said it had completed the purchase of the multilayer ceramic, glass and tantalum capacitor operations of Corning Glass Works for $66 million.
Separately, Corning sold its resistor operations to Vishay Intertechnology Inc. for $37 million.


REAGAN NOMINATES ANTHONY KENNEDY TO SUPREME COURT
LEAD: President Reagan, stung by the failure of two nominations to the Supreme Court in the last three weeks, today nominated Judge Anthony M. Kennedy and expressed the hope that he could be confirmed quickly in a spirit of bipartisan cooperation.


G.M. Seen Closing Plant Temporarily
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation will temporarily close its assembly plant in Hamtramck, Mich. in January, idling 2,500 workers, while it redesigns models produced there, according to a report published today.
The Detroit Free Press said the nation's largest auto maker would close the $600 million plant for three weeks as workers begin converting it for production of 1989 Buick Riviera and Oldsmobile Toronado models.


IN THE NATION
LEAD: Mario Cuomo of New York says it's hard to be governor of a major state and run for President at the same time.
Michael Dukakis of Massachusetts says it's a piece of cake.


PAY-FONE SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAY-FONE SYSTEMS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,528,567
1,745,525
Net inc
73,241
197,741
Share earns
.05
.13


5 KILLED BY BOMB AT BEIRUT AIRPORT
LEAD: A bomb hidden in a suitcase exploded in a crowded passenger terminal at Beirut International Airport today, killing at least 5 people and wounding 70 others, the police said.


British Seek Tokyo Seats
LEAD: Britain urged Japan today to grant Tokyo Stock Exchange memberships to six British brokerage firms.
One such firm, Warburg Securities, has a seat now.
The exchange is going to expand to 115 seats from 93.


SCHWAB SAFE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCHWAB SAFE CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,366,416
2,895,678
Net inc
168,536
193,980
Share earns
.31
.31
Shares outst
548,036
609,501
9mo sales
10,026,354
8,647,769
Net inc
575,000
b394,672
Share earns
1.05
.63
Shares outst
547,343
624,238


PAGE AMERICA GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAGE AMERICA GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,636,500
2,942,600
Net inc
71,600
b1,804,300
6mo rev
5,537,200
6,262,200
Net loss
116,500
2,830,300
b-Net loss  The latest second quarter included a gain of $886,200 from the sale of assets in the latest period.


Hallmark Cards
LEAD: Hallmark Cards Inc., which took control of the nation's largest group of Spanish-language television stations in August, is now negotiating to buy Univision Inc., the Los Angeles-based unit of Mexico's Televisa, a report said.
Univision is a television programmer that supplies its stations with Spanish-language programming.


Concert: Sibelius Academy Quartet
LEAD: LIKE the Juilliard Quartet, Finland's Sibelius Academy Quartet, which performed for the first time in New York Tuesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall, is named for its country's foremost conservatory.
Tuesday's concert got better and better, moving from indifferent Haydn to pleasing Ravel to superb


Trade Limits Played Down
LEAD: Foreign trade barriers are exaggerated as a cause of the United States trade deficit, a survey of the export performance of rapidly growing companies shows.


New Look on College Campuses: Gray Hair
LEAD: Naval duty in World War II, then marriage and the obligations of putting two sons through college forced Angelo Kachulis to squelch his own yearnings for a college education.


BROWN, ROBERT C &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROWN, ROBERT C &amp; CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,007,708
6,323,374
Net inc
31,117
1,351,367
Share earns
.01
.50
Yr rev
10,516,771
19,014,766
Net inc
452,259
3,651,702
Share earns
.17
1.17


Power Rationed in Rumania
LEAD: Rumania announced strict rationing of power and natural gas today as the Communist country prepared for a fourth straight winter of restrictions and hardships for its 23 million people.
The Government declared a 30 percent reduction in natural gas and electricity quotas for private households until March 1.


U.S. TO BACK GENE-ENGINEERED DRUG FOR CLOTTING
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration plans to announce approval of a new drug Friday that can reduce the damage of heart attacks by dissolving harmful blood clots, Government officials said today.


DEWEY ELECTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEWEY ELECTRONICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,784,000
2,092,000
Net inc
1,165
2,693


For Disarmament Chief, a Man of Arms?
LEAD: After months of disagreement within the Reagan Administration and typical buzzing on the Washington rumor mill, a retired Navy admiral who is little known beyond the circle of professional military experts is now a leading candidate to succeed Kenneth L. Adelman as director of the Arms Control and Disarmament


BLESSINGS CORP reports earnings for 12wks to Oct 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLESSINGS CORP (AMEX)
12wks to Oct 10
1987
1986
Sales
18,367,300
16,562,600
Net inc
1,356,900
b1,322,900
Share earns
.42
.41
40wk sales
56,266,900
50,042,500
Net inc
4,222,200
b3,774,700
Share earns
1.30
1.16


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL BALTIMORE (AL) - Purchased the contracts of Craig Worthington, third baseman; John Hoover, pitcher, and Sherwin Cijntje, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.
CINCINNATI (NL) - Named John Cox director of scouting.
CLEVELAND (AL) - Released Miguel Roman, outfielder.


For Ex-Police Officer, New Life After Drugs
LEAD: His hands are steady now.
His voice is firm.
The police officer who became a cocaine addict and entered a drug treatment center 15 months ago is beginning to talk about returning to the world outside again, this time without a uniform, without a gun and without a secret life.


No Headline
LEAD: The Salvadoran Air Force bombed parts of central Cuscatlan province and left-wing guerrillas attacked the army during a unilateral Government cease-fire, civilians and the Government said today.


ELBIT COMPUTERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELBIT COMPUTERS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
42,777,000
40,354,000
Net inc
1,579,000
3,337,000
Share earns
.11
.25
Shares outst
14,019,707
13,269,707
6mo rev
81,117,000
76,369,000
Net inc
54,066,000
6,603,000
Share earns
.37
.50


MAY DEPARTMENT STORES CO reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAY DEPARTMENT STORES CO (NYSE)
13wks to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,478,000,000
2,308,000,000
Net inc
89,000,000
74,000,000
Share earns
.57
.47
39wk sales
7,004,000,000
6,432,000,000
Net inc
214,000,000
168,000,000
Share earns
1.38
1.06


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  KLAUS FUCHS: The Man Who Stole the Atom Bomb.
By Norman Moss. 216 pages.
Illustrated.
St.
Martin's Press. $16.95.
KLAUS FUCHS, ATOM SPY.
By Robert Chadwell Williams. 267 pages.
Illustrated.
Harvard University Press. $25.


The Guggenheim Collection Celebrates Itself and Its Art
LEAD: HARDLY since the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria in 1897 has an anniversary been as thoroughly celebrated as the 50th birthday of the Guggenheim Museum.
People by the hundreds danced, dined, drank, talked, reminisced.
The staff got to forget what day it was, and virtually every foreign artist who has ever shown at the Guggenheim flew in to pay tribute to Thomas M.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article yesterday on an anti-cholesterol drug misstated the cost of another drug, lovastatin.
Its costs range from $700 to $3,000 a year per patient.


EQUITY OIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EQUITY OIL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,837,508
2,403,400
Net inc
48,284
126,956
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
10,108,403
8,868,511
Net inc
292,784
313,292
Share earns
.02
.03
Sales represent total sales.


In the Night
LEAD:  Ruby Braff Is Back


Judge Sets Aside Mandel Verdict In Mail Fraud
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Baltimore today overturned convictions that sent former Gov.
Marvin Mandel of Maryland and five co-defendants to jail 10 years ago on charges of mail fraud.


LOBLAW COMPANIES LTD reports earnings for 16wks to Oct 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOBLAW COMPANIES LTD
16wks to Oct 10
1987
1986
Sales
2,670,100,000
2,393,900,000
Net inc
21,300,000
22,300,000
Share earns
.25
.27
40wk sales
6,598,600,000
5,799,500,000
Net inc
54,300,000
51,300,000
Share earns
.64
.64


WOOLWORTH, F W CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WOOLWORTH, F W CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,765,000,000
1,593,000,000
Net inc
54,000,000
46,000,000
Share earns
.82
.70
9mo rev
4,942,000,000
4,511,000,000
Net inc
120,000,000
97,000,000
Share earns
1.81
1.48


Storm Batters Boston Area With Wind and Foot of Snow
LEAD: Near-blizzard conditions plagued the Boston area yesterday, dumping up to a foot of snow and closing Logan International Airport.


Threadbare Economics?
LEAD: Some months ago stock analysts were delighted to learn that, in the world of women's fashion, miniskirts were back in style.
There was a correlation, said the statistical pundits, between short skirts and bull markets.


AMERICANA HOTELS &amp; REALTY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICANA HOTELS &amp; REALTY (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,274,000
1,153,000
Net inc
426,000
b143,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
6,427,000
3,851,000
Net inc
859,000
b471,000
Share earns
.14
-


'Though Homeless, She Copes, She Is Fit, She Survives'
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the decision by Acting Justice Robert D. Lippmann of State Supreme Court in Manhattan ordering the release from the Bellevue Hospital Center of Joyce Brown, a homeless woman involuntarily hospitalized by New York City mental-health authorities:


Honeywell Bull to Cut 1,600
LEAD: Honeywell Bull Inc. said yesterday that it would eliminate 1,600 staff positions, about 8 percent of its staff, during the next year as part of a domestic restructuring.


SKYWEST INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SKYWEST INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,064,000
14,546,000
Net inc
b54,000
1,388,000
Share earns
.01
.33
6mo rev
34,299,000
27,994,000
Net loss
b542,000
c2,274,000
Share earns
-
.64
b-Includes tax benefits of $774,000.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-12


PRONET INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRONET INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,476,000
1,808,000
Net inc
b103,000
c93,000
Share earns
.03
.03
9mo rev
6,806,000
5,158,000
Net inc
b375,000
d11,000
Share earns
.12
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $59,000 and $150,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Koch Rules Against Wider Role for Firefighters
LEAD: In an effort to resolve tensions between New York City's Police and Fire Departments, Mayor Koch last night announced that the Fire Department would be notified about more emergencies than it is now.
But he overruled a proposal to expand the firefighters' authority further.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: THE Lincoln Center area is always a challenge for those seeking interesting dining before or after performances.
A spiffy new Italian trattoria just across the street, called Poccino, is a welcome addition.
The sleek, glass-enclosed dining room and its futuristic bar look out on the Lincoln Center complex and the nonstop urban opera along Broadway.


COLONIAL GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLONIAL GAS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,324,000
14,404,000
Net loss
1,872,000
1,288,000
9mo rev
89,305,000
94,327,000
Net inc
6,643,000
5,747,000
Share earns
1.68
1.49


Senate Backs A-Waste Site Plan
LEAD: The Senate today approved an overhaul of the nation's program for dealing with high-level nuclear waste that virtually chooses Nevada as the most likely state for a permanent repository for such waste.
The vote was 63 to 30.


61.01 Rise Puts Dow At 1,960.21
LEAD: The stock market surged yesterday, and analysts laid the stock rally firmly at the door of the September trade figures released by the Commerce Department.


Ambassador of Rock Visits Leningrad
LEAD: To the Editor:


CELLO CONCERTO
LEAD: The New York Chamber Sympho-ny, conducted by Gerard Schwarz, is to perform works by Mozart and the premierof a cello concerto by and Sunday at 3 P.M. at the 92d Street Y. Soloists for the concert are to be the pianist Alicia de Larrocha and Andre Emelianoff, cellist.
Tickets are $15 to $22.50.
Information: 966-1100.


Raise Deductibility Cap
LEAD: To the Editor:


BGS SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BGS SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,380,000
2,907,000
Net inc
174,000
28,000
Share earns
.06
.01
9mo rev
10,146,000
9,698,000
Net inc
306,000
651,000
Share earns
.10
.20


Witness's Home Is Bombed; Two Are Charged in Queens
LEAD: Two people have been charged with firebombing the home of a man who complained to the police about drug dealing in his South Jamaica, Queens, neighborhood.


Filipino Rebels Tied to Deaths
LEAD: The commander of the Philippine Constabulary said today that Communist rebel gunmen were responsible two weeks ago for the killing of three Americans outside Clark Air Base.


TECH-SYM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TECH-SYM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
28,047,000
23,654,000
Net inc
1,723,000
b2,430,000
Share earns
.26
.37
9mo sales
80,391,000
74,254,000
Net inc
5,962,000
b6,324,000
Share earns
.90
.96


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The World Boxing Association junior-featherweight champion, Louie Espinoza, has signed contracts for two fights - in Puerto Rico Nov. 28 against the eighth-ranked contender, Julio Gervacio, and Jan. 15 against Bernardo Pinango, the No. 1-ranked contender. . . .
Pernell Whitaker, a 1984 Olympic gold medalist, will fight Jose Luis Ramirez in Paris in March for the World Boxing Council's lightweight crown, according to Dan Duva, Whitaker's promoter.


UNITED COASTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED COASTS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,485,170
984,266
Per share
.12
.10
Shares outst
12,072,826
10,000,000
9mo net inc
b3,789,039
c1,156,300
Per share
.35
.12
Shares outst
10,753,785
10,000,000


Rangers Decide To Suffer Quietly
LEAD: The Rangers - victims of circumstances, injuries and too many changes - haven't won in their last eight games and have lost seven straight for the first time since 1963, but they have opted to cope quietly with their nonsuccess.


DUKAKIS SAYS GOVERNMENT CAUSED STOCK PLUNGE
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts charged yesterday that last month's stock market plunge was ''a government-made disaster.''


South Boston Journal; Close-Knit Neighborhood Disowns a Favorite Son
LEAD: It took the residents of South Boston 161 years to elect one of their own as Mayor of Boston.
It took them four years to turn against him.


253 Pounds of Trouble for Jets
LEAD: On Sunday in Kansas City, the Jets will meet one of the more interesting new players in the National Football League, Christian Okoye of Enugu, Nigeria.


The Monthly Trade Figures: A Closely Watched Barometer
LEAD: The monthly trade figures have become a litmus test of sorts for the health of the overall United States economy.
This is why investors and traders in all the financial markets pay so much attention to the report - and, correspondingly, why the prices of stocks and bonds and the value of the dollar in relation to other major currencies can rise or fall, depending on how the actual figures stack up against expectations.


Call Is Issued for New Policy
LEAD: A group of American and European business leaders today called on governments to reduce the trade imbalances that have fueled turmoil in the financial markets.


COMMONWEALTH MORTGAGE reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMONWEALTH MORTGAGE (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Net inc
540,000
1,630,000
Share earns
.09
.30
6mo net loss
1,858,000
b3,149,000
Share earns
-
.60
b-Net income


TESORO PETROLEUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TESORO PETROLEUM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
365,907,000
277,380,000
Net inc
b3,933,000
bc61,661,000
Share earns
.12
-
Yr rev
1,314,380,000
1,472,789,000
Net loss
1,776,000
124,824,000
b-Includes a gain of $5.6 million on oil sales for the latest quarter, and the year-ago quarter includes writedowns of $58.4 million after tax.


BRITISH PETROLEUM CO PLC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRITISH PETROLEUM CO PLC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,450,000,000
8,757,000,000
Net inc
533,000,000
536,000,000
Share earns
1.17
1.17
9mo rev
33,190,000,000
30,507,000,000
Net inc
1,462,000,000
2,334,000,000
Share earns
3.19
5.10


WRIGHT HAS TALKS WITH BOTH PARTIES IN NICARAGUA WAR
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua and the leaders of the American-backed rebels conferred separately today with the House Speaker, Jim Wright, as efforts to negotiate a cease-fire appeared to be stepping up.


Brunch Spots Where Music Is on the Menu
LEAD: GOING out to eat long ago ceased having much to do with simply eating.
From the power breakfast to the hot date, the number of variations on the general theme of dining out have mushroomed into a veritable smorgasbord of possibilities.


Met Opera: Pavarotti and Sutherland in 'Trovatore'
LEAD: NORMALLY it takes a new opera production years to decline to the point of terminal weariness and ineptitude, but the Metropolitan Opera's ''Trovatore'' reached that sad state in one evening, at last night's premiere.
Placing the blame precisely is not easy, simply because there is so much blame to go around.


John Lydenberg; Scholar, 74
LEAD: John Lydenberg, a retired professor of American literature at Hobart and William Smith Colleges in Geneva, N.Y., died of cancer Wednesday at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 74 years old.


Jailed for Paddling the Paddler
LEAD: A judge has held that it is all right for a school principal to paddle a pupil but wrong for the pupil's mother to hit a principal.


4 South Africa Soldiers Said to Die in Angola
LEAD: South Africa said today that four of its soldiers had been killed in combat with Cuban-backed Angolan troops in southeast Angola, in what appeared to be an intensification of the 12-year-old civil war in that country.


TRANS LEASING INTERNAIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANS LEASING INTERNAIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,156,000
2,803,000
Net inc
322,000
263,000
Share earns
.10
.08


Priest's Mission Is Contras' Surrender
LEAD: The Rev.
Enrique Oggier has come to regard the Central American peace plan with a faith nearly equal to that he holds for the church's teachings.


A Lion in Winter on Wall St.
LEAD: Many investors are boasting these days that they sold stocks before the market collapsed on Oct. 19.
But few of them are now stepping forward to be big buyers of stocks again.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 13, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


Bowater Industries' Holders Back Bid
LEAD: Shareholders of Bowater Industries P.L.C. have approved the acquisition of the Rexham Corporation for $60.25 a share, or about $224 million.
The agreement, which had been approved by the boards of both companies, was ratified by Bowater's shareholders in London, said Bowater's chief executive, David Lyon, and Rexham's president, Scott C.


5,000 at NBC to Receive Stock as Gift After Strike
LEAD: Some 5,000 NBC employees who kept the network on the air during a 17-week strike by filling in as news writers, camera operators and engineers will be given a bonus of 10 shares each of General Electric stock.


Lessons of the Koch Mission
LEAD: The mission of a nine-member delegation headed by Mayor Koch of New York City made it clear that fact-finding in Central America is a formidable undertaking.


ISS INTERNATIONAL SERVICE SYSTEMS (DANISH, CO)(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ISS INTERNATIONAL SERVICE SYSTEMS (DANISH, CO)(A)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
53,026,000
40,886,000
Net inc
341,000
307,000
Share earns
.09
.08
9mo rev
162,322,000
117,360,000
Net inc
1,155,000
590,000
Share earns
.30
.20


Nicholas L. Castellano; Lawyer and Ex-Prosecutor, 72
LEAD: Nicholas L. Castellano, a Long Island criminal lawyer, died of a heart attack Tuesday at Long Beach (L.I.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in Island Park, L.I.


IVERSON TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IVERSON TECHNOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,680,400
6,160,700
Net inc
1,175,100
563,400
Share earns
.31
.16
Shares outst
3,840,000
3,630,000
9mo rev
25,978,300
16,164,900
Net inc
2,300,000
1,565,000
Share earns
.61
.43
Shares outst
3,760,000
3,645,000


HOME OFFICE REFERENCE LABORATORY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME OFFICE REFERENCE LABORATORY (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,555,158
4,142,459
Net inc
3,581,004
797,526
Share earns
.24
.05
9mo sales
24,466,346
11,186,737
Net inc
7,615,273
1,971,680
Share earns
.51
.13


Financial Man Elevated At Cincinnati Milacron
LEAD: Cincinnati Milacron Inc., the nation's largest machine tool manufacturer, said yesterday that Daniel J. Meyer, the company's vice president for finance and administration, had been elected president.


THE PLAYOFF RACE: OLD FACES AND NEW
LEAD: If the National Football League playoffs were to start Sunday, there would be many familiar faces and a few stunning surprises.


No Winners at Tourney
LEAD: The yearly records of the Volvo International tennis tournament in Stratton Mountain, Vt., will show no singles or doubles champions for 1987.
Final matches in both events were rained out last Aug. 9 and, despite efforts by tournament officials to arrange for the finalists to return and complete the matches, the organizers announced yesterday they had given up.


Ford Plans New Stock Repurchase
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company, which has been reluctant to spend much of its cash hoard on acquisitions, said today that it would repurchase up to $2 billion of its own shares after a current buyback program ends.


HEALTH-CHEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTH-CHEM CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,961,000
7,595,000
Net loss
b6,233,000
c681,000
Share earns
-
.09
9mo sales
25,623,000
20,963,000
Net loss
b5,817,000
c3,000
b-Includes losses on the disposal of discontiunued operations of $145,000 for the quarter and $318,000 for the 9 months, an allowace for loss of $4,700,000 on the anticipated repurchase of the company's stock for both the quarter and 9 months, allowances for unrealized losses on investment in U.S.


Horse Racing Notebook; A Move to Switch Breeders' Mile to Dirt
LEAD: Afleet, Gulch, Polish Navy, Stacked Pack and Very Subtle going a mile on the dirt later this month would be a sensational race and a fitting part of the Breeders' Cup Day.
It will not happen this year, but a similar race could be part of the cup within a year or two.


FIRST CITY INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST CITY INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
34,361,000
28,011,000
Net inc
b496,000
c8,142,000
9mo sales
98,926,000
96,006,000
Net inc
b106,700,000
c22,004,000
Share earns
11.50
-
b-After tax credits of $2,306,000 and $21,733,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, and the quarter also includes net from discontinued operations of $7,864,000, and a gain of $92,110,000 from disposal of discontinued operations.


British Jobless Rate Dips
LEAD: Britain's unemployment rate fell to a seasonally adjusted 9.8 percent in October, dropping below 10 percent for the first time in six years, the Department of Employment said today.
Total seasonally adjusted unemployment was estimated at 2.71 million people in October, down from a revised 2.77 million in September and 3.16 million in the comparable period a year ago.


Cleveland-Cliffs
LEAD: David F. Bolger, the New Jersey investment banker seeking control of Cleveland-Cliffs Inc., has hired Donaldson, Lufkin, &amp; Jenrette Inc. as his financial adviser.
Mr.
Bolger, who holds 1.05 million, or 8.5 percent, of Cleveland-Cliffs's shares, is soliciting proxies to replace the board of the Cleveland-based iron ore and gas drilling concern.


Dollar Perplexes Candidates
LEAD: What the Republican and Democratic candidates for the Presidency are saying about the dollar is, mostly, the obvious: it will remain weak until a workable long-term agreement is reached to reduce the nation's budget deficit.


San Francisco Fire Dept. Job Pact Faces Challenge
LEAD: A Federal district judge tentatively approved a settlement today establishing goals for hiring and promoting women and blacks in the San Francisco Fire Department.


Not the Villain
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stocks, Dollar Advance In Asia on U.S. Report
LEAD: Share prices climbed this morning, as traders, buoyed by news of a shrinking American trade deficit and a stronger dollar, flooded the market with buy orders.


Harvesting Holiday Symbol
LEAD: Workers guiding 75-foot Norway spruce onto flatbed truck in Suffern, N.Y., for trip to Rockefeller Center.


THEATER: A MUSICAL, 'TEDDY AND ALICE'
LEAD: FOR those who worried that Broadway might be nothing more than a carnival fairway offering mindless fun, along comes ''Teddy and Alice,'' a show that fearlessly puts pedagogy back into the American musical.
An extravagant treatment of the life of our 26th President and his terminally spunky daughter, the production at the Minskoff is full of fascinating footnotes to our nation's proud history.


TANDON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TANDON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
96,724,000
56,382,000
Net inc
965,000
b45,294,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
258,860,000
166,319,000
Net inc
11,668,000
b63,614,000
Share earns
.21
-


Iran Announcement: Offensive Is Due
LEAD: The Teheran radio said today that Iran was preparing to mobilize troops for a major new offensive against Iraq, and American and Iraqi officials here said they believed it would begin soon.


Buyout of Eastern Air Urged
LEAD: As pink slips went out today to the first of 3,500 workers being laid off at Eastern Air Lines, a union official urged an employee buyout of the carrier.


Cyprus Awarded Victory in Soccer
LEAD: Europe's soccer authority today overturned a victory by the Netherlands against Cyprus last month in a game of the European Championship qualifying tournament in which a smoke bomb was thrown at the Cypriot goalie.


CORRECTIONS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORRECTIONS CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,345,721
3,939,843
Net loss
562,137
768,061
9mo rev
12,500,332
9,729,286
Net loss
1,294,505
1,814,211


An Export Assault on Europe
LEAD: The rush to Europe is on.
With the dollar sinking to postwar lows, making American products ever cheaper, United States companies are flocking across the Atlantic to cash in.


QMAX TECHNOLOGY GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QMAX TECHNOLOGY GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,184,756
881,295
Net inc
305,944
136,762
Share earns
.06
.03


8 Charged With Mafia Drug Plot, Including Murders and Extortion
LEAD: Eight men with ties to organized crime were charged yesterday with conspiring to control drug sales at locations in Brooklyn and Staten Island in a pattern of racketeering that included murder, extortion and bribery.


CLAIRSON INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLAIRSON INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
28,187,084
17,078,178
Net inc
1,211,000
875,000
Share earns
.24
.23
Shares outst
5,089,270
3,746,509
Yr rev
82,018,415
56,957,419
Net inc
2,675,000
1,895,000
Share earns
.55
.51
Shares outst
4,899,462
3,744,206


Canadians Cool To Tunnel Plan
LEAD: The international underwriters of the $:750 million ($1.34 billion) Eurotunnel share issue said today that they had withdrawn plans to seek financing in Canada because of low interest among investors.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


ARSON AT THE FRANKFURT OPERA
LEAD: The Frankfurt Opera House was badly damaged today by a fire started by an unemployed and homeless East German refugee, officials said.


Advertising; PEOPLE
LEAD: John M. Greening has been elected senior vice president of DDB Needham Woldwide, Chicago.


Whiteheads Divorce and Cite Battle For Baby M, Not Pregnancy, as Cause
LEAD: Richard and Mary Beth Whitehead were divorced here today, eight days after she formally revealed she was two months' pregnant by another man.


Economic Scene; World System Seeks Stability
LEAD: AFTER a week of intense discussions here among leading European and American economists and politicians, an agenda can be constructed of the critical problems to be solved if the stock market collapse is to be prevented from becoming a greater catastrophe.


SILICON SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILICON SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
24,117,000
19,718,000
Net inc
1,481,000
1,811,000
Share earns
.22
.27
Yr rev
81,805,000
66,846,000
Net inc
2,845,000
87,000
Share earns
.41
.01


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD:  Bank of America, San Francisco, named Barbara Rambo a senior vice president.
Colgate-Palmolive Co. elected as a director Ronald E. Ferguson, president and chief executive of General Re Corp., a reinsurance company.
Holiday Corp., Memphis, a hotel and casino concern, said Richard J.


Child Is Buried as Inquiry Into Her Death Goes On
LEAD: Coffin of Elizabeth Steinberg, the 6-year-old child who died after a beating, being carried yesterday to a grave in Hawthorne, N.Y., that was provided by her mother, Michelle Launders.
Page B1. (NYT/Vic DeLucia)


LOUISIANA GENERAL SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOUISIANA GENERAL SERVICES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,317,000
30,360,000
Net loss
131,000
b1,162,000
Share earns
-
.19
Yr rev
159,188,000
165,126,000
Net inc
7,685,000
c1,864,000
Share earns
1.29
-


WESTON, GEORGE LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTON, GEORGE LTD
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,290,000,000
2,940,000,000
Net inc
39,700,000
36,900,000
Share earns
.80
.74
9mo sales
7,960,000,000
7,080,000,000
Net inc
88,000,000
74,800,000
Share earns
1.65
1.45


LYNCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LYNCH CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,864,000
2,638,000
Net loss
240,000
b112,000
Share earns
-
.08
9mo sales
12,348,000
8,083,000
Net inc
184,000
561,000
Share earns
.13
.41
b-Net income


From New Talent, Bold New Images
LEAD: IT sometimes seems that the exhibition scene in photography is characterized by an endless repetition of familiar names and images.
The names bring in the crowds, and the images help pay the rent.
But at the moment, as if by an unspoken, collective urge, the focus has shifted to the young and the undersung, giving them a showcase they sorely need if they are to follow in the footsteps of giants like Henri Cartier-Bresson and Edward


Kasparov Maintains His One-Point Lead
LEAD: Neither Gary Kasparov nor Anatoly Karpov was able to upset the balance of the 12th game of their world championship chess match in Seville, Spain, on Wednesday, and they agreed to an early draw.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Who among us is not familiar with the tattered, filthy, malodorous presence of the wretched homeless?
The blame and shame must attach to us, not to them.''  - Acting JusticeRobert D. Lippmannof New York StateSupreme Court.  [ B2:2. ]


ENTERRA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENTERRA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,449,000
8,923,000
Net loss
b3,771,000
d4,996,000
9mo rev
28,891,000
38,584,000
Net inc
b4,001,000
cd12,194,000
Share earns
.45
-
b-After gains on the disposal of discontinued operations of $10,000 and $13,137,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, and the 9 months also includes income from discontinued operations of $320,000.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Tuesday with an article about Governor Cuomo's attendance at a conference in Tarrytown, N.Y., on the plight of minority-group children, reversed the identities of two of the women shown with Mr.
Cuomo.
Yveline Sylvain of the Youth Leadership Conference, was at the right, and next to her was Meredith Carey of the Manhattan Borough President's Youth Advisory Committee.


Carlucci Hints Budget Plan Portends Shrinking Military
LEAD: Frank C. Carlucci, President Reagan's choice to be the new Defense Secretary, said at his confirmation hearings today that continuing reductions in military spending are likely to lead to a smaller American military force.


Film: 'Cross My Heart,' a Date in Detail
LEAD: IF a date were a thing that could be examined under a microscope, then ''Cross My Heart'' offers some idea of what it might look like, warts and all.
The entire film concentrates on the all-important third encounter between David (Martin Short) and Kathy (Annette O'Toole), an event that the film deems critical for several reasons.


DISNEY, WALT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DISNEY, WALT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
758,648,000
627,956,000
Net inc
b135,262,000
c81,087,000
Share earns
.98
.59
Shares outst
138,275,000
136,781,000
Yr rev
2,876,859,000
2,165,874,000
Net inc
b444,678,000
c247,315,000
Share earns
3.23
1.82
Shares outst
137,768,000
135,849,000


MARKETS REBOUND
LEAD: The nation's deficit in international trade shrank by a hefty $1.6 billion in September, improving against all major trading partners except Canada, the Commerce Department said today.


PAMELA B. RUBIN AND JON R. CARTER WED
LEAD: At Temple Emanu-El in New York, Pamela Beth Rubin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic P. Rubin of Old Westbury, L.I., was married yes-terday to Jon Robert Carter, the son of Arthur L. Carter of New York and Linda Gordon of Newfane, Vt.
Rabbis Ronald B. Sobel and Eugene Lipsey officiated.


3 Are Killed in Bangladesh Riots
LEAD: At least three people were reported killed today in a clash between rioters and the police as anti-Government protests continued sporadically and shops in central Dhaka were shut for half the day.


Lab Wars, Star Wars
LEAD: There is trouble in one of the key atomic weapons labs working on ''Star Wars,'' over an issue of greater importance than seeking a defense against missiles.
It is about whether defense of scientific integrity can be maintained against a push to make even the most technical questions political, if they can be exploited.


3-Year-Olds in Stretch
LEAD: Mack Lobell and Jate Lobell, 1986's top trotter and top pacer, will end their campaigns as 3-year-olds in Breeders Crown races Friday night at Pompano Park.


Australian 'Howling'
IF you see only one werewolf movie this year, you might as well make it ''Howling III,'' Philippe Mora's not-altogether straight-faced howler on behalf of lycanthropes' liberation.
Among other things, the Australian-made movie suggests there's nothing inherently evil about being a werewolf that a little human understanding wouldn't cure.
Mr.
Mora and his associates are blunt about it: this anti-werewolf hysteria must stop.
In the meantime, they're free to exploit it with a good deal of earnest levity. ''Howling III'' involves a tribe of indigenously Australian (marsupial) lycanthropes, a defecting Russian ballerina named Olga, who is herself a werewolf, and Beckmeyer, a hardworking, civil libertarian Australian professor, who has espoused the werewolf cause.


Shell Resists Bid
LEAD: The Royal Dutch/Shell Group has threatened to leave Brazil if a proposal to put the distribution of petroleum products solely in the hands of Government companies becomes law.
It is the second economic issue this month pitting Government interests against those of multinational companies.
Autolatina, a venture of the Ford Motor Company and West Germany's Volkswagenwerk A.G., has challenged the Brazilian Government's system of price controls in court.


PAINFUL VIEW OF HOWARD BEACH CASE
LEAD: For five weeks, a 42-year-old black woman, Jean Griffith, has sat in a Queens courtroom listening to graphic testimony describing how her son was killed and her fiance severely beaten last December in Howard Beach.


Tales of the Pioneers
LEAD: Even before they could vote in national elections, women sometimes attained positions of responsibility and authority in the Federal Government.
But they rarely received public recognition for their work.


BP CANADA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BP CANADA INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
86,508,000
53,456,000
Net inc
13,305,000
10,604,000
Share earns
.26
.24
9mo sales
237,905,000
199,695,000
Net inc
33,170,000
14,155,000
Share earns
.66
.32


New Hands, Old Philosophy Control Notre Dame Sports
LEAD: The new executive vice president of the University of Notre Dame, the man who controls the overall philosophy of the athletic department, is a priest with no experience in the administration of college sports.


HOECHST CELANESE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOECHST CELANESE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,230,000,000
-
Net inc
45,000,000
-
9mo sales
3,150,000,000
-
Net inc
133,000,000
-
The company was formed by the merger of American Hoechst Corp. with Celanese Corp.


At the Movies
LEAD:  Kapoor's London Talkie


Dining Out Guide: Cucina Nuova
LEAD:  This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
ALO ALO, 1030 Third Avenue, at 61st Street (838-4343) - **(June 21, 1985) The whimsically chic dining room resembles a grand cafe.


JACOBS ENGINEERING GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACOBS ENGINEERING GROUP INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,785,000
c299,000
Share earns
.41
-
Yr rev
320,307,000
207,589,000
Net inc
3,512,000
850,000
Share earns
.81
.20
b-Includes a gain of $500,000, or 11 cents a share, from litigation settlement.


HOSPOSABLE PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOSPOSABLE PRODUCTS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,304,158
2,851,250
Net inc
55,421
154,925
Share earns
.05
.17
9mo sales
9,753,646
8,123,464
Net loss
303,166
b468,489
Share earns
-
.52
b-Net income


CIRCLE FINE ART CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CIRCLE FINE ART CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,205,000
4,982,000
Net inc
406,000
539,000
Share earns
.17
.23
Yr sales
20,668,000
15,360,000
Net inc
843,000
560,000
Share earns
.35
.23


Disney Profits Climb by 66.8%
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company, benefiting from an upswing in attendance at its theme parks and the popularity of its new and old film releases, said today that its earnings rose 66.8 percent in the fourth quarter.


Suez Canal Revenues Up
LEAD: The Suez Canal earned Egypt $1 billion in the first 10 months of 1987, up $50 million from a year earlier, Ezzat Adel, chairman of the Canal Authority, reported today.
An increase in ship tolls, scheduled for next year, has been canceled because of the world financial turmoil, he said.


Houston Post Sale Nearly Completed
LEAD: Media News Group Inc., the owner of The Dallas Times Herald and 27 other daily newspapers, is expected to complete next week its $150 million purchase of The Houston Post, the company said.
Originally announced Sept. 10, the all-cash purchase of the newspaper from the Toronto Sun Publishing Corporation was expected to close by Nov.


Patrick J. Growney; Lawyer, 81
LEAD: Patrick J. Growney, a retired partner of the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling, died Monday at a convalescent home in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
He was 81 years old and lived in Gladwyne, Pa.


John H. Rizzuto; Fashion Executive, 52
LEAD: John H. Rizzuto, former president of Givenchy Inc., the United States corporate office of the Paris fashion house, died Tuesday at his home in Manhattan after a long illness.
He was 52 years old.


INTERNATIONAL THOROUGHRED BREEDERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL THOROUGHRED BREEDERS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,359,446
23,889,917
Net loss
4,108,660
4,794,128


Moscow Talk: Leader's Fall From Heights
LEAD: Maksim, a computer worker, spotted the real news tucked five minutes beyond the headlined stories, offered by the state-controlled television announcer in the minimalist form that Muscovites are alert for: Boris N. Yeltsin, the city's leading politician, had been suddenly ousted.


Berlin Journal; In Search of a Work of Art to Overcome the Wall
LEAD: The Berlin wall, Peter Unsicker says, is the only really German art since the war. ''It's built by Germans in the East, painted by Germans in the West,'' he explained, not without a tinge of Berliner Schnauze, the cheek on which Berliners used to pride themselves.


Senator Lugar Hurt in Fall
LEAD: Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, broke a bone in his face and suffered a cut over his eye when he slipped today on his icy driveway in McLean, Va., a spokesman said.
Mr.
Lugar was treated at Bethesda Naval Hospital and released but will have to return Wednesday to have the facial bone set, the spokesman, Andy Fisher, said.


TUCKER DRILLING CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TUCKER DRILLING CO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,825,000
2,090,000
Net loss
339,000
322,000
6mo rev
7,438,000
3,833,000
Net inc
488,000
b768,000
Share earns
.23
-
b-Net loss


Texaco Committees Ordered to Merge
LEAD: The Federal judge overseeing the bankruptcy proceedings of Texaco Inc. yesterday ordered the two separate committees of creditors to merge.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD:  Apple Computer Inc., Cupertino, Calif., said it would raise its dividend to 8 cents a share, from 6 cents.
It is payable Dec. 15, to shareholders of record Nov. 23.


TECHNICAL TAPE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TECHNICAL TAPE INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,234,000
17,169,000
Net inc
b578,000
393,000
Share earns
.12
.08
9mo rev
56,947,000
49,742,000
Net inc
b1,934,000
1,401,000
Share earns
.41
.30


Lowell Coggeshall Is Dead at 86; Authority on Diseases of Tropics
LEAD: Dr.
Lowell T. Coggeshall, an authority on tropical diseases and a former vice president and trustee of the University of Chicago, died Wednesday at the South Baldwin Hospital in Foley, Ala.
He was 86 years old and lived in Foley.


Advertising; A Label For Johnnie Walker
LEAD: JOHNNIE WALKER Black Label, in hopes of continuing its forward motion, is spending an extra $1 million for a pre-Christmas print advertising spectacular.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
9.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.69
n.a.
5.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.79
n.a.
5.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.27
n.a.
5.48
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.61
n.a.
7.16
30-YR.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Lakers 111, Clippers 82: James Worthy scored 20 points and A.C.
Green added 17 last night in Inglewood, Calif., as the Lakers remained the only unbeaten team in the Western Conference.
The defending league champions need a victory Saturday at Golden State to equal the best start in their history.


Stalin's Daughter Isn't Moving
LEAD: Svetlana Alliluyeva, Stalin's daughter, said today that she had no plans to move to Britain, although she inquired informally about a work permit.


Holmes a Court Is Under the Gun
LEAD: After being badly hurt by last month's stock collapse, the investor Robert Holmes a Court is searching the world for buyers for his 9.6 percent stake in Texaco Inc. and his other holdings as well.


A.M.A. Rules That Doctors Are Obligated to Treat AIDS
LEAD: The American Medical Association declared today that doctors had an ethical obligation to care for people with AIDS as well as for those who had been infected with the virus but showed no symptoms.


WOMEN'S DANCE SERIES
LEAD: Melanie Slater and Pamela Hoff-man are to open the Working Women dance festival tonight at 8 at Middle Collegiate Church, 50 East Seventh Street.
The choreographers will present ''Lore,'' which they describe as a concert of human tales.
Others scheduled to present dances in the festival are Amy Sue Rosen, tomor-row and Sunday at 8; Sally Silvers, from Dec.


Giamatti's Report
LEAD: Speaking to students at Yale, the university he formerly was president of, A. Bartlett Giamatti, now the National League president, said last night that the most serious problem that baseball has before it is the unruliness of spectators that threatens to ''take the game away from the American family.


VICTORIA CREATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VICTORIA CREATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,209,000
15,193,000
Net inc
893,000
1,808,000
Share earns
.12
.24


ANGELES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANGELES CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,704,000
10,331,000
Net inc
119,000
b514,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Includes a tax loss carryforward of $249,000.


After Summit, a New Look for Egypt
LEAD: Egypt nudged a small way farther from isolation today after an Arab League summit meeting lifted a prohibition on diplomatic ties with Cairo because of its 1979 peace with Israel.


Auditing Rule Impact Cited
LEAD: A study said today that anticipated new accounting regulations could have a major impact on big business -reducing stock market prices, affecting corporate takeover decisions and altering benefits to retired Americans.


LABARGE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LABARGE INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
15,021,490
12,816,250
Net inc
b217,173
c450,704
b-After a tax credit of $73,800.
c-Net loss  No share earnings available because of preferred dividend requirements.


The Elis Can Wait
LEAD: Justice Department officials say Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d is in relatively good spirits and fully engaged in his duties.
This despite his mounting legal problems in connection with grand jury investigations of the Wedtech and Iran-contra scandals and despite such pressures of office as having to advise President Reagan on three Supreme


What Snow?
LEAD: Inhabitants of Heckscher State Park in Huntington, L.I., watching as mid-autumn returned yesterday. (NYT/Barton Silverman)


GLOBAL NATURAL RESOURCES PROPERTIES LC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GLOBAL NATURAL RESOURCES PROPERTIES LC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,448,000
8,276,000
Net loss
b353,000
cd1,331,000
Share earns
-
.06
9mo rev
23,908,000
28,217,000
Net inc
b156,000
d7,193,000
Share earns
.01
.32


GF CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GF CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
33,595,000
31,609,000
Net loss
b1,900,000
c161,000
Share earns
-
.04
9mo sales
97,508,000
98,244,000
Net loss
3,813,000
585,000
b-Includes a one-time charge of $220,000 for termination in early retirement benefits.


U.N. Repeats Debt Warning
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar has told the United States representative here that the United Nations will run out of funds unless Washington pays $87 million of its annual contribution by early December, United Nations officials said today.


3 on Election Panel to Oppose Bypassing Contribution Limit
LEAD: Three of the six members of the Federal Election Commission indicated today that they would oppose a request to allow political action committees to bypass Federal restrictions on political contributions.


Coors Biotech
LEAD: The Coors Biotech Products Company, a division of the Adolph Coors Company of Golden, Colo., said it would form a venture with Meiji Seika Kaisha Ltd., a Tokyo confectionery company.
The venture would market a food additive that the Japanese company had developed and sold in its country for more than three years.


ALCO STANDARD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALCO STANDARD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
970,870,000
1,116,028,000
Net inc
b29,520,000
c13,947,000
Share earns
.65
.33
Yr rev
3,633,162,000
4,323,073,000
Net inc
b80,167,000
c56,963,000
Share earns
1.81
1.33


Tremors on Wall Street Don't Make New York City Quake
LEAD: To the Editor:


INMAC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INMAC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 24
1987
1986
Sales
48,831,000
36,469,000
Net inc
2,182,000
1,617,000
Share earns
.23
.19
Shares outst
9,478,000
8,397,000


Deaver's Illness Delays Trial
LEAD: Michael K. Deaver's second painful kidney stone attack in two weeks forced the adjournment today of his perjury trial until at least Wednesday while he undergoes surgery and recuperation.


Bridge: Event This Weekend Gives Rare Chance at Par Contest
LEAD: Perhaps the most difficult task that any bridge expert ever undertakes is the construction of par hands, prepared deals designed to test the bidding, play and defense skills of a group of contestants.
The difficulty lies largely in guaranteeing that alternative plays will not succeed.


KEPTEL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEPTEL INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,869,000
3,339,000
Net inc
502,000
b51,000
Share earns
.15
-
Shares outst
3,383,365
2,805,714
Yr sales
24,552,000
14,066,000
Net inc
2,042,000
810,000
Share earns
.61
.28
Shares outst
3,352,740
2,867,605


Reagan's New Reality: Compromise
LEAD: By naming Judge Anthony M. Kennedy to the Supreme Court and making significant concessions in talks on reducing the deficit, President Reagan has agreed to compromise some of the basic goals and precepts he set for the final two years of his Administration.


4 Airlines Order 7 Boeing Jets
LEAD: Four airlines have ordered seven jets for a total of about $240 million from the Boeing Commercial Airplane Company, the company said.
Germania, a charter airline based in Cologne, West Germany, ordered three 737-300's for delivery in November and December 1988, doubling its fleet.
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines ordered two 737-300's for delivery in December 1988.


Broadway
LEAD:  Glenda Jackson in 'Macbeth'


THRIFTY RENT-A-CAR reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THRIFTY RENT-A-CAR (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,913,771
14,365,567
Net inc
1,927,685
1,398,970
Share earns
.34
.28
Shares outst
5,700,000
5,000,000


Trainer Banned Over Drugs
LEAD: Peter Ferriola's training license was suspended for 120 days yesterday by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board because three of his horses tested positive for Lasix after racing at Aqueduct last week.


Mortgage Buying Set by Fannie Mae
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association announced yesterday that it would buy adjustable-rate mortgages whose interest rates are tied to an index measuring the cost of funds for savings and loans in the district of the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco.


Podiatrist Is Indicted in a Medicaid Fraud Case
LEAD: A podiatrist has been indicted by a Westchester County grand jury on a charge of stealing $1.8 million in fraudulent Medicaid billings for special footwear, it was announced today.


Arizona Bid to Cards
LEAD: Arizona State University in Tempe, and the cities of Tempe and Phoenix, have joined to offer the St.
Louis Cardinals football team a $10 million package in an effort to lure Bill Bidwill, the owner, and his National Football League team to Arizona.
Bidwill, who has said the Cardinals would move after completing this season, has also investigated Jacksonville, Fla., Baltimore and Memphis.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A report in Science Times Tuesday about a tribute to Dr.
Arnold O. Beckman, the prominent designer of scientific instruments, misstated the site of the event.
It was the University of Pennsylvania.


Chrysler Unit Offering 1 Billion of Securities
LEAD: The Chrysler Financial Corporation is using underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation to offer about $1 billion of securities backed by automobile loan receivables.
The financing is the largest public offering of loan receivables by the Chrysler unit, about twice the size of a similar financing arranged in


U.S. Bars Visit by Jackson to Servicemen in Gulf
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson will not be allowed to make a planned Thanksgiving visit to United States forces in the Persian Gulf, the Defense Department said today.


TIFFANY &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIFFANY &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
53,995,000
42,801,000
Net inc
3,682,000
1,192,000
Share earns
.36
.17
9mo sales
148,226,000
114,628,000
Net inc
b6,497,000
c108,000
Share earns
.68
-


Yankees Fill Roster
LEAD: The Yankees filled their 40-player winter roster yesterday by buying the contracts of six players from their Columbus minor-league team.
The players are Darren Reed, an outfielder; Mitch Lyden, a catcher; Chris Alvarez, a third baseman, and three pitchers, Amalio Carreno, Troy Evers and Steve Frey.


Cotton Contracts Soar On Soviet Crop Report
LEAD: Cotton futures surged the limit for daily trading yesterday on indications that wintry weather has severely damaged the Soviet Union's crop.


Graf Draws Garrison in Slims
LEAD: Her serve is in need of improvement and her net game is still in its infancy, but Steffi Graf said she was generally satisfied with the progress she has made this year.
Imagine, then, how formidable she will be when she reaches her full potential.


Wilbur Dale Talley, An American Dancer
LEAD: Wilbur Dale Talley, a ballet dancer who performed with the Harkness Ballet and Ballet Internacionale de Caracas, died on Wednesday at the General Hospital South in Maracaibo, Venzuela, from injuries sustained when he was thrown from a horse on Sunday.
Mr.
Talley, whose stage name was Dale Talley, was 39 years old.


Indian Museum Presses for a Move to Washington
LEAD: Lawyers for the Museum of the American Indian left, and Smithsonian Institution officials, right, at hearing in Washington.
Both groups formally urged Congress to approve a bill that would allow the museum to move from its home at 155th Street and Broadway to a new one on the Mall in Washington.


Name That Bill
LEAD: On the theory that a rose by some other name might smell sweeter, Representative Richard A. Gephardt has renamed the amendment that he succeeded in attaching to the trade bill now being studied in a House-Senate conference committee.
The Gephardt amendment would require the President to negotiate with a country that has erected trade barriers against United States products and, if that country refuses to modify those barriers, authorize the


Police Begin Stopping Drivers Of Cabs to Insure Their Safety
LEAD: In an effort to reduce crimes against taxicab drivers, the New York City police will stop hundreds of cabs each night for random ''safety checks,'' Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward said yesterday.


Ex-Judge Gets 8-Year Term On a Racketeering Charge
LEAD: A former New York City Civil Court judge who pleaded guilty last spring to committing crimes before he was elected to the bench was sentenced yesterday to eight years in Federal prison, despite his emotional appeal for mercy.


COLOROCS CORP reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLOROCS CORP
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
134,559
112,986
Net loss
505,510
493,479
9mo rev
1,860,537
170,594
Net loss
432,035
1,576,656


Iran Unites the Arabs
LEAD: The communique adopted at the Arab summit meeting in Jordan is astonishing: it thunders at Iran in tones once reserved for Israel.
It calls for an international peace conference, in which Arab participants would have to deal with Israel, and leaves the door open for its members to renew ties with Egypt.


CHAUS, BERNARD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAUS, BERNARD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Sales
92,884,000
76,968,000
Net inc
2,780,000
5,773,000
Share earns
.15
.32


The Inspired, the Silly and the Useless
LEAD: Ken Hakuta used to export ironing board covers to Japan.


MGM/UA Loss Grows
LEAD: MGM/ UA Communications Inc. reported losses today of $46.2 million for its fiscal fourth quarter ended Aug. 31, bringing the cumulative losses for the year to $88.1 million.
No comparison figures are available since the reconstituted MGM/UA is in its first year of operations.
Based in Culver City, Calif., the movie and television producer had revenues of $118 million for the quarter and $427.6 million for the year.


Reagan Meets With Afghan Guerrilla Leaders
LEAD: President Reagan talking with Yunis Khalis, the chairman of the Islamic Union of the Mujahedeen, during meeting with guerrilla leaders yesterday in the Oval Office.
Mr.
Reagan, who pledged continued U.S. support for the insurgents, said the presence of Soviet troops in Afghanistan remains a ''major impediment'' to improved relations and that ''the withdrawal of Soviet forces is the key to resolving the Afghan crisis.


BULL &amp; BEAR GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BULL &amp; BEAR GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,913,000
1,317,000
Net inc
181,000
b150,000
Share earns
.12
-
9mo rev
5,810,000
4,314,000
Net loss
405,000
c227,000
Share earns
-
.15
b-Net loss


A LITERATE NIGHT OF DINING AND LIONIZING
LEAD: Garrison Keillor is currently reading Roy Blount Jr.'s book ''Webster's Ark'' and Lillian Ross's ''Reporting.'' But, like the other 250 or so literate people attending the seventh annual Literary Lions dinner at the New York Public Library on Wednesday night, Mr.
Keillor spent this particular evening engaged in a far more active pursuit: reading the crowd.


JUILLIARD DANCE GROUP
LEAD: Four world premieres are to be danced by the Juilliard Dance En-semble as part of its fall performance series, which begins tonight at 8 o'clock at the Juilliard Theater, 144 West 66th Street.
The program fea-tures ''Prom Story'' by Benjamin Harkarvy; ''Monday Morning'' by David Parsons; ''Light, Part 24'' by Kei Takei and ''Reeks with Class!


FILM: 'HYPOTHESES,' FROM FRANCE
LEAD: IN connection with the French Film Institute's retrospective devoted to the work of Raoul Ruiz, the Chilean-born fabulist, the Bleecker Street Cinema today presents the American premieres of ''Hypothesis of the Stolen Painting,'' a 1978 feature, and the short, ''Dog's Dialogue'' (1977), both made in


TRIPLE BILL AT THE RITZ
LEAD: Three groups - That Petrol Emo-tion, World at a Glance and Salem 66 - play a rock triple bill tonight at the Ritz, 119 East 11th Street (254-2800).
Music begins at 11; tickets are $13.50.


Flyers Win 2d in 12 Games
LEAD: Mark Howe scored a power-play goal and assisted on Dave Poulin's shorthanded score as the Philadelphia Flyers snapped a five-game streak without a victory tonight by defeating the Pittsburgh Penguins, 5-2.


SCHOOL IN MISSOURI BASKS IN SUCCESS
LEAD: Topping off six exhilarating months, this little Missouri River town's parents, grandparents and students rolled out the welcome mat and a brand new sweatshirt today for the most prominent visitor anyone here could recall.


REUTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REUTER INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,804,914
7,008,783
Net loss
100,207
b86,087
Share earns
-
.03
9mo rev
19,174,015
18,612,549
Net loss
773,602
b397,553
Share earns
-
.17
b-Net income


NATIONAL GUARDIAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL GUARDIAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
37,911,000
25,958,000
Net inc
1,617,000
1,702,000
Share earns
.16
.16
9mo rev
109,413,000
69,229,000
Net inc
4,956,000
5,127,000
Share earns
.48
.50


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  CHINESE FESTIVAL


ADDISON WESLEY PUBLISHING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADDISON WESLEY PUBLISHING CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
75,310,000
70,127,000
Net inc
14,629,000
13,836,000
Share earns
5.65
5.38
9mo sales
131,299,000
120,263,000
Net inc
9,060,000
8,350,000
Share earns
3.51
3.26


AUCTIONS
LEAD: TURN-OF-THE-CENTURY designs by Frank Lloyd Wright, Rene Lalique, John La Farge, Emile Galle and Gustav Stickley will be offered in three auctions over the next eight days by Sotheby's, Christie's and David Rago of Trenton.


LIFE INVESTORS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIFE INVESTORS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b8,229,000
c7,000,000
Share earns
.96
.77
9mo net inc
b30,168,000
c32,444,000
Share earns
3.44
3.51
b-After investment gains of $100,000 for the quarter and $7,289,000 for the 9 months.


300 Mourn Abused Girl At Funeral
LEAD: About 300 people, the vast majority of them strangers, came out to mourn the tangled life and brutal death of Lisa Steinberg yesterday as the 6-year-old was buried by relatives and clergymen who never knew her.


AMERICAN TRAVELERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN TRAVELERS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
694,771
519,869
Share earns
.28
.21
9mo net inc
1,975,925
1,184,812
Share earns
.80
.59


Art: 67 Years of Works By Latin Americans
LEAD: ''ART of the Fantastic: Latin America, 1920-1987,'' at the Queens Museum, is an effective and, at times, impressive exhibition, even though it is not a consistently good one.
The chopped-up galleries of the museum and the chaotic, often cheek-by-jowl installation are a detriment; the fact that the exhibition, organized by the Indianapolis Museum of Art to celebrate the 10th Pan American Games, has been cut is a disappointment.


IN THE NIGHT
LEAD:  Sphere at the Vanguard


BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b61,156,000
c36,081,000
Share earns
53.32
31.46
9mo net inc
b167,870,000
c245,527,000
Share earns
146.37
214.08
b-Includes realized investment gains of $11,917,000 for the quarter and $15,532,000 for the 9 months.


City Opera: Mozart and Knussen Duo
LEAD: ''WHERE THE WILD THINGS ARE,'' a children's opera for adults (and an adult opera for children, too) by Oliver Knussen and Maurice Sendak, lumbered happily into the New York State Theater last night.
Playing on a double bill with a version of Mozart's incomplete opera ''L'Oca del Cairo,'' it will close out the New York City Opera season with five more performances through Sunday evening.


Devils' Streak: End Is No Loss
LEAD: The winning streak at home came to end for the Devils tonight after eight victories.
But the ninth game was not a total loss and the Devils are still the only National Hockey League team that is undefeated at home.


Our Towns; Smokers Fume At the Interlopers Of the L.I.R.R.
LEAD: How many times will Blanche Celestine have to die a thousand deaths? ''I'm dying now,'' she said.
It's the maniac nonsmokers who are destroying her health.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 411 money market mutual funds increased $558 million, to $261.11 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 111 institutional funds increased $598.2 million, to $73.58 billion.
Assets of the 207 general-purpose funds were down $641.5 million, to $78.77 billion.


DILLARD DEPARTMENT STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DILLARD DEPARTMENT STORES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
535,877,000
442,935,000
Net inc
14,564,000
13,740,000
Share earns
.45
.43
9mo sales
1,427,854,000
1,222,436,000
Net inc
41,479,000
37,037,000
Share earns
1.29
1.17


CAGLE'S INC reports earnings for 14wks to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAGLE'S INC (AMEX)
14wks to Oct 3
1987
1986
Sales
37,008,000
35,857,000
Net loss
1,053,000
b2,543,000
Share earns
-
1.09
6mo sales
69,080,000
68,540,000
Net loss
1,535,000
b3,788,000
Share earns
-
1.63


G.M. to Export Cars to Japan
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it would export three car models to Japan through the Suzuki Motor Company, in which it has held a 5.3 percent interest since 1981.


A Big Fund Ready to Capitalize on Hard Times
LEAD: In major articles in The Atlantic and Newsweek, Peter G. Peterson, a former Commerce Secretary and a former head of Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb, has warned of troubled economic times ahead.


Gorbachev Accuses Former Ally Of Putting Ambition Above Party
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev, backing the removal of a former ally as Moscow party chief, accused him of mismanagement and undisciplined behavior, Tass, the official press agency, reported today.


AIDS Tests Suggested For Infants of 1980-85
LEAD: Parents whose infants had transfusions before the nation's blood supply was routinely screened for the AIDS virus should consider blood tests for their children, a California researcher said today.


Debentures Placed For Holiday Inns
LEAD: The Holiday Corporation yesterday announced the private placement of $100 million of the 7 1/2 percent, 10-year subordinated debentures of Holiday Inns Inc. to Bass P.L.C., a British brewer.


3M Realigns Its Divisions
LEAD: The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company announced a realignment that would separate its consumer and commercial businesses from its industrial products lines.
The shuffling will not result in any shrinkage of the businesses, the company said.


Brokers' New Ads Offer Reassurance
LEAD: The stock market's collapse in mid-October shook the confidence of seasoned Wall Street veterans and small investors alike.
It also presented financial institutions with a daunting challenge: How to restore investors' faith in the market.


LANCER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANCER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,090,000
7,175,000
Net inc
604,000
555,000
Share earns
.26
.24
9mo rev
24,392,000
22,970,000
Net inc
1,606,000
1,868,000
Share earns
.69
.79


Kirkpatrick Is on the Fence In G.O.P. Presidential Race
LEAD: She dined the other night with Bob Dole and his wife.
She showed up at Jack Kemp's home for dinner a couple of nights later.
And Vice President Bush telephoned her recently and said, essentially, let's have lunch.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Kirkpatrick on the Fence


'MAYFLOWER MADAM,' FROM THE BOOK, ON CBS
LEAD: ON CBS this Sunday at 9 P.M., ''Mayflower Madam'' provides perhaps the ultimate, certainly the most unintentionally hilarious, example of commercial television caught in a vise between cupidity and hypocrisy.
The network and the producer, Robert Halmi, were quick to snap up the rights to ''Mayflower Madam,'' the best-selling book by Sydney Biddle Barrows, former debutante, about the swank call-girl service she ran in Manhattan for about five years.


William Clay Ford Named to Key Post
LEAD: William Clay Ford, who has spent most of his business life in the long shadow cast by his older brother, Henry Ford 2d, was named yesterday as chairman of the finance committee of the Ford Motor Company's board.
He succeeds his brother, who was chairman of the powerful committee until his death at 70 on Sept.


Erratic Session Ends With Gains for Dollar
LEAD: The dollar moved higher in active, choppy trading yesterday.
Traders said the currency was bolstered by an improvement in the United States trade deficit and by rumors that the Administration and Congress were near agreement on a package to cut the Federal budget deficit.


NANCY S. PFEFFER WED TO DAVID H. KAUFMAN
LEAD: Nancy S. Pfeffer, a daughter of Beatrice Pfeffer of New York and the late Dr.
Burton B. Pfeffer, and David H. Kaufman, a son of Sally Kaufman of Brooklyn and the late Norman Kaufman, were married yesterday.
Rabbi David Posner performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.


Interest Rates Finish Mixed
LEAD: Interest rates were mixed yesterday, rising for some short-term securities due in less than two years but falling or holding steady for longer-term issues.


TRADITIONAL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRADITIONAL INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,171,000
7,019,000
Net inc
1,193,000
625,000
Share earns
.50
.29


Pan Am Board Rejects Kerkorian's Airline Bid
LEAD: The Pan Am Corporation yesterday rejected a proposal by the investor Kirk Kerkorian to take over Pan American World Airways.


NORTHWESTERN NATIONAL LIFE INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHWESTERN NATIONAL LIFE INSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b9,694,000
c11,558,000
Per share
.87
1.03
9mo net inc
b31,147,000
c34,256,000
Per share
2.79
3.43
b-Includes an investment loss of $725,000 and $1,239,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


David Rockefeller Heads Modern Museum Board
LEAD: David Rockefeller was elected chairman of the board of trustees of the Museum of Modern Art at a board meeting on Wednesday, the museum announced yesterday.
Mr.
Rockefeller, who has been a trustee of the museum since 1948, is the former chairman of the board and chief executive officer of the Chase Manhattan


LINDAL CEDAR HOMES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINDAL CEDAR HOMES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,481,510
7,003,547
Net inc
604,544
b480,724
Share earns
.34
.28
9mo rev
26,892,771
15,736,055
Net inc
1,456,659
b942,844
Share earns
.81
.54


WEDGESTONE REALTY INVESORS TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEDGESTONE REALTY INVESORS TRUST (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,778,100
1,818,700
Per share
.48
.45
Shares outst
5,733,121
4,012,894
9mo net inc
b6,699,100
5,232,300
Per share
1.31
1.31
Shares outst
5,099,839
3,920,572


Restaurants
LEAD: NINE-MONTH-OLD Remi is one of those rare places that combine a striking setting, attentive service and distinctive food.
Remi in Italian means oars, and both the menu and the design theme reflect maritime Venice.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article yesterday about Mel Miller, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly, misstated the circumstances that led an Assemblywoman, Gerdi E. Lipshutz, to resign from the Assembly last March.
Ms.
Lipshutz, a Queens Democrat, quit after testifying at the trial of an Assembly staff member that she had carried two ''no show'' jobs on her payroll.


ROPER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROPER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
116,395,000
107,710,000
Net inc
1,989,000
1,626,000
Share earns
.22
.17


Let's Party
LEAD: The nation began celebrating its bicentennial in 1976, and activities continued off and on through this Sept. 17, the 200th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution.
Just when one might have thought the bicentennial had run its course, the Commission on the Bicentennial of the United States Constitution issued an advisory this week stating that the ceremony in Philadelphia in September ''was only the beginning of our celebration of this great document.


BOONTON ELECTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOONTON ELECTRONICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,675,952
2,263,296
Net inc
207,014
32,763
Share earns
.14
.02
Yr sales
12,609,802
9,910,254
Net inc
618,893
281,750
Share earns
.42
.19


Nominee Comfortable in the Spotlight
LEAD: On Wednesday, Judge Anthony M. Kennedy became a nominee for the Supreme Court.
Today he became a media event.


Drug Report Assailed
LEAD: Jeannie Longo of France, who holds more than 10 world records in cycling, had never tested positive in drug tests in nine years of competition until traces of ephedrine were found in her system after she won a 3-kilometer race in September at Colorado Springs. ''I'm the most sane athlete about drugs, amphetamines,'' she said yesterday in Grenoble, France, after the drug report from the American Cycling Federation was received by the French Cycling Federation and made public.


Film: Australian 'Howling'


TGX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TGX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
25,232,000
4,597,000
Net inc
3,937,000
b710,000
Share earns
.15
-
9mo rev
66,636,000
14,438,000
Net inc
5,078,000
b279,000
Share earns
.19
-
b-Net loss


ALL AMERICAN SEMICONDUCTOR reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALL AMERICAN SEMICONDUCTOR
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,585,970
3,393,366
Net inc
174,599
24,420
9mo rev
14,559,765
10,208,191
Net inc
500,521
84,410
The company completed its initial public offering in August.


Film: Schwarzenegger In 'The Running Man'
LEAD: THE year is 2019.
In the fascist state that America has become, Ben Richards (Arnold Schwarzenegger) is a helicopter pilot with the Federal police.
One night, while on a routine patrol, he's ordered to terminate a food riot in Bakersfield, Calif.
Some 1,500 unarmed women and children are running amok in search of nourishment.


Show-Biz Animals All Around Town
LEAD: Elephants have been practicing their pas de deux at Lincoln Center and bears have been pirouetting at Radio City Music Hall, helping to open the winter season weeks ahead of the calendar.


Irving Bank Bid
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Bank of New York will delay until Nov. 17 its decision on the Bank of New York Company's application to acquire the Irving Bank Corporation, a Fed spokesman said.
The decision was due yesterday, but the Fed decided, with the concurrence of the banks, that the ''five-day period the Fed has to accept or reject the application would run out next week,'' the spokesman said.


Salvador to Amnesty 3 Held as Americans' Killers
LEAD: Three suspects charged in a 1985 attack that killed 13 people, including six Americans, were ordered freed today under a new amnesty program.


Knicks Trade Sparrow
LEAD: Little by little, the Knicks are discarding the few remnants of their embarrassing past.
Yesterday, the day after suffering their fourth defeat in four games, they sent Rory Sparrow to the Chicago Bulls for a second-round draft choice in 1988.


Iowa Union Backs Dukakis
LEAD: A union that represents state workers said Tuesday that it had endorsed Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, becoming the first major labor group in Iowa to back a Presidential candidate.


Islander Thrill Show Goes On
LEAD: The script was being followed: a 4-1 cushion for the Islanders had become a 4-3 tightrope in the third period at St.
Louis Arena.
In their three previous games, the Islanders had been outscored by a total of 9-1 in the third period, yet had won twice in overtime.


Hite's New Book Is Under Rising Attack
LEAD: Shere Hite's new book, ''Women and Love,'' is coming under increasing attack by academic specialists who contend that its statistical conclusions that a great majority of women are unhappy with their male partners are based on badly flawed methodology.


Giants Brace for a Tough One
LEAD: For the first time in years, a Giants-Eagles game is taking on the dimension of a true division rivalry.


Stock Price of Drug's Maker Jumps on Word of Clearance
LEAD: The price of Genentech Inc. shares rose $3.25 today, to $42.75, on anticipation that the company would receive Government approval on Friday to market its drug for dissolving blood clots, called tissue plasminogen activator, or T.P.A.


Polling, Communist-Style
LEAD: The Chinese long ago dismissed public opinion polling as a trapping of bourgeois liberalism: Why would a party that embodies public opinion need polls?
But on the eve of their recent congress, party leaders decided that Deng Xiaoping's creed, ''Seek Truth from Facts,'' would be well served by the bourgeois device.


DANGER: QUOTATIONS
LEAD: For 50 years, illustrations in newspapers, magazines and books have carried the credit line of the Bettmann Archive.
The person behind the New York-based archive, it turns out, is a man not only of pictures but also of words.


Homeless Woman Sent to Hospital Under Koch Plan Is Ordered Freed
LEAD: A New York State judge yesterday ordered the release of the first person involuntarily hospitalized under a new Koch administration plan to remove seriously disturbed homeless people from the streets.
The judge ruled that the city had failed to prove that the homeless woman was mentally ill or unable to care for herself.


WESTERN INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE INCOME TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE INCOME TRUST (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,867,000
2,591,000
Net inc
3,442,000
2,163,000
Share earns
.29
.26
9mo rev
10,503,000
6,658,000
Net inc
8,670,000
b5,554,000
Share earns
.81
.77


ARCHIVE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARCHIVE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 25
1987
1986
Sales
25,142,000
18,206,000
Net inc
2,286,000
b845,000
Share earns
.19
-
Yr sales
88,806,000
78,824,000
Net inc
6,085,000
2,024,000
Share earns
.55
.19
b


BUDGET TALKS HIT LAST-MINUTE SNAG
LEAD: The budget negotiations, earlier reported to be near completion, hit a snag today, and Democrats accused the White House of changing its demands at the last minute.


PIPER JAFFRAY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIPER JAFFRAY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 25
1987
1986
Revenue
45,716,911
40,000,493
Net inc
1,744,792
2,036,597
Share earns
.44
.53
Yr rev
180,759,900
165,183,414
Net inc
8,308,130
9,486,470
Share earns
2.13
2.48


Truck Safety Record Is, Unfortunately, Poor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Boy Playing Between Cars Falls to Death on Subway
LEAD: A teen-age boy fell to his death from between two cars of an IND C train yesterday afternoon in the Bronx, officials said.


KEYSTONE CAMERA PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEYSTONE CAMERA PRODUCTS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,164,000
10,089,000
Net loss
2,028,000
b457,000
9mo sales
35,665,000
22,972,000
Net loss
4,296,000
b2,193,000
b-After a gain of $225,000 on the sale of operations for the quarter and 9 months.


Allan C. Bernstein, 76, Office Systems Inventor
LEAD: Allan C. Bernstein, who invented a series of office communications systems, died of a heart attack Sunday at the inpatient unit of Hospice Inc. in Tamarac, Fla.
He was 76 years old and lived in Tamarac.


IMMUNEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMMUNEX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,206,000
2,865,000
Net inc
1,283,000
b120,000
Share earns
.16
-
9mo rev
11,416,000
6,349,000
Net inc
349,000
b1,149,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss


GOLDOME reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOLDOME (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
4,400,000
6,300,000
Share earns
.14
-
9mo net inc
29,500,000
b45,300,000
b-Includes a non-recurring gain of $10,900,000 relating to prepayments of certain debt.


DR. ENDERS WEDS MICHAEL SOUTHAM
LEAD: Alice Talcott Enders, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas O. Enders of New York was married in a civil ceremony at Old City Hall in Toronto yesterday to Michael Cargill South-am, the son of G. Hamilton Southam and Jacqueline Lambert David, both of Ottawa.


Art People
LEAD:  Just an Artist's Dream?


MUMMENSCHANZ
LEAD: The Swiss mime group Mummen-schanz is to appear on Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Lehman Center for the Performing Arts, Lehman College, Bedford Park Boulevard, the Bronx.
Members of the troupe use masks, costumes and lighting to form living sculptures.
Tickets are $13, $15 and $17.50.
Information: 960-8833.


SCI SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCI SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
151,686,000
128,399,000
Net inc
3,876,000
3,314,000
Share earns
.19
.16


85 Soldiers Reported Dead In Raid on Ethiopia Convoy
LEAD: Ethiopian rebels said today that they killed 85 Government soldiers on Wednesday in an attack on a famine relief convoy escorted by the Ethiopian Army in Eritrea Province.


CORKEN INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORKEN INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,588,000
2,383,000
Net inc
210,000
190,000
Share earns
.07
.07


ANECO REINSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANECO REINSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b436,845
c406,811
Share earns
.18
.19
9mo net inc
b1,662,273
c2,957,434
Share earns
.74
1.41
b-Includes realized gains of $65,625 for the quarter and $145,757 for the 9 months.


110 Boston Commuters Injured in Train Crash
LEAD: A commuter train crashed into another that was stopped at an underground station this morning, injuring at least 110 people, 6 of them seriously, officials said.


Stroh to Buy Back Tampa Brewery
LEAD: The Stroh Brewery Company of Detroit said today that it would buy back a Tampa, Fla., brewery it traded to the Pabst Brewing Company of San Antonio five years ago.


The Working Woman's Dream
LEAD: What do women really want?
Many of them want to go to work, and therefore also want houses that are easier to keep clean.
A New Jersey housing developer asked women what conveniences they'd install in a house of their own design.


ARMS TALKS DELAY WORRIES OFFICIALS
LEAD: American and Soviet negotiators have not yet agreed on some important verification procedures for the treaty banning medium- and shorter-range missiles that is to be signed next month, Administration officials say.


GAP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GAP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
273,616,000
224,800,000
Net inc
18,634,000
21,279,000
Share earns
.52
.60
9mo sales
702,429,000
549,540,000
Net inc
47,925,000
39,897,000
Share earns
1.34
1.13


Iowa a Shadow Over New Hampshire
LEAD: The New Hampshire primary is just not what it used to be.
Iowa's first-in-the-nation caucuses have stolen much of New Hampshire's political thunder and a lot of the time and sweat of the Presidential candidates as well.


Mine Kills 25 in Sri Lanka; Autonomy Bill Passes
LEAD: A bus carrying ethnic Tamils hit a land mine planted by Tamil rebels and exploded today, and all 25 passengers were killed, a military official said.


MICRO MASK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICRO MASK INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,361,000
5,845,000
Net inc
632,000
b1,113,000
Share earns
.29
-
Yr sales
28,034,000
21,428,000
Net inc
47,000
b4,477,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss and after losses from discontinued operations of $93,000 for the quarter and $294,000 for the year.


A Walk on the Wild Side of the Stock Market
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dance: Nina Wiener Troupe
LEAD: ENVELOPED by the sound of sensuous sighs, a woman is dwarfed by a Futurist landscape and recalls a relationship with a man that went sour.
This, in a sketch, is ''Fierce Attachments,'' Nina Wiener's new dance work, and its look and sensibility are uncomfortably close to Calvin Klein's perfume commercials.


CUSTOMEDIX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CUSTOMEDIX CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,098,655
1,023,678
Net inc
b545,978
c4,500,905
Share earns
.02
.42
Shares outst
31,230,492
10,830,666
b-Includes a tax loss carryforward of $153,700.


SEAWAY FOOD TOWN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEAWAY FOOD TOWN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Sales
115,780,000
105,654,000
Net inc
724,000
559,000
Share earns
.57
.35
Yr sales
457,788,000
423,635,000
Net inc
2,594,000
1,683,000
Share earns
1.91
.37


Art: Works by Julian Schnabel at the Whitney
LEAD: NO matter how sick many people may be of the swagger and theatrics of Julian Schnabel, and of the publicity machine fed by him and his work, his show at the Whitney Museum of American Art is welcome.
It has enough information and flair to encourage a fresh look at a 36-year-old artist who seems to have been so much with us for so long that we never had a chance to decide if we wanted him or not.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in the Business People column in Business Day last Friday, about the appointment of Frank Harrison 3d as a vice chairman of the Coca-Cola Bottling Company Consolidated, listed his college history incorrectly.
He received his bachelor's degree from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and his M.B.A.


AUDIOTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUDIOTRONICS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,497,000
1,605,000
Net loss
148,000
b20,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


WHOSE SURNAME(S) FOR BABY?
LEAD: In the months preceding a child's birth, first names were always the ones that kept parents awake at night, mulling over their mellifluous qualities, debating whose relative deserved a namesake.
Last names were a given: like father, like child.


Top Skier Sidelined
LEAD: Tamara McKinney, who would give the United States its best hope for a medal in Alpine skiing at the Winter Olympics in Calgary, Alberta, in February, will be sidelined at least six weeks with a hairline fracture of her lower left leg that she suffered while training Monday at Copper Mountain, Colo.


Shell and B.P Report Gains
LEAD: The Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Companies, the world's largest oil enterprise, reported a 27 percent increase in its third-quarter profit yesterday, while the British Petroleum Company reported an 8 percent gain.


Unrecognized Risks of X-Ray Radiation
LEAD: To the Editor:


SUPER-8 FILMS
LEAD: A program of super-8 films from Berlin is to be shown tomorrow night at 8 o'clock at the Collective for Liv-ing Cinema, 41 White Street.
The films were part of this year's ''Docu-menta 8'' exhibition in Kassel, West Germany.
The screening is a joint venture of the Collective for Living Cinema and Goethe House.


2 American Mountaineers Tell Of Witnessing Tibet Protests
LEAD: Two American mountaineers, who had gone to climb the remote peaks of Tibet, found themselves witness to violent demonstrations six weeks ago calling for independence.


Informer at Westies Trial Admits Frequent Lies Under Oath
LEAD: A convicted killer who turned informer at the racketeering trial of several members of a West Side gang testified under cross-examination yesterday that he had frequently lied to authorities, even under oath.


President Reagan's Drug Bust
LEAD: The marijuana smoking that led to Judge Douglas Ginsburg's withdrawal from consideration for the Supreme Court also revives questions about President Reagan's war on drugs.
What war on drugs?


Excerpts From Tass Account Of Gorbachev Talk on Yeltsin
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a report, as distributed in translation by the Soviet press agency Tass, on Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speech Wednesday before the Moscow Communist Party organization on the dismissal of Boris N. Yeltsin:


THE EVENING HOURS
LEAD: IT was a week to honor First Ladies. The celebrations began gently


Iraqis Resume Diplomatic Relations With Egypt
LEAD: Iraq said today that it had restored full diplomatic relations with Egypt.


SIERRA HEALTH SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIERRA HEALTH SERVICES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
34,424,000
30,575,000
Net loss
b799,000
3,871,000
9mo rev
102,569,000
82,462,000
Net inc
b96,000
c5,838,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Includes a reversal of a tax credit of $299,000 for the quarter, and for the 9 months includes a tax credit of $36,000.


BROUGHER INSURANCE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROUGHER INSURANCE GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b1,422,569
c430,488
Share earns
-
.16
9mo net loss
b980,335
c1,552,261
Share earns
-
.67
b-After gains on investments of $626 and $2,048 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, and the 9-month also includes a gain on stock sale by a subsidiary of $352,029.


Kate Smith Is Buried
LEAD: Frankl Zinter, designer of Kate Smith's mausoleum, removing tape as structure was assembled at St.
Agnes Cemetery in Lake Placid, N.Y.
A private ceremony was held yesterday; a public service will be held there today.
Miss Smith, best known for her rendition of ''God Bless America,'' died in June 1986.


CHINESE DISSIDENT SAID TO DIE IN JAIL
LEAD: Amnesty International said that Wei Jingsheng, China's most prominent political prisoner, is reported to have died in prison while serving a 15-year sentence for ''counterrevolutionary crimes.''


PAINEWEBBER RESIDENTIAL REALTY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAINEWEBBER RESIDENTIAL REALTY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,392,432
1,377,983
Per share
.23
.23
9mo net inc
3,982,286
3,020,823
Per share
.66
.64


Drug Approval For Genentech
LEAD: Genentech Inc. received approval today from the Food and Drug Administration for its blood clot-dissolving drug, tissue plasminogen activator, or T.P.A.
The approval comes just five months after an F.D.A. advisory committee recommended against licensing Activase, as Genentech calls the drug, and asked for additional information about the its ability to save lives.


9 Killed in India Hurricane
LEAD: A hurricane lashed coastal areas of India's southern Andhra Pradesh state today, killing at least 9 people and forcing the removal of about 29,000, the United News of India reported.


NORDSTROM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORDSTROM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
411,347,000
359,092,000
Net inc
19,750,000
16,662,000
Share earns
.24
.21
9mo sales
1,319,059,000
1,110,041,000
Net inc
59,427,000
46,652,000
Share earns
.73
.59


Norman Applezweig  Biochemist, 70
LEAD: Norman Applezweig, a consulting biochemist and the founder of Progenics Inc., a health care research and development company, died of a heart attack Monday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan.


AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,775,500,000
2,278,600,000
Net inc
b261,583,000
c200,836,000
Share earns
1.60
1.23
Shares outst
163,375,000
163,105,000
9mo rev
8,045,000,000
6,241,500,000
Net inc
b757,666,000
c499,272,000
Share earns
4.64
3.07
Shares outst
163,305,000
162,392,000


Rates on Treasury Issues Rise
LEAD: Interest rates for Treasury issues of all maturities rose yesterday.
Investor demand was lackluster and many securities dealers were unwilling to support the market if it meant accumulating large inventories.


MEDEX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDEX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,768,000
5,090,000
Net inc
491,000
388,000
Share earns
.13
.10


JACKSON NAMES 2 TO LEAD CAMPAIGN
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, seeking to strengthen his Presidential campaign organization, today introduced two new campaign officials whose selection appeared aimed at broadening his appeal.


REPLIGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REPLIGEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,706,183
1,261,006
Net loss
b787,933
1,425,778
6mo rev
7,730,180
2,233,911
Net inc
b2,247,368
c2,333,734
Share earns
.29
-
b-Includes a reversal of a tax credit of $291,000 for the quarter and a tax credit of $831,000 for the 6 months.


Eastern's Shuttle to Be Autonomous
LEAD: Eastern Airlines is turning its famous and profitable shuttle into an autonomous division with its own budget, work force, fleet and management, an Eastern official said yesterday.


SAXON OIL DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAXON OIL DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS LP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,233,934
2,870,571
Net inc
648,867
b87,478
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
9,012,486
9,979,860
Net inc
1,168,345
b46,962
Share earns
.05
-


ATLANTIC RESEARCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTIC RESEARCH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
103,453,000
91,824,000
Net inc
5,590,000
3,721,000
Share earns
.60
.42
9mo sales
300,540,000
269,320,000
Net inc
14,259,000
12,728,000
Share earns
1.55
1.41


Bush Facing Robertson in Florida Poll
LEAD: The campaigns of Vice President Bush and Pat Robertson today prepared for a showdown in a straw poll of Florida Republicans Saturday.


GRANGES EXPLORATION LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRANGES EXPLORATION LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,469,317
2,277,504
Net inc
822,721
162,431
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
18,536,650
13,318,174
9mo sales
13,475,429
6,823,744
Net inc
1,357,078
471,582
Share earns
.09
.04
Shares outst
15,675,127
13,050,097


HAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
84,903,000
62,097,000
Net loss
619,000
b6,070,000
Share earns
-
3.23
9mo rev
223,241,000
165,727,000
Net loss
438,000
b3,658,000
Share earns
-
1.95


A SELECTION OF STYLISH SAMPLES
LEAD: For the last two years, Honora Horan has run a small evening-dress rental business in New York called Pret-a-Party.
She works by appointment, made by calling 212-696-9260, and charges from $75 to $150 for a rental, with a refundable deposit of $100 to $250, depending on the value of the dress and its fragility.


Mildred Smith Huser  Lawyer, 94
LEAD: Mildred Smith Huser, a Brooklyn lawyer who was a delegate to the 1920 Republican state convention, died Monday at the New Rochelle Medical Center.
She was 94 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Bad Turn for a Slalom Star
LEAD: Cheery pink and yellow hair bands, a navy sweater, aquamarine sweat pants, a lavender sock, a pink sneaker: these were the colors of Tamara McKinney today as she sat in the cafeteria of a resort where other members of the United States ski team were finishing a week of practice.


Rutledge Likely to Be Starter
LEAD: Phil Simms looked fit, didn't limp and didn't throw today.


Inflation Would Result
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cuomo Rules Out a Late Race In Primaries, but Still Hedges
LEAD: Governor Cuomo, faced by persistent rumors that he is considering a last-minute Presidential bid in 1988, said yesterday that he would not participate in the late primaries in California and New Jersey.


Korean War Memorial Site
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has approved plans to erect a memorial honoring veterans of the Korean War on the mall between the Capitol and the Lincoln Memorial.
Representative James J. Florio, a New Jersey Democrat who backs the memorial, said Tuesday that Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel had approved the site.


Syracuse Goes for 10 Out of 10
LEAD: Mike Power, the Boston College quarterback, has revived memories of Doug Flutie, a former star for the Eagles.
Against undefeated Syracuse on Saturday, Power may well be spending most of the day doing a Flutie-like impression of a scrambling quarterback.


INTERNATIONAL PROTEINS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL PROTEINS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,460,000
24,152,000
Net inc
497,000
b217,000
Share earns
.15
.10
Shares outst
3,324,065
2,115,178
9mo rev
73,418,000
70,518,000
Net inc
1,675,000
b1,014,000
Share earns
.62
.48
Shares outst
2,690,130
2,090,778


Ballet School's New Guiding Hand
LEAD: Last spring, when Robert Lindgren was appointed to the new post of general manager of the School of American Ballet, the school of the New York City Ballet, no one was more surprised than Mr.
Lindgren himself.


Simmer Adjusts To Here and Now
LEAD: HE hasn't sought them out, but sports cliches have seemed to follow Charlie Simmer throughout his 14 seasons in the National Hockey League.
Now that he's in Pittsburgh, they're still after him, still prominent even in his self-descriptions.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
9.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.77
6.72
5.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.92
5.79
5.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.42
6.27
5.43
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.68
8.61
7.09
30-YR.


For Muscovites, Pravda Account of the Yeltsin Ouster Is Riveting Reading
LEAD: Pravda offered Soviet citizens a rare look today at the purging of Boris N. Yeltsin by his peers in the Communist hierarchy.


FRANCE AND WEST GERMANY TO SET UP JOINT COUNCILS
LEAD: The leaders of West Germany and France concluded a two-day meeting today with agreements to jointly develop a combat helicopter and to set up joint councils on military and economic policy.


Kaisertech Leader Sets Loan Accord
LEAD: Allan E. Clore, the financially troubled chairman of Kaisertech Ltd., disclosed today that a group of his creditors had agreed to forbear his $99 million defaulted loan.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Clore said that the forbearance period expires on Dec. 31, unless Mr.


John H.F. Haskell, 83, Ex-Finance Executive
LEAD: John H. F. Haskell, a retired banker and a former diplomat and officer of the New York Stock Exchange, died of heart failure Tuesday aboard the Queen Elizabeth 2 en route to New York on a visit.
He was 83 years old and lived in Grasse, France.


U.S. Closes Savings and Loan And Shifts Insured Deposits
LEAD: Federal regulators today closed the Tri-County Savings and Loan Association because it was insolvent and transferred its insured deposits to a Pennsylvania-based savings institution.


To the Aid Of an Old Typewriter
LEAD: ACCORDING to conventional wisdom in the computer age, the typewriter is obsolete.
Indeed, many would call it a veritable dinosaur when it comes to producing the printed word.


Knicks Foul Up, Bullets Convert
LEAD: On a night when they expected Bernard King to make an emphatic statement concerning his feelings about being discarded, the Knicks were instead victimized by the dramatic performance of another familiar player.


ORTEGA PROPOSES TRUCE BUT REBELS OBJECT TO TERMS
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua presented a detailed proposal today for a cease-fire with the contras that would oblige the rebels to surrender their weapons after one month and accept a political amnesty.


U.N. Body Calls for Widening of Test Ban Treaty
LEAD: The United Nations moved today to expand a 1963 treaty into a complete ban on nuclear testing.


Your Money; Yields Stressed By Investors
LEAD: DAVID PEARL, a New York apparel manufacturer, has been selling some of his stocks since the steep October market decline. ''I decided to redirect my allocation of assets that were geared toward growth into income-oriented securities,'' he said. ''You look for some security.''


Yeltsin Affair Is Raising New Speculation On Soviet Leader's Commitment to Change
LEAD: The public humiliation of a Communist Party official once regarded as one of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's closest political supporters has raised critical questions about the Soviet leader as he prepares for his first visit to the United States next month.


What's Still Wrong With an Oil Import Fee
LEAD: To the Editor:


Somehow, Chargers Win
LEAD: Two months ago, Les Miller was working the graveyard shift in Arkansas City, Kan., affixing handles to picnic coolers for $5 an hour.
Tomorrow, he'll line up as a starting defensive end against the Los Angeles Raiders, epitomizing all that has become wonderful and unbelievable for the San Diego Chargers.


Recital: Sandra Miller
LEAD: Sandra Miller's Wednesday evening performance at Weill Recital Hall was the second of two concerts offering the solo flute Fantasias of Telemann and the accompanied sonatas of his contemporary and colleague, J. S. Bach.
Ms.
Miller played the flauto traverso, the valveless, largely wooden predecessor of the ''modern'' flute


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page TK.


Du Pont and Bush Taking Off Gloves
LEAD: In the view of many Republican regulars, Vice President Bush landed an effective verbal punch on Pete du Pont at the first debate of the six candidates for the Republican Presidential nomination in Houston two weeks ago.


ABITIBI-PRICE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABITIBI-PRICE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
749,800,000
716,500,000
Net inc
33,000,000
b28,800,000
Share earns
.45
.39
9mo sales
2,200,000,000
2,070,000,000
Net inc
91,100,000
b79,000,000
Share earns
1.23
1.08


FEDERAL REALTY INVESTMENT TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL REALTY INVESTMENT TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,222,000
b1,896,000
Share earns
.09
.16
9mo net inc
4,596,000
c13,147,000
Share earns
.36
1.12
b-Includes a $500,000 loss from litigation settlement.


60 People Flee A Gas Pipe Rupture
LEAD: About 60 people were evacuated from the center of North Branford, Conn., yesterday after a construction company doing excavation ruptured a natural-gas pipe, the police said.


COURIER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COURIER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Sales
32,654,000
28,798,000
Net inc
564,000
660,000
Share earns
.31
.33
Yr sales
138,143,000
122,517,000
Net inc
3,706,000
3,711,000
Share earns
1.99
1.82


MICHAEL ANTHONY JEWELERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICHAEL ANTHONY JEWELERS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
26,446,000
14,626,000
Net inc
887,000
787,000
Share earns
.18
.20
Shares outst
4,988,000
4,000,000


Old Brook Bed Is Discovered Under Rubble
LEAD: Somewhere beneath Washington Square Park, under asphalt, sand, gravel, shards of brick and old water pipes, lies the bed of a brook.
Yesterday two geology professors and a graduate student from New York University set out to find it without moving so much as a pebble.
They used radar.
Their equipment, called ground penetrating radar, has penetrated sand, gravel, clay and solid rock, but it nearly met its match yesterday with the urban debris under New York City.


COCA MINES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COCA MINES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,358,100
1,667,800
Net inc
b1,297,200
c123,900
Share earns
.16
-
9mo rev
13,408,300
2,027,000
Net inc
b3,056,700
c982,300
Share earns
.38
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $1,097,300 for both the quarter and 9 months, and gains of $402,000 and $3,260,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, from the sale of some of its stock in Equity Silver Mines Ltd.


SUNSHINE MINING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNSHINE MINING (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
38,529,000
26,341,000
Net loss
13,419,000
24,245,000
9mo rev
109,630,000
98,286,000
Net loss
32,248,000
68,316,000


Rift in Florida Government Deepens
LEAD: Mired in a battle over the state's 5 percent tax on services and bogged down even more over medical malpractice insurance, the Florida Legislature and Gov.
Bob Martinez are drifting deeper into a partisan fight with widespread consequences.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article on a new American export drive in Europe mislabeled the two main components.
The labels for imports and exports, in the chart showing trade in capital goods, should have been reversed.


MMI MEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MMI MEDICAL (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,884,000
7,102,000
Net inc
455,000
238,000
Share earns
.14
.07
6mo rev
16,916,000
13,714,000
Net inc
802,000
423,000
Share earns
.25
.13


No Headline
LEAD: Atlanta officials are hoping that a scarred, five-block area in the heart of the downtown area can mimic the city that surrounds it by rising from the ashes of its own destruction.


Mike Nichols to Receive Abbott Theater Award
LEAD: Mike Nichols, who has won six Tony awards for directing and two more as a producer, will receive the third Mr.
Abbott Award for lifetime achievement in the theater.
The award will be presented Monday during a ceremony at the Astor Ballroom of the Marriott Marquis Hotel.


Air Wisconsin Is Being Sought
LEAD: Air Wis Services Inc., the parent of the commuter carrier Air Wisconsin, said that it had received an unsolicited takeover offer from an unidentified party for $11.50 a share in cash, or $85.1 million.
An Air Wis spokesman said the buyers are a venture capital group and two individuals but refused further identification.


Ginsburg's Role in Cable TV Case Is Investigated
LEAD: The Justice Department is investigating whether a special prosecutor should be appointed to look into possible conflicts of interest by Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg while he was a Justice Department official, a Federal law enforcement official said today.


MODERN CONTROLS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MODERN CONTROLS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,859,000
1,131,000
Net inc
346,000
33,000
Share earns
.16
.02
9mo sales
5,246,000
4,567,000
Net inc
927,000
593,000
Share earns
.43
.27


LORIMAR TELEPICTURES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LORIMAR TELEPICTURES CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
197,869,000
154,571,000
Net loss
b56,331,000
d2,171,000
Shares outst
46,058,000
45,636,000
6mo rev
361,711,000
328,936,000
Net loss
b63,423,000
cd25,799,000
Share earns
-
.59
Shares outst
46,031,000
43,929,000


DUCOMMUN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DUCOMMUN INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 2
1987
1986
Sales
115,684,000
111,103,000
Net loss
2,504,000
849,000
9mo sales
339,402,000
347,837,000
Net inc
4,664,000
b525,000
Share earns
1.42
-
b-Net loss  The company said the 1986 third quarter had benefited from the profitable performance of the Metermaster and Airdrome Parts Co.


INTERNATIONAL GAME TECHOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL GAME TECHOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,419,000
16,725,000
Net inc
910,000
660,000
Share earns
.17
.08
Shares outst
5,351,000
8,200,000
Yr rev
83,522,000
52,105,000
Net inc
1,019,000
b8,111,000
Share earns
.17
-


In the Heavy Rain and Fog
LEAD: HE remembers coming out of a movie theater and suddenly hearing the news that would change his life, and now - whether in a work situation, or at a social function, or simply in a coffee shop - people still ask, ''Aren't you the one who missed that plane crash?''


Military Spending Bill Approved by Conferees
LEAD: House and Senate negotiators today approved a compromise military budget that makes sharp cuts in several weapon programs.


MICROBIOLOGICAL SCIENCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROBIOLOGICAL SCIENCES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,286,000
6,120,000
Net inc
b1,774,000
185,000
Share earns
.45
.05
9mo rev
17,585,000
17,780,000
Net inc
3,928,000
3,844,000
Share earns
.02
.08


10 Arrested in South Africa
LEAD: The South African police arrested 10 youths at the Soweto township houses of anti-apartheid activist Winnie Mandela today.
Mrs.
Mandela, wife of the imprisoned black leader Nelson Mandela, said the police had surrounded one of her two houses, searched it and taken away five youths who had been staying there.


Young 49ers' Starter
LEAD: Steve Young will start at quarterback for the San Francisco 49ers on Sunday, Coach Bill Walsh announced after yesterday's practice, and Joe Montana's status remains in doubt for the important game against the New Orleans Saints.


Big Hong Kong Bank To Buy 14.9% of Midland
LEAD: The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation has agreed to buy 14.9 percent of Midland Bank P.L.C., Britain's fourth-largest bank, for nearly $680 million, the two banks announced today.


Bridge:; Couple Denied an Injunction In Tournament Sex Bias Suit
LEAD: The American Contract Bridge League scored a significant, although not decisive, legal victory Thursday in a Los Angeles court.


Hearth at Harvard, Heart and Soul at High Court
LEAD: Laurence H. Tribe may have his office in the bookish confines of the Harvard Law School.
But in a sense, his heart and soul lie 380 miles to the southwest, in Washington, at the United States Supreme Court.


British Inflation at 4.5%
LEAD: Retail prices in Britain rose five-tenths of 1 percent in October from the previous month, bringing the inflation rate to 4.5 percent, the Department of Employment announced today.


MID-AMERICA INDUSRTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MID-AMERICA INDUSRTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
21,706,000
24,132,000
Net loss
39,000
113,000
9mo sales
63,081,000
67,633,000
Net loss
965,000
372,000


Trainer Appealing Ban
LEAD: Peter Ferriola, whose training license was ordered suspended for 120 days Thursday after charges he violated state medication rules, has obtained a stay of the ruling that will allow him to continue training pending a hearing Nov. 23.


AM International Stake Purchased
LEAD: AM International Inc. said that the Komori Printing Machinery Company, a Japanese printing concern, had purchased 6.4 percent of the company's common stock on the open market.
In a filing today with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Komori said it had acquired the shares for ''investment purposes.


Vehicle Sales Rise In Period
LEAD: Sales of new American-made cars and light trucks totaled 228,665 units in the first 10 days of November, up 2.2 percent from the comparable period a year ago, the eight domestic manufacturers reported today.
There were eight selling days in the period both this year and last year.


LE PEEP RESTAURANTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LE PEEP RESTAURANTS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,591,613
2,321,379
Net loss
944,104
1,480,457
9mo rev
9,967,168
5,796,190
Net loss
2,808,076
3,560,240


GENERAL NUTRITION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL NUTRITION CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
74,191,000
74,746,000
Net inc
970,000
307,000
Share earns
.03
.01
9mo rev
236,741,000
231,505,000
Net inc
4,248,000
4,125,000
Share earns
.13
.12


6 Parkway Workers Held in Drug Cases
LEAD: Four toll collectors on the Garden State Parkway have been arrested and charged with selling drugs inside their booths at three toll plazas in northern New Jersey, according to the state police.


SAXON OIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAXON OIL CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,411,215
1,217,709
Net inc
b402,399
c58,023
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
9,499,631
3,851,418
Net inc
b679,689
c105,527
b-Includes a tax credit of $268,681.


AVATAR HOLDINGS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AVATAR HOLDINGS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
35,759,000
23,836,000
Net inc
b2,829,000
c873,000
Share earns
.36
.11
9mo rev
95,554,000
66,923,000
Net inc
b8,311,000
c3,485,000
Share earns
1.04
.43


AMERICAN EXPLORATION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN EXPLORATION CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,665,000
2,430,000
Net inc
3,376,000
b1,639,000
Share earns
.19
-
9mo rev
21,174,000
8,989,000
Net inc
1,802,000
b10,481,000
Share earns
.08
-


Pasqua Traded; Dotson a Yankee
LEAD: The Yankees, who hadn't made a deal with the Chicago White Sox in 11 weeks, bolstered their starting pitching corps yesterday by acquiring Richard Dotson in a five-player trade with the White Sox.
Dan Pasqua, the enigmatic young power hitter, was the most significant of the three players the Yankees shipped out.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
North Stars Win: Brian Bellows's power-play goal with 6 minutes 28 seconds to play last night gave Minnesota a 5-4 victory at Buffalo.
The Sabres, trailing by 4-2 after two periods, tied the score on early third-period goals by Phil Housley and Scott Arneil.
But with Calle Johansson of Buffalo in the penalty box for tripping, Steve Payne trapped the puck along the boards and relayed it to Brian Lawton, who immediately found Bellows.


LIBERTY HOMES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIBERTY HOMES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,618,000
23,225,000
Net inc
487,000
469,000
Share earns
.11
.11
9mo sales
62,210,000
64,057,000
Net inc
1,532,000
1,493,000
Share earns
.34
.33


Bring the Others in From the Cold
LEAD: Joyce Brown's claim that she has a right to live on the street, supported this week by a judge, may stimulate dinner parties and Philosophy I discussions.
But in practical terms, her case is beside the point.
Sweeping the mentally ill off the streets makes no sense unless the authorities are in a position to care for them properly.


U.S. Sees Progress With Allies
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is confident that it will soon be able to promise its biggest allies lower Federal budget deficits and to assure them that it will avert a restrictive trade law, senior Administration officials said today.


Bronx Man Slain in Holdup
LEAD: A 49-year-old grocery worker was fatally shot in a Bronx holdup yesterday evening, the police said.
A spokesman, Officer Peter O'Donnell, said the robbery took place at 7:15 P.M. in a bodega at 1792 Westchester Avenue, in the borough's Clasons Point section.
He said one of two intruders shot the worker, Jose Hernandez, of 1310 Rosedale Avenue in the Soundview section, in the right eye, and the victim died shortly thereafter at Bronx Municipal Hospital.


NVRYAN LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NVRYAN LP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
215,170,000
48,253,000
Net inc
7,238,000
5,099,000
Share earns
.25
.25
Shares outst
25,003,000
20,200,000
9mo sales
613,902,000
105,545,000
Net inc
12,813,000
7,465,000
Share earns
.44
.42
Shares outst
23,862,000
17,666,000


Met Opera: Pavarotti Stars In New 'Trovatore' Staging
LEAD: Normally it takes a new opera production years to decline to the point of terminal weariness and ineptitude, but the Metropolitan Opera's ''Trovatore'' reached that sad state in one evening, at Thursday night's premiere.
Placing the blame precisely is not easy, simply because there is so much blame to go around.


TV: Learning Channel Series on Cable
LEAD: The Learning Channel is a cable service specializing in educational programs, offering formal and informal instruction, business and career information and assorted hobby and how-to series.
The service is not available to cable subscribers in New York City, but one of its series, ''Likely Stories,'' has now been picked up in a one-time-only arrangement by Manhattan


SHOE-TOWN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHOE-TOWN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
37,238,000
35,063,000
Net inc
1,900,000
1,361,000
Share earns
.18
.13
9mo sales
114,416,000
101,206,000
Net inc
6,044,000
b4,096,000
Share earns
.57
.38


CLASSIFIED FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLASSIFIED FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
382,000
b2,535,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo net inc
1,039,000
b7,082,000
Share earns
.17
-
b-Net loss


Dukakis Political Campaign Releases Personal Records
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, a Democratic Presidential contender, reported $87,714 in income in 1986, finished 71st in a class of 468 at Harvard Law School and graduated with highest honors from Swarthmore College, despite a D in physics.
In addition, he was never tardy in high school.


School Parents Wrestle With Lisa's Death
LEAD: United in their grief over the death of Lisa Steinberg, but differing over the questions it raised, about 40 parents of the girl's classmates met this week with staff and counselors at Public School 41.


ORION CAPITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORION CAPITAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
130,798,000
118,414,000
Net inc
b7,568,000
c3,573,000
Share earns
.95
.35
9mo rev
382,931,000
364,065,000
Net inc
b20,419,000
c19,476,000
Share earns
2.53
2.62


Strike Ends At Big Board
LEAD: A three-day-old strike against the New York Stock Exchange ended yesterday when both sides agreed to a request from a Federal mediator to resume talks on Monday.


MEI DIVERSIFIED INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEI DIVERSIFIED INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
56,356,000
49,598,000
Net inc
1,731,000
553,000
Share earns
.09
.03
9mo sales
156,387,000
129,123,000
Net inc
1,784,000
b431,000
Share earns
.09
-


INSIDE
LEAD:  Homeless Woman Still Held  An appellate court stayed the release of a homeless woman who a judge said was inappropriately hospitalized by New York City.
Page 29.


Old Hats and Strains Between New York's Finest and Bravest
LEAD: There was a time when New York City police officers and firefighters wore virtually the same hats.


DREW INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DREW INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,711,000
20,896,000
Net inc
b639,000
d645,000
Yr rev
88,020,000
72,609,000
Net inc
b1,538,000
cd1,371,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $103,000 and $238,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A listing on Thursday of the 10 most expensive works of art sold at auction gave an incorrect date for the auction of ''Rue Mosnier With Street Pavers,'' by Manet.
The painting was sold at Christie's in London in 1986.


Beech-Nut Is Fined $2 Million for Sale Of Fake Apple Juice
LEAD: The Beech-Nut Nutrition Corporation pleaded guilty yesterday to Federal charges that it had sold phony apple juice intended for babies and agreed to pay a $2 million fine.


Factory Owners Guilty; Judge Sets Aside Verdict
LEAD: A Brooklyn jury convicted the owners of a thermometer factory yesterday of assault for exposing workers to unsafe levels of mercury fumes, but a judge immediately set aside the verdict, saying Federal safety statutes pre-empt the state's jurisdiction.


JACK HENRY &amp; ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACK HENRY &amp; ASSOCIATES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,632,000
3,186,000
Net loss
79,000
b147,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of a production error, a Washington dispatch on Wednesday, about the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association and its attitude on air safety, omitted the association's position on collision-avoidance equipment.
Edmund Pinto, an association vice president, said his organization supported the use of ''supplementary equipment'' that would alert air traffic controllers to the position and altitude of a private plane in congested areas.


Court Bars The Release Of Woman
LEAD: A New York State appellate court yesterday barred the immediate release of a woman found by a state judge to have been inappropriately hospitalized under a Koch administration plan to remove seriously disturbed homeless people from the streets.


COMMODORE ENVIRONMENTAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMODORE ENVIRONMENTAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
23,079,000
562,000
Net inc
751,000
126,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
49,640,000
43,111,000
9mo rev
50,205,000
2,864,000
Net inc
3,774,000
b1,274,000
Share earns
.08
.03
Shares outst
46,554,000
43,111,000


STANWOOD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANWOOD CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
28,906,000
30,563,000
Net loss
282,000
b284,000
Share earns
-
.19
9mo sales
86,327,000
85,949,000
Net loss
32,000
b935,000
Share earns
-
.61
b


LIQUID AIR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIQUID AIR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
142,884,000
139,019,000
Net inc
9,125,000
c8,135,000
Share earns
.64
.56
9mo sales
419,121,000
404,779,000
Net inc
b26,726,000
c26,193,000
Share earns
1.87
1.83


Two Women Killed In Jersey House Fire
LEAD: A woman honored for saving a friend from fire has died along with the friend in another blaze in their home here, the authorities said.


CONTINENTAL MEDICAL SYSEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINENTAL MEDICAL SYSEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
24,604,000
6,772,000
Net inc
809,000
b188,000
Share earns
.06
.02
Shares outst
13,395,702
10,144,564
b-Includes a tax credit of $103,000.


Alexandria Recovering Its Arab Soul
LEAD: The myths have been stripped from this city, and the outsiders' fables of love and war are lost in the land they saw as only backdrop and metaphor.


AGS COMPUTERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AGS COMPUTERS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
125,535,000
95,349,000
Net inc
3,988,000
2,310,000
Share earns
.30
.23
9mo sales
355,388,000
267,052,000
Net inc
10,289,000
6,023,000
Share earns
.90
.58


FIRST FAMILY GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FAMILY GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,300,000
13,000,000
Net inc
602,593
b2,542,975
Share earns
.17
-
Shares outst
3,490,270
3,487,760
b-Net loss resulting from a $2,550,000 charge against earnings incurred when the company withdrew from the Southern California market.


CUOMO PROPOSES CORRUPTION UNIT
LEAD: Governor Cuomo called yesterday for the creation of a state investigative agency to combat ''systemic corrupution'' and racketeering in the multibillion-dollar construction industry in New York City.


Who Are These Homeless People New York Is Hospitalizing?
LEAD: To the Editor:


South Korea Denies Report on Leader's Purchase
LEAD: The Government of South Korea has denied that President Chun Doo Hwan has bought an apartment in New York City in a newly renovated building owned by Donald J. Trump.


Big Loss, Big Gain for the Jets
LEAD: In a surprising turn of events, the Jets have lost Johnny Hector, their leading runner, for at least one game, but have regained the services of Joe Klecko.


IRE FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IRE FINANCIAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,743,000
1,356,000
Share earns
.44
.60
Shares outst
3,965,000
2,265,000
9mo net inc
b3,047,000
2,062,000
Share earns
.85
.91
Shares outst
3,588,000
2,265,000


MATRIX MEDICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MATRIX MEDICA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
608,000
849,000
Net loss
345,000
119,000


Charges of Parent Sex Abuse, And a Family Left in Tatters
LEAD: Elizabeth Morgan had a difficult choice: She could deliver her 5-year-old daughter for a court-ordered visit to the former husband she contends had been sexually abusing the child since infancy, or she could hide her, be held in contempt of court and go to jail.


Richard Rhodes and the Bomb
LEAD: It took Richard Rhodes five years to research and write ''The Making of the Atomic Bomb'' - or two years longer than it took the nuclear scientists in New Mexico to make the bomb that was dropped on Hiroshima.


Grant for Mentally Disabled
LEAD: A Chicago foundation has awarded $2 million to a nonprofit group that works to assure the rights of mentally disabled people, the foundation said Thursday.
The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation made the award to the Mental Health Law Project, a Washington-based public interest organization that recently helped restore Social Security benefits to thousands of mentally disabled people, a statement said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ARX Inc., Plainview, L.I., announced that it would purchase an additional 25 percent of common stock of VTX Electronics Inc., increasing its ownership in VTX to about 55 percent.


A Necessary War
LEAD:  THE KOREAN WAR. By Max Hastings. 389 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


William N. Bannard, Investment Counselor
LEAD: William N. Bannard, a New York investment counselor, died of cancer Wednesday at his home in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
He was 69 years old.


Patriot Retiring
LEAD: Steve Nelson, a mainstay at linebacker for the New England Patriots since coming out of North Dakota State as a second-round draft pick in 1974 and three times a Pro Bowl selection, said yesterday that he would retire after this season, his 14th in the National Football League.


TWINKIES FANS COPE
LEAD: While some of us may be fretting about the stock market and others about the Persian Gulf, there is one segment of the population that has been undergoing a far more serious personal crisis this last week.


Reagan Imposes Punitive Tariffs Against Brazil
LEAD: President Reagan announced today that he would impose punitive tariffs covering more than $100 million worth of imports from Brazil in retaliation for Brazilian curbs on American computer and software products.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Thursday about the risks of options trading misidentified in the first mention the type of investor who would suffer big losses if the underlying security turned down.
As the article correctly explained thereafter, it is the seller, not the buyer, of an options put contract who risks the heavy losses.


Exclusionary Club May Pose Problems for Judge Kennedy
LEAD: Judge Anthony M. Kennedy's resignation from an all-male club here came after its members refused to admit women despite a threat of a lawsuit by the city.


Excerpts From Moscow Speeches by Yeltsin and His Critics
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a report in Pravda yesterday about a Moscow Communist Party meeting Wednesday at which Boris N. Yeltsin was dismissed.
The section quoting Mr.
Yeltsin was translated by The New York Times; the section quoting others was translated by Reuters.
YELTSIN FOES' REMARKS


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 54.


Mother of Slain Girl, 6, Denied Visit With Son
LEAD: A Family Court judge yesterday denied a request, at least temporarily, by Hedda Nussbaum to visit the 16-month-old boy whom she and her companion have been accused of abusing.


MR GASKET CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MR GASKET CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
26,826,000
26,296,000
Net inc
327,000
b4,207,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo sales
89,223,000
87,998,000
Net inc
2,972,000
b2,208,000
Share earns
.28
-


The Times and Its Pressmen Tentatively Agree on a Pact
LEAD: The New York Times Company and leaders of the newspaper's pressmen's union have tentatively agreed on terms of a labor contract considered crucial to proceeding with the newspaper's plans to invest $400 million in a new plant in New Jersey that will include color presses.


Psychiatrists Debate Role in Legal System
LEAD: As they did in the case of Joyce Brown, as they do in hundreds of civil and criminal cases every day, consulting psychiatrists pondered the vicissitudes of their inexact science yesterday and disagreed over the role of their profession in court.
How accurate are psychiatric diagnoses?
Should psychiatrists, with the power to deprive people of liberty, continue to work for one side or another in court, or should they work exclusively for the court itself?


7 Democrats Say White House Resisted Iran Panel
LEAD: Seven of the nine House Democrats on the Congressional Iran-contra committees will attach a separate statement to the panels' report next week taking issue with the report's conclusion that the White House was fully cooperative with the Congressional inquiry.


Random House Head To Get Rights Award
LEAD: Robert L. Bernstein, chairman of the board and chief executive officer of Random House, has been named this year's recipient of the Human Rights Award from the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights.
The award is given annually to individuals who work for the cause of human rights; last year's recipient was Corazon


MOR-FLO INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOR-FLO INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
49,066,933
47,133,730
Net loss
1,097,028
b256,349
Share earns
-
.10
9mo sales
154,399,266
147,837,651
Net loss
352,619
b1,768,518
Share earns
-
.70


CONSUMER GAS reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSUMER GAS
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,547,702,000
1,699,537,000
Net inc
82,757,000
92,512,000
Share earns
2.20
2.51
Results are in Canadian dollars.


COMMONWEALTH MORTGAGE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMONWEALTH MORTGAGE (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
44,196,000
38,901,000
Net inc
1,046,000
82,000
Share earns
.03
-
Year-ago share earnings are not available; the company went public Nov. 12, 1986.


VESTRON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VESTRON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
52,262,000
38,235,000
Net loss
9,761,000
b960,000
Share earns
-
.03
9mo sales
142,500,000
138,500,000
Net loss
18,300,000
b12,400,000
Share earns
-
.33


Library for Reagan Papers Finds a Home in the West
LEAD: A $30 million library to house Ronald Reagan's Presidential papers will be built on 100 acres of donated land near here, library and Ventura County officials announced today.


U.S.-Owned Foreign-Flag Ships Pay Taxes
LEAD: To the Editor:


3 Devils Who Chased Fans Are Fined
LEAD: The National Hockey League yesterday penalized the three Devils players who tried to climb out of the penalty box and get to spectators in Pittsburgh during New Jersey's 5-4 victory over the Penguins Oct. 21.


PROGRESS IS MADE ON BUDGET TALKS
LEAD: The budget negotiations got back on track today, and Congressional leaders began to consider ways to delay the $23 billion in spending cuts that are to take effect automatically next Friday.


The Poor a Major Concern Of Judge in Homeless Case
LEAD: Acting Justice Robert D. Lippmann of State Supreme Court, who ruled Thursday that a homeless woman, Joyce Brown, should be allowed to return to a life on the streets, is a well-respected judge and a former lawyer with the Legal Aid Society who has long been known for his interest in housing for the poor.


ELRON ELECTRONIC INDUSRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELRON ELECTRONIC INDUSRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
42,544,000
40,427,000
Net loss
2,079,000
b1,099,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo rev
80,595,000
76,420,000
Net loss
833,000
b2,149,000
Share earns
-
.20


Dance: Michele Anne de Mey, of Belgium, at the Kitchen
LEAD: After the Germans, the French and the Japanese, the newest group epitomizing the extraordinary worldwide spurt in dance innovation comes from Belgium, a country that has generally had little impact upon dance history.
After Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker, the revelation of the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival last year, there are others obviously who have something to offer on their own.


Valery A. Belikov  Soviet Commander in East Germany, 62
LEAD: Gen.
Valery A. Belikov, commander in chief of Soviet forces in East Germany, died of a heart attack Thursday, the official East German press agency reported today.
He was 62 years old.


Florida Sinkhole Swallows a Home
LEAD: Anthony Geraldi, right, and his friend Jason Paul, both 10 years old, looking at the wreckage of the Geraldi family mobile home after a sinkhole 35 feet deep opened under it Thursday in Odessa, Fla. (AP)


CHARTING A COURSE WITH A FINANCIAL PLANNER
LEAD: On Tuesday, Oct. 20, the day after the stock market took its historic tumble, Gregory Smith sat down with a pile of folders and papers that represented his financial portfolio, haphazardly arranged as it was.
He had invested $15,000 in stocks here and there, and had placed some money in mutual funds.


Gore Cuts His Iowa Staff to Four People From 21
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr.'s Presidential campaign announced today that it had cut its staff of paid workers in Iowa to four from 21.


RETAIL SALES BRISK AS PRICES DECLINE AT PRODUCER LEVEL
LEAD: The nation's shoppers seem to have been largely unfazed by the stock-market plunge that began in mid-October, continuing to spend freely, the Commerce Department's monthly report on retail sales indicated today.


Give the 60's Generation a Break
LEAD: With President Reagan's nomination of Judge Anthony M. Kennedy to the Supreme Court, the Ginsburg marijuana episode is gone, but not forgotten.


LANCASTER COLONY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANCASTER COLONY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
114,541,000
113,782,000
Net inc
6,399,000
4,767,000
Share earns
.55
.40


Fourth Time Is a Charm
LEAD: Eddie Robinson, the coach with the most victories in college football history, said he had never seen anything like it in 46 seasons at Grambling State University.
On his fourth attempt, William Wrighten, a freshman, kicked a 21-yard field goal with no time remaining Thursday night to give South Carolina State a 15-13 victory over


INSITUFORM MID-AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSITUFORM MID-AMERICA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,059,880
5,391,627
Net inc
b631,549
c461,504
Share earns
.09
.09
Yr rev
18,013,228
15,945,148
Net inc
b1,557,209
c1,412,767
Share earns
.24
.28


Push for Lights
LEAD: Mayor Harold Washington of Chicago said yesterday that he would introduce an ordinance allowing the Cubs to play 18 home games at night in Wrigley Field, the only major-league ball park without lights.
The proposal, which will be introduced in a City Council meeting next week, calls for 18 of the National


MANUFACTURED HOMES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANUFACTURED HOMES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
54,229,916
33,141,821
Net inc
2,394,802
1,177,160
Share earns
.60
.30
9mo rev
148,183,582
85,943,718
Net inc
5,842,451
3,381,067
Share earns
1.48
.87


INTERNATIONAL REMOTE IMAGNG SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL REMOTE IMAGNG SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,558,000
708,000
Net loss
165,000
409,000
9mo rev
4,421,000
1,994,000
Net loss
663,000
1,202,000


Quiet Day for the Dollar As Budget Talks Go On
LEAD: The dollar was little changed in quiet trading yesterday.


Home Resales Off in Quarter
LEAD: Sales of existing homes, hurt by rising mortgage rates, fell in 28 states during the peak summer sales season, a real estate trade group reported today.


Late Drop Pushes Dow Down 25.20, to 1,935.01
LEAD: Stock prices pulled back yesterday, ending a two-day mini-rally attributed to a firming dollar and encouraging news on the trade front.


Tech Star Ineligible
LEAD: Riccardo Ingram's football and baseball career at Georgia Tech ended yesterday after the star senior admitted taking money from sports agents and signing a representation contract in violation of National Collegiate Athletic Association rules.
Athletic Director Homer Rice said the violations were reported to the N.C.A.A.


Khan Beats Dittmar in 4 Sets
LEAD: Jansher Khan of Pakistan reasserted his claim as the world's top squash racquets player last night with a 15-7, 11-15, 15-1, 15-7 victory over Chris Dittmar of Australia in the Rolex United States Open championship at the Palladium nightclub in Manhattan.


Girl, 14, Wounded As Boy Shows Gun
LEAD: A 14-year-old Manhattan girl was shot in the head Thursday night when she and two friends handled a gun in a Brooklyn apartment, the police said.


FUDDRUCKERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FUDDRUCKERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,324,000
18,854,000
Net inc
159,000
b610,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
33,000,000
52,000,000
Net loss
104,000
3,354,000
b-Net loss


Bangladesh Chief Talks Tough as Rioting Subsides
LEAD: President H. M. Ershad, declaring he would no longer tolerate anti-Government riots, vowed today that arsonists and looters would be shot on sight.


Hong Kong Inquiry
LEAD: The Hong Kong Stock Exchange said today that in the wake of the global stock collapse it had appointed an accounting firm to help with market surveillance and that the financial position of seven small brokerages was being investigated.
The exchange's senior chief executive, Robert Fell, said the trading activities of all seven had been suspended pending the findings of the accountants, Coopers &amp; Lybrand.


Singer Acts to Bar A Bid by Bilzerian
LEAD: Determined to fight off a $1.1 billion hostile takeover bid by Paul A. Bilzerian, the corporate raider from Tampa, Fla., the Singer Company said yesterday that directors had instructed senior executives to open discussions with potential buyers -including those who have indicated an interest in the company.


AMERICAN PIONEER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN PIONEER CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,455,000
b2,447,000
Share earns
.25
.26
9mo net inc
6,513,000
b6,933,000
Share earns
.64
.68
b-Includes tax credits of $413,000 and $2,240,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Lorimar Sets Write-Down
LEAD: The Lorimar-Telepictures Corporation, giving the new management of its film unit a clean slate, said today that it would take a $45 million write-down in its second quarter on five movies that are expected to lose money.


Welfare's Day Care Corollary
LEAD: Welfare reform legislation working its way through Congress reflects a developing national consensus: Benefits for poor families ought to be linked to their willingness to work.
That's all to the good, so long as the lawmakers recognize a crucial corollary.
Most of those families are headed by women.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption on Friday with an article about the Literary Lions dinner at the New York Public Library Wednesday night misidentified the woman pictured with Harold Pinter and Marietta Tree.
She was Kathleen Tynan.


TV Dumping Cited by U.S.
LEAD: The Commerce Department said today that color television picture tubes from four countries were being sold at unfairly low prices in the United States.


SAGE ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAGE ENERGY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,885,000
5,747,000
Net inc
b970,000
c1,536,000
Share earns
.09
-
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $1,069,000 from the repurchase and retirement of debentures.


ARKANSAS BEST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARKANSAS BEST CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
187,688,775
181,343,258
Net inc
3,276,776
6,846,367
Share earns
.32
.67
9mo rev
535,655,861
513,000,300
Net inc
5,301,876
16,389,968
Share earns
.52
1.62


QVC NETWORK reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QVC NETWORK
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
31,240,000
-
inc
804,000
-
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
59,723,000
-
Net loss
6,843,000
-
Comparable figures are unavailable because the company went public in June 1986.


City Opera: A Mozart and Knussen Pairing
LEAD: ''Where the Wild Things Are,'' a children's opera for adults (and an adult opera for children, too) by Oliver Knussen and Maurice Sendak, lumbered happily into the New York State Theater Thursday night.
The work, playing on a double bill with a version of Mozart's incomplete opera ''L'Oca del Cairo,'' will close out the New York City Opera season with four more performances through Sunday evening.


LPL INVESTMENT GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LPL INVESTMENT GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
129,340,000
24,252,000
Net inc
b746,000
427,000
Share earns
.06
.02
Shares outst
5,766,917
4,760,328
9mo sales
219,332,000
69,477,000
Net inc
b2,793,000
c5,712,000
Share earns
.28
-


PETROLEUM INVESTMENTS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PETROLEUM INVESTMENTS LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,646,000
2,040,000
Net loss
2,011,000
b2,840,000
9mo rev
5,202,000
7,376,000
Net loss
2,561,000
b12,971,000
b-Includes a $2.6 million and $12.2 million writedown of oil and gas properties for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Nets Lose to the Bulls
LEAD: Nets' Mike Gminski trying to maneuver past Bulls' John Paxson.
Bulls went on to win, 103-85.
Page 52. (AP)


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


NELSON HOLDINGS INTERNAIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NELSON HOLDINGS INTERNAIONAL (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,971,000
9,000
Net loss
7,430,000
425,000
9mo rev
79,676,000
56,000
Net loss
9,974,000
939,000
The company noted that prior to October 1986, it was a development stage entity and that comparison of operations with the year-ago period is not meaningful.


Jordan Has 36 in Rout of Nets
LEAD: Michael Jordan continued to take charge -but only when necessary - and the Chicago Bulls continued unbeaten tonight.


Woody Allen Talks of Films And Fatherhood on the BBC
LEAD: Woody Allen, the actor and director, who is about to become a first-time father, discussed his films and hopes for a baby girl in a television interview that appeared today on the BBC.


Expert Rejects Drug Claim In the Howard Beach Death
LEAD: An expert in the effects of drugs on human behavior testified yesterday that Michael Griffith had used cocaine too long before he died for the drug to have influenced his decision to run onto a highway in Howard Beach, Queens.


Buenos Aires Journal; Timerman, Stranger in Two More Strange Lands
LEAD: Jacobo Timerman's impassioned pen, which once gave voice to the victims of repression in Argentina, has turned to two other troubled Latin American nations, Chile and Cuba.


MIDWEST ENERGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDWEST ENERGY INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
113,621,000
107,679,000
Net inc
6,470,000
4,683,000
Share earns
.30
.22
9mo rev
384,456,000
434,781,000
Net inc
21,751,000
24,846,000
Share earns
1.01
1.15


Student Newspapers Need Some Limits
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Meeseful Wonder
LEAD: Senator Orrin Hatch says there are gutless wonders at the White House.
President Reagan says there isn't a single gutless wonder on the premises.
Since these two usually see eye-to-eye on everything, the gutless-wonder dispute is a big, big story.


Soviet Union Allows Visit By Nureyev
LEAD: Rudolf Nureyev said today that he had received permission to visit his elderly mother in the Soviet Union.
It will be the first visit by the star dancer to his native land since he defected in 1961.


Soviet Purchases in U.S.
LEAD: The Soviet Union made additional agricultural purchases in the United States today, contracting for 500,000 metric tons of wheat and 150,000 tons of soybean meal, the Agriculture Department announced.


THOUSAND TRAILS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THOUSAND TRAILS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,885,000
19,712,000
Net loss
3,924,000
5,948,000
9mo sales
26,782,000
52,409,000
Net loss
11,877,000
11,638,000


U.S. Won't Alter Policy to Bolster Gorbachev in Rifts, Officials Say
LEAD: Administration officials, who are divided in their assessment of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's political problems, say American policy will not be influenced by internal maneuvering in the Soviet leadership.


MDC ASSET INVESTORS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MDC ASSET INVESTORS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
108,909,000
-
Net inc
5,804,000
-
Share earns
.63
-
9mo rev
252,399,000
-
Net inc
13,187,000
-
Share earns
2.05
-
There are no year-ago comparisons because the company is in its first year of operations.


JOHN ADAMS LIFE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHN ADAMS LIFE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
71,082
c170,848
Share earns
-
.06
9mo net loss
b628,052
c827,749
Share earns
-
.28
b-After realized investment gains of $21,018.
c-Net income and after realized investment gains of $1,324 for the quarter and $101,784 for the 9 months.


Stage: At Yale Reportory, 'Melons' Explores Indian Issues
LEAD: In the second act of Bernard Pomerance's ''Melons,'' there is a confrontation between a once fierce Apache chief now posing as a peaceful Pueblo farmer and a young Indian doctor who has a pragmatic attitude about the achievement of equal rights for their people.
It is 1906, wars are over but old wounds remain raw.


2 Government Aides Charged In Brazil Radiation Disaster
LEAD: Two Government officials have been charged in connection with a radiation accident that has killed four Brazilians, the police said today.


Soviet Purchases Send Soybeans Up Sharply
LEAD: Soybean futures surged yesterday, in reaction to large Soviet purchases in the United States of both beans and soybean meal.


CHESS GAME IS DRAWN
LEAD: The 13th game of the world chess championship between Gary Kasparov, and the challenger, Anatoly Karpov, ended in a draw today after 36 moves.


Fire Destroys Warehouse on Long Island
LEAD: Firefighters in Bethpage recovering hoses on ground littered with cans of propane fuel after an early morning fire at a barbecue-supply warehouse at 50 Lexington Avenue.
It took 150 firefighters six hours to contol the blaze.
They were hampered because of exploding fuel cannisters.
Residents of 15 nearby homes were removed as a precaution.


FALCON CABLE SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FALCON CABLE SYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,276,000
3,981,000
Net inc
458,000
b1,318,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
14,998,000
9,570,000
Net inc
1,468,000
b2,848,000
Share earns
.24
-


MONITOR TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONITOR TECHNOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,598,351
1,941,904
Net inc
516,186
b46,880
Share earns
.29
-
9mo sales
7,434,002
7,358,079
Net inc
931,218
b2,535,014
Share earns
.51
-
b


Rat Nerves Repaired and Rejoined With Spine
LEAD: Scientists report that for the first time they have repaired crushed nerves connecting the extremities to the spinal cord in mammals, in this case rats.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The next step is up to them.''- President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua, referring to the contras.  [ 4:4. ]


MADISON GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MADISON GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
44,405,000
43,681,000
Net inc
5,752,000
6,023,000
Share earns
.85
.88
9mo rev
147,146,000
151,885,000
Net inc
14,216,000
13,845,000
Share earns
2.10
2.00


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


The Editorial Notebook; By How to Invest Without Anxiety
LEAD: Several years ago, while visiting Australia, I bought the remnants of what must have been an enormous 1930's dinner service: 41 pieces in all, some of it oddly and wonderfully shaped.
I knew its age and its maker, and that I loved it.
What I didn't know was the kind of money such stuff pulled in New


Dutton Released
LEAD: Another 36-year-old N.F.L. defensive standout with 14 years' experience might have seen his season end yesterday.
The Dallas Cowboys released John Dutton, a defensive tackle who spent the last eight seasons with Dallas.
Dutton has been replaced as a starter by Kevin Brooks.


Senator Lugar Hurt in Fall
LEAD: Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, broke a bone in his face and suffered a cut over his eye when he slipped Thursday on his icy driveway in McLean, Va., a spokesman said.
Mr.
Lugar was treated at the Bethesda Naval Hospital and was released but will have to return next Wednesday to have the facial bone set, the spokesman, Andy Fisher, said.


INVESTMENT TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INVESTMENT TECHNOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
318,646
347,068
9mo net loss
868,629
1,102,289
Investment Technologies is a development stage company.


BEFORE THE FIRST CONSULATION
LEAD: Experts suggest that when selecting a financial planner, consumers should consider the following points:


COMSTOCK GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMSTOCK GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
107,400,000
84,982,000
Net loss
2,045,000
1,170,000
9mo rev
287,569,000
252,157,000
Net loss
7,548,000
b4,326,000
b-After an extraordinary gain of $2,533,000.


Ungermann-Bass Bars Digital Offer
LEAD: Ungermann-Bass Inc., a computer network manufacturer based in Santa Clara, Calif., said its board had unanimously rejected an acquisition proposal from Digital Communications Associates Inc.
Digital, a computer parts maker based in Alpharetta, Ga., had said on Thursday that it might begin a hostile tender offer if Ungermann did not accept its offer of $9.75 a share, or about $172.6 million, but the company told Reuters today that it had no immediate plans to take further action.


Homicide Experts Meet: Gruesome Cases and a Bit of Fun
LEAD: Call them what you will - the mavens of murder, the doyens of death.
They are 125 of the country's leading experts on homicide, and for three days they have met here to compare cases and swap stories, talking of knives and cyanide and killings in the night.


Payment by Venezuela
LEAD: The Venezuelan Government will repay $250 million in principal owed to private foreign banks by mid-December, Finance Minister Hector Hurtado said today.
He told reporters the amount would be sent within 30 days from Monday as specified under terms of Venezuela's $20.3 billion rescheduling accord with private foreign banks.


PERKIN-ELMER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PERKIN-ELMER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
319,800,000
311,500,000
Net inc
14,300,000
11,000,000
Share earns
.31
.24


New Life For Copper Industry
LEAD: In the desert mountain ranges dotted with creosote bushes and prickly pear cactuses, the Phelps Dodge Corporation has helped bring about a fundamental change in the economics of mining copper.


Arthur Miller Reading
LEAD: To mark the publication of his autobiography, ''Timebends: A Life,'' Arthur Miller will give a reading from the work on Monday at 8 P.M., at the Vivian Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center.
The book is published by Grove Press, which is sponsoring the reading with Lincoln Center Theater.
Admission is free.


Zhao Ziyang, on Mao and China's Future
LEAD: Three days after becoming Secretary General of China's Communist Party, Zhao Ziyang relaxed over dinner at the leadership compound of Zhongnanhai in the Forbidden City and told how Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, had insisted on stepping down ''before my mind becomes confused.''


Dr. Lehan K. Tunks  Law School Dean, 72
LEAD: Dr.
Lehan K. Tunks, a former dean of law at Rutgers University and the University of Washington, died of lymphoma and acute respiratory distress in a Seattle nursing home Monday.
He was 72 years old and lived in Seattle.


No Damage Is Seen to Homeless Plan
LEAD: Mayor Koch's program to remove mentally ill homeless people from the streets has not been damaged by the Joyce Brown decision, and New York City does not plan to broaden existing laws to gain wider latitude to pick them up for treatment, the city's chief assistant corporation counsel said yesterday.


ESCAPE TESTS SET ON SPACE SHUTTLE
LEAD: Small rockets that could eject astronauts through a hatch in the space shuttle and a telescoping pole on which they could slide through it will be tested later this month as possible escape systems, the space agency reports.


Girl Begged to Have Her Mother Killed, Document Reveals
LEAD: A Glastonbury woman was murdered in August after her 16-year-old daughter ''begged'' her boyfriend to do the killing and they discussed several nights on which to do it, according to an arrest warrant unsealed today.


Soviet to Let 2 Women Join Husbands in U.S.
LEAD: Two of three Soviet citizens who appealed to join their spouses in the United States have been given permission to leave the Soviet Union, one of the three said today.


ATICO FINANCIAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATICO FINANCIAL INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,090,000
1,147,000
Share earns
.65
.31
9mo net inc
b3,387,000
2,178,000
Share earns
.83
.60
Shares outst
4,101,000
3,617,000
b-Includes an income tax credit of $4,596,000 from the reduction of deferred tax liability related to gains in the company's portfolio of marketable securities for both the quarter and 9 months.


Exchanges' Merger Bid Advances
LEAD: Efforts to combine New York's two biggest futures exchanges have moved one step closer to fruition, officials at the New York Mercantile Exchange and the Commodity Exchange Inc. said yesterday.


40 Are Killed in Mexico City As Bus Overturns Into Lake
LEAD: A city bus packed with schoolchildren and workers skidded off a dirt road and flipped onto its roof in a shallow lake today, killing 40 people and injuring 5, the authorities said.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Elvis Franks, a defensive lineman who played seven National Football League seasons with the Cleveland Browns, the New York Jets and the Los Angeles Raiders, has pleaded guilty in Cleveland to conspiracy to distribute cocaine.
He was arrested July 20 when police confiscated from his car four ounces of a substance believed to be cocaine and seized six ounces of the powder at his residence.


Pretoria Reports 5 Died in Angola
LEAD: Pretoria announced today that five more of its soldiers had been killed in southeastern Angola, in a further indication of a growing South African role in the 12-year-old Angolan civil war.


Physician Awareness of Home Care Increasing
LEAD: To the Editor:


CONNECTICUT NATURAL GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONNECTICUT NATURAL GAS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
25,220,000
22,914,000
Net loss
1,494,000
b1,171,000
9mo rev
142,891,000
149,392,000
Net inc
7,757,000
b8,701,000
Share earns
1.10
1.27


K N ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*K N ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
67,927,000
68,427,000
Net loss
1,799,000
1,361,000
9mo rev
222,391,000
232,363,000
Net inc
b3,461,000
6,732,000
Share earns
.22
.57
b-After a credit of $3,185,000, representing cumulative effect of an accounting change.


AMERICAN ISRAELI PAPER MILLS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN ISRAELI PAPER MILLS LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
48,615,000
38,545,000
Net inc
1,265,000
3,015,000
Share earns
.32
.91
9mo sales
137,316,000
105,194,000
Net inc
5,704,000
7,334,000
Share earns
1.60
2.21


Brock Is Planning a Shake-up Of Dole Campaign, Aides Say
LEAD: A major shake-up in Senator Bob Dole's troubled Presidential organization is planned, aides to the Republican leader said tonight.


LAURENTIAN CAPITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAURENTIAN CAPITAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,467,000
c848,000
Share earns
.09
.06
Shares outst
16,129,000
13,380,000
9mo net inc
b1,916,000
c4,667,000
Share earns
.11
.36
Shares outst
16,126,000
12,905,000


NECO ENTERPRISES reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NECO ENTERPRISES (AMEX)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
46,076,447
41,141,290
Net inc
1,333,254
b1,487,887
Share earns
1.28
1.46
b-Includes a gain from an accounting change of $270,114.
Year-ago figures have been restated to reflect the adoption of an accounting change related to the recognition of unbilled revenues.


Michael S. Comay Is Dead at 79; An Influential Diplomat in Israel
LEAD: Michael S. Comay, Israel's chief delegate to the United Nations in the 1960's and one of his nation's most influential diplomats, died Nov. 6 in Jerusalem.
He was 79 years old.


About New York; Sans Graininess, A New Focus On Howdy Doody
LEAD: In those days the picture was never good except in the showrooms and the studios but the people lucky enough to own a television always seemed to have gotten crystal clear reception the night before - the night before you were invited to look at the new marvel. ''Never seen it so bad,'' the hosts would say, fiddling with the rabbit ears.


LANDS' END reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANDS' END (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
80,191,000
64,857,000
Net inc
4,619,000
3,392,000
Share earns
.23
.17
9mo sales
204,889,000
164,945,000
Net inc
11,127,000
6,123,000
Share earns
.55
.31


Trustco Buys 8.6% of Glenfed
LEAD: Royal Trustco Ltd., a leading Canadian financial institution, disclosed today that it had purchased an 8.6 percent stake in Glenfed Inc., and said it might decide to seek control of Glenfed, the fifth-largest savings and loan holding company in the United States, with nearly $19 billion in assets and 176 branch offices in California and


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 1987
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 3-7, 28  A Nicaraguan cease-fire plan was presented by that country's president.
It would oblige Managua's rebel opponents to surrender their weapons after one month and accept a political amnesty.
Page 1  News analysis: Boris Yeltsin's ouster has raised questions about the Soviet leader as he prepares for his first visit to the United States.


Film Forum 2 Will Show 2 1930's French Movies
LEAD: ''Crime and Punishment'' and ''The Man From Nowhere,'' two French films of the 1930's, will be shown Nov. 20 through 26 at Film Forum 2, 57 Watts Street.
The films were directed by Pierre Chenal, who supervised the recent striking of new prints from the original negatives.


NOEL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOEL INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,353,367
12,617,076
Net loss
2,627,832
b400,453
Share earns
-
.35
9mo sales
23,636,200
24,255,779
Net loss
3,611,044
b89,941
Share earns
-
.08


PLACER DOME reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLACER DOME
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
201,500,000
190,800,000
Net inc
84,900,000
28,100,000
Share earns
.39
.13
Shares outst
219,200,000
204,600,000
9mo rev
603,100,000
549,800,000
Net inc
184,600,000
130,100,000
Share earns
.85
.64
Shares outst
217,400,000
202,500,000


'Pow! Right in the Kisser!'
LEAD: True, Ralph Kramden of ''The Honeymooners'' never did hit his wife, Alice.
But Jackie Gleason commonly punctuated episodes of the television show with a clenched fist and the threat: ''One of these days, Alice - Pow!
Right in the kisser!'' The routine and the laughter it elicited reflected wide public insensitivity to the violence that continues as terrible reality in millions of households.


Chief for Dow Chemical
LEAD: The Dow Chemical Company said today that its board of directors had appointed Frank P. Popoff as its chief executive officer, succeeding Paul F. Oreffice, who will remain chairman.
Mr.
Popoff has also been elected chairman of the board's executive committee, replacing Mr.
Oreffice, who remains on the committee.


Markets Welcome Smaller Trade Gap
LEAD: The trade deficit shrank in September, with the value of the nation's imports exceeding that of exports by $14.1 billion, down $1.6 billion from August.
The September number was at the low end of what had been expected and financial markets were pleased, especially when traders recalled that the ''October massacre'' began with the release of the August number on Oct.


Tickets on Sale Today For Pavarotti Classes
LEAD: Luciano Pavarotti will give two master classes at the Juilliard School, Thursday from 2 to 6 P.M. and next Sunday from 3 to 5:30 P.M.
He will work with singers presently studying at the school.


CORRECTION
LEAD: The gazetteer accompanying an article on Turtle Bay on Nov. 1 omitted the name of a New York City Council member who serves the neighborhood.
She is Carol Greitzer.


Choosing the Right Island
LEAD: THERE are more than three dozen Caribbean islands, stretching across a body of water one-third the size of the United States.
The choice presents a perennial problem: which island suits you best.


JAPAN: For Its Retirees, Tokyo Is Relying on Self-Reliance
LEAD: IT is not just in the United States that people worry about who is going to pay for social security.
Throughout the industrialized world, because of the baby boom's huge presence and low fertility rates, the classic demographic pyramid is narrowing at the base and swelling at the top.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development projects that in its 24 member nations the proportion of the population aged 65 and over will rise from 12 percent now to 22 percent in 2040.


WOMEN IN COMPETITION HAVE COME A LONG WAY
LEAD: YEARS ago, women's chess was generally stodgy, lacking aggression and combinational fireworks, but that's not true any more.


Correction
LEAD: A Travel Advisory report in the Travel section today about Dublin's 1,000th birthday lists an incorrect address for the Irish Tourist Board.
The correct address is 757 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  FATSO: Football When Men Were Really Men.


Family Court Is Struggling With Caseload, Experts Say
LEAD: New York City's Family Court, created 25 years ago to handle family matters and youthful offenders, is being overwhelmed by a new generation of children more abused and neglected than ever before, according to experts addressing a special seminar yesterday.


WHO WILL CONTROL POPULATION GROWTH?
LEAD: This letter is in response to the Oct. 25 Opinion Page article ''The Population Bomb Is Still Ticking.'' I agree with Diana Gerhardt's assessment that Long Island is overcrowded; we do have too much garbage, too much population and too many shopping centers being built.
Our traffic situation is deplorable during midday and the rush hours try the patience of many.


SPORTS AUTHORITY FACING SCRUTINY
LEAD: AS IF losing the vote to build a baseball stadium in the Meadowlands was not enough, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority faces increased skepticism in the Legislature.


HOW TO INSTALL A WALL CABINET
LEAD: INSTALLING hanging cabinets against a framed wall is a task that many do-it-yourselfers view with trepidation.
Not only must the cabinet's horizontal surfaces be level and its vertical surfaces plumb, but also, for strength, at least some of the fasteners must penetrate the studs that make up the core of the wall.


REAGAN AND WRIGHT CAUGHT UP IN FEUD
LEAD: The relationship between President Reagan and Jim Wright, the Speaker of the House, has deteriorated so badly that it is complicating efforts to arrange compromises on domestic and foreign policy, officials in the White House and on Capitol Hill say.


Risky Markets
LEAD: To the Editor:


Maryland Considering A Computer Photo File
LEAD: In an effort to keep drivers with excessive traffic violations off the road, the state of Maryland is considering storing photographs of drivers in a computer to prevent people from getting several licenses.


GATHERING TOGETHER
LEAD: ONE MAY OR may not feast on ham or lamb at Easter.
And a goose, or some other fowl, at Christmas is fit for a flip of the coin.
But the last Thursday in November without turkey is a cause for depression.


Mitchell-Lama
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chicago Man, 22, Is Charged With Anti-Jewish Vandalism
LEAD: A 22-year-old man charged with breaking windows and painting swastikas on the walls of a Jewish meat market may have been involved in other vandalism acts against Jewish-owned businesses, the police say.


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  Computers That Listen


WHAT'S NEW IN RADAR DETECTORS
LEAD: THE radar detector business is not for the timid.
Makers of the little black boxes, which alert drivers to the presence of police radar and help them avoid speeding tickets, have come under fire from traffic safety organizations, politicians and police.
Their technological adversaries, the makers of police radar equipment, consistently find new ways to circumvent detectors.


AFTER QUICHE
LEAD: This classic French country dish sits proudly on my kitchen counter, ready to be served (Food: ''After Quiche,'' by Patricia Wells, Oct. 4).
Now I read that this brilliant marriage of the flavors of beef, red wine and herbs has become a culinary has-been.


SCHOOLS TO GET HELP ON AIDS
LEAD: EDUCATING children about AIDS is a race against time, according to Linda Cocian, supervisor of nursing and child care for this city's schools.


A CANDIDATE'S 'POSITIVE ATTRIBUTES'
LEAD: In my opinion the Oct. 25 article ''Garbage Is Issue in Two Races'' was unfair in its treatment of Ben Zwirn, Democratic candidate for supervisor of Town of North Hempstead.


BAKED VEGETABLES OF AUTUMN CELEBRATE THE HARVEST SEASON
LEAD: TURKEY may be the star of the Thanksgiving table, but vegetables play an effectual supporting role.
And since this holiday is the celebration of the harvest, I like to serve a selection.
I bake whole acorn squashes in the oven, not cutting them open until after they are cooked.
Then I slice them in half, scoop out the seeds and add a little butter, salt and pepper.


Pittsburgh Gets Tough On Domestic Violence
LEAD: The police here have been ordered to make arrests or seek warrants in all cases of domestic violence.


Jet Crash Hearing to Focus on Alarm Failure
LEAD: If the pilots of the Northwest Airlines jetliner that crashed in Detroit in August forgot a key step needed for a safe takeoff, as almost all safety experts agree, why did the plane's automatic warning system fail to sound the alarm?


Saving a Cemetery For Famous Pets
LEAD: FRANCE'S oldest pet cemetery, one of the most lavish in the world, faced an uncertain future two months ago in Asnieres, outside of Paris.
The owner had locked its gate on an island in the Seine and was threatening to plow up the land and sell it to apartment builders.


DON JUAN IN MANHATTAN
LEAD:  Don Juan's a hero with a hundred faces:  For some he's mostly Mozart, or Moliere.
He shows up in a hundred different places,  He's profligate, Byronic, debonair.
He goes to Hell, so heavy his disgrace is,  In ''Man and Superman'' we see him there - A daring Shavian variant on the pattern;  So after that let's send him to Manhattan.


Detroit Symphony's Future Clouded by Strike
LEAD: When General Motors and the United Automobile Workers settled their contract negotiations earlier this year without so much as a threat of a strike, both sides proclaimed that a new era of labor-management relations had arrived in the Motor City.


A Marathon On Pynchon Stirs Readers
LEAD: From the shadow of an abstract sculpture titled ''Song of the Vowels,'' a group of students and teachers raised their voices in song the other night to Thomas Pynchon and his mammoth novel, ''Gravity's Rainbow.''


AS AMERICAN AS CHEESECAKE
LEAD:  MISS AMERICA, 1945  Bess Myerson's Own Story.
By Susan Dworkin.
Illustrated. 229 pp.
New York: Newmarket Press. $18.95.


On Language; Too Clever By Three-Quarters
LEAD: SOVIET SUMMITRY:


MOVIES
LEAD:  Tin Men  Starring Richard Dreyfuss, Danny DeVito and Barbara Hershey.
Written and directed by Barry Levinson. 1987.
Touchstone Home Video. 112 minutes. $89.95.
Just as certain foods are relished by the Chinese more for their texture than their flavor, so must ''Tin Men'' be savored for its very special texture rather than for its plot.


MACK LOBELL WINNER BY 12 3/4 LENGTHS
LEAD: ''A horse like him comes along only once in a lifetime,'' John Campbell said after driving Mack Lobell to a 12 3/4-length victory in the $442,662 Breeders Crown Trot for 3-year-old colts Friday night at Pompano Park.


THE IRISH CRUISE AGAINST THE TIDE
LEAD: Notre Dame is on a mission to win the national college football championship, but may never get the chance to fulfill it.


Share the Indian Museum
LEAD: The protracted struggle over the Museum of the American Indian now comes down to a confrontation between Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York and Senator Daniel Inouye of Hawaii.
Senator Moynihan leads forces that would put the museum in the old U.S.
Custom House in Lower Manhattan.
Senator Inouye argues for transfer to the Smithsonian Institution in


Robin Drake Cameron Married to Richard Steen
LEAD: At St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Englewood, N.J., Robin Drake Cameron, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Cameron of Englewood, was married yesterday to Richard Spencer Steen, a son of Mrs.
George Voutsas of Carmel, Calif., and the late Dr.
Sigvart J. Steen.
The Rev.
Jack M. McKelvey performed the ceremony.


POETS FAR FROM HOME
LEAD:  SELECTED POEMS  1956-1986.
By Anne Stevenson. 149 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Paper, $9.95.
TWO HORSE WAGON GOING BY  By Christopher Middleton. 143 pp.
New York: Carcanet.
Paper, $8.50.


Gulliver's Travails
LEAD: Ever since the Wall Street plunge demonstrated the financial world's interdependency, Asian opinion leaders have been viewing the U.S. with the same condescension as the brisk Lilliputians saw big Lemuel Gulliver: an amiable, clumsy giant whose profligacy is awful but whose strength could still prove useful.


Seeking a Pardon For Eddie Slovik
LEAD: FORTY-TWO YEARS after Pvt.


Social Events
LEAD: Evenings on the Town  New Plays  Nov. 16 - The Circle Repertory Theater, a leading Off Broadway showcase for new American plays, will present six short new works by playwrights including Lanford Wilson and Terrence McNally at a benefit for the company at the Equitable Center, 787 Seventh Avenue near 51st Street.


'HOUSE OF BLUE LEAVES,' TRAGICOMEDY
LEAD: ARTIE SHAUGHNESSY has been infected with the American dream of making it big in show business.
In John Guare's surreal tragicomedy, ''The House of Blue Leaves,'' the only impediment's to Artie's rise to songwriting fame are Bananas, his insane wife; Ronnie, his AWOL son, and -well, that's just the beginning.


Correction
LEAD: An interview with the author Mary Helen Washington on Oct. 4 incorrectly identified her college affiliation.
She graduated from Notre Dame College of Ohio, Cleveland.


CUNY Official Sees Problems in Cutting Loan Default Rates
LEAD: The City University of New York will be hard-pressed to meet proposed Federal goals to reduce student loan default rates at many of its colleges, according to the university's director of financial aid.


Toxic Cleanup Puzzle Pondered at Conference
LEAD: The conference was billed as a search to unlock ''environmental gridlock'' - to quicken the pace of cleanup of polluted land, air and water.


A Wedding Is Planned By Dr. Jennifer S. Hock
LEAD: Dr.
Jennifer Suzanne Hock and Dr.
Bruce Brod, who are residents at the Rhode Island Hospital in Providence, plan to be married in March.


ONE COMMUTER'S CHOICE: GO BY BIKE
LEAD: LIFE is a process of choices, most people like to believe.


Atlanta Expects $60 Million From Convention
LEAD: Businesses in Atlanta could earn nearly $60 million from the Democratic National Convention next summer, and even more if the party's Presidential nomination has not been decided by the time delegates arrive July 18.


U.S.-Soviet Group Discusses Textbook Versions of History
LEAD: Soviet textbooks should spend less time dwelling on poverty and urban crime in the United States, and the Russians want publishers of American textbooks to present a more balanced discussion of Lenin, a leader of a joint textbook study project says.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: It's How You Play the Game Screaming and clapping, the home-team crowd was going wild in the balcony overlooking the college's tiny gymnasium.
The entire student body was on its feet. (Actually, they had to be, since there weren't any seats.) But euphoria was rampant, for it was the opening home basketball game and their team was winning, as in scoring more points than the opponent, a feat most students had only dreamed about.


Correction
LEAD: ''Home Remedies,'' an article about indoor pollutants on Sept. 27 in The Good Health Magazine, part 2 of The Times Magazine, misidentified a harmful substance released in excessive amounts by malfunctioning gas appliances.
It is carbon monoxide.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: IF the third time's a charm, Joe Dudek should have quite a season with the Denver Broncos next year.


Sports of The Times; Weeds In the Garden
LEAD: FOR anyone suffering from exhaustion from trying to pull the weeds out of the Garden, take two spoonfuls of Mets and Giants history and relax.
Chances are that the Knicks and the Rangers will get even worse before they get better.


U.S. RECHARTING THE OCEAN OFF STATE
LEAD: THANKS to an extensive Federal project, mariners will soon be able to ply the waters off North Jersey with less anxiety.


Bronx Man Is Charged With Abusing His Son
LEAD: A Bronx man has been charged with child abuse after hospital officials said his 4-month-old son had suffered brain damage caused by a severe shaking.


Heidi Solomon Is Married
LEAD: Heidi Gretchen Regina Solomon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert A. Solomon of Media, Pa., was married yesterday to Peter Robert Barnett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph J. Barnett of Hobart, Australia.
Rabbi Mayer Selekman performed the ceremony at Temple Sholom in Broomall, Pa.
The bride is director of sales promotion at the American Society of Chartered Life Underwriters and Chartered Financial Consultants in Bryn Mawr, Pa.


Commercial Properties: Escalation Clauses; Why It Pays to Hire a Lawyer in Negotiating a Lease
LEAD: FROM his file cabinet, Robert Wagner pulled out evidence of a horrific business decision: a lease he signed three years ago for factory and office space at 25 West 45th Street in Manhattan.


WHY WIDENING CONGESTED HIGHWAYS IS THE WRONG ROUTE TO FOLLOW
LEAD: FOR more than 30 years, highway departments have been selling us the same old bill of goods: ''building more highways to ease congestion.'' After spending billions upon billions and paving over countless acres of valuable land, congestion is worse than ever.
None of the state transportation department's proposals will ease the jams for long.


Dr. Cathy A. Colt Planning to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Colt of Sharon, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Cathy Ann Colt to Dr.
Roger James Pomerantz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Pomerantz of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The wedding is planned for next month.


'Safer Sex' Shop at Stanford
LEAD: ''Ye Olde Safer Sex Shoppe'' has opened at Stanford University, offering information and products aimed at slowing the spread of AIDS.
The shop, which is actually just a table where condoms and other items are sold, is sponsored by an AIDS education project with approval from administrators and student groups.


When Best-Laid Plans Go Awry
LEAD: THE THEATER HAS A THOUSAND and one ways of doublecrossing the people who work in it, and woe betide the actor or writer or composer or designer who doesn't keep a cautious eye on his exposed left flank.
The theater doesn't mean to trip up any of its attractive inhabitants, of course.
It's just that in an activity so collaborative it's very easy to get some of the signals mixed.


EMBRACABLE THEM
LEAD:  SINGERS AND THE SONG  By Gene Lees. 257 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $18.95.


Growth Overtakes Calm And Culture of Ozarks
LEAD: When Rudolph Crouse arrived in these remote Ozark hills in 1920 in search of a new home, he knew he had found ''the best place in all creation.''


CHILDREN'S HEALTH
LEAD: Taking its cue from the success of programs like ''Sesame Street,'' the Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program - a national health-care plan - has developed a theatrical troupe that travels nationwide to teach elementary-school children about health and safety.


CHAMPION PIANISTS AND COMIC OPERAS
LEAD: TWO comic operas by Donizetti, in Hartford and Bridgeport, are vying for attention with the three prize-winners from the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition, in Hartford, New Haven and Greenwich.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a large bluestone patio about 10 years old, and some of the cement between the flags is coming out of the joints.
Can you tell us how to handle this problem?


Maine Faculty Votes C.I.A. Ban
LEAD: The faculty of Colby College in Waterville, Me.,has voted to ban the Central Intelligence Agency from recruiting students on its campus.
The student government opposes such a ban.


The Stage: 'Scooncat,' A Mother and Son Effort
LEAD: BOBBY, or Scooncat, as he prefers to be known, lives in a high-tech room, into which the world keeps intruding in mostly disagreeable forms.


When Artistic Rebels Set England Aglow
LEAD: ONE OF THE MOST POWERFUL works of art to have been produced in Britain during this century is the ''Hieratic Head of Ezra Pound'' by the very young French sculptor Henri Gaudier-Brzeska.
Carved in 1914, and now the centerpiece of ''British Modernist Art: 1905-1930'' at the Hirschl &amp; Adler Galleries, 21 East 70th Street, it stands for a key moment in the history of the cosmopolitan London that was to be dispersed and demoralized by the outbreak of World War I in


Special Today: The World of New York/Magazine Part 2
LEAD: In the holiday World of New York, these special reports:


A THEORY OF EVERYTHING
LEAD: Recently, Edward Witten returned to his alma mater (Brandeis), where he received an honorary degree.
Many on campus were surprised to discover that Witten, the enfant terrible of physics, was a history major as an undergraduate.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  EARLY PAINE  Clive Phillpot, director of the library at the Museum of Modern Art in Manhattan, will give a talk about one of his countrymen - Thomas Paine - at the New Rochelle Public Library, 8 P.M.
Tuesday.
An emigre from England himself, albeit two centuries later, Mr.
Phillpot will explore Paine's early life in Thetford, Alford and Lewes, which is seldom discussed.


Bokassa Sentence Upheld
LEAD: The Supreme Court today rejected an appeal for a retrial by Jean-Bedel Bokassa, sentenced to death last June for crimes committed during his 13-year rule.
His lawyers had argued that a former head of state could be tried only on treason charges.


Julius Lane Wilson, Doctor, 90
LEAD: Dr.
Julius Lane Wilson, first director of medical education of the American Thoracic Society, the medical section of the American Lung Association, died of an aneurysm Tuesday at his home in Tryon, N.C.
He was 90 years old.


BAPTISTS' FACTION SCORES IN POLITICS
LEAD: As 22 state Baptist groups ended their annual conventions, there were hints that moderate Baptists were mastering political organization in their battles with orthodoxy in the nation's largest Protestant denomination.


Headliners; Starting Over
LEAD: Mary Beth Whitehead, who says her marriage fell apart in the course of the landmark Baby M custody case, has started two new lives.
As Mrs.
Whitehead was divorced from her husband, Richard, last week, her lawyers disclosed that she plans ''very soon'' to wed Dean Gould, the father of a baby Mrs.
Whitehead expects in the spring.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 15, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
GARDEN OF SHADOWS, by V. C. Andrews.
(Pocket, $4.95.) The beginnings of the evil that
beset the Dollanganger family in four previously
published novels.
2
1
WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.


Pieter N. Menten, War Criminal And Art Collector, Is Dead at 88
LEAD: Pieter Nicolaas Menten, the Netherlands' most notorious Nazi war criminal, died here today in a nursing home, according to Dutch television.
He was 88 years old and no cause of death was given.


OUT OF ANTAGONISM, RENT DECISIONS EMERGE
LEAD: &gt;''IT was the closest thing to a ? circus you've ever seen at a public meeting,'' said Walter D. Johnston, Acting Chairman of the Westchester Rent Guidelines Board, which granted rent increases this month of 3 percent on one-year leases and 5 percent on three-year leases.


For Nureyev, An 'Inevitable' Return Home
LEAD: Rudolf Nureyev, the ballet star who defected from the Soviet Union 26 years ago, returned home for the first time today under an unusual two-day visa that will allow him to see his ill mother.


Snowfall Cancels Suffolk Racing
LEAD: The Sunday racing card at Suffolk Downs was canceled because of the snowfall last week, but a regular schedule will resume on Monday, officials said.


The Dream House
LEAD: To the Editor:


Comparing Costs to 24 Destinations
LEAD: PACKAGE tours are a good way to cut costs and save time arranging a vacation in the sun.
In addition to air fare and hotel accommodations, most include Federal departure tax and airport transfers.
Some, known as all-inclusive packages, include meals, drinks, recreational activities, taxes and tips.


Music: Kent Nagano Makes Philharmonic Debut
LEAD: FRESH from leading a Steve Reich program for the Next Wave Festival in Brooklyn, the 36-year-old Kent Nagano is making his New York Philharmonic debut at the orchestra's current Avery Fisher Hall subscription concerts - the only conductor to appear for the first time with the Philharmonic this season.


Originality Isn't Everything
LEAD: AT THE METROPOLITAN Museum of Art's Hudson River School exhibition, there's a wonderful bit of diplomacy-cum-criticism among the annotations on the walls.
A painter named Jasper Cropsey, one placard says, ''tended to model his work on that of his colleagues, using their compositions and techniques as catalysts for change in his own style.


MYTH AND THE TITANIC
LEAD: William F. Buckley Jr. was reported to have said that his descent to the Titanic as a guest of the French expedition would be done to ''give himself something new and different to write about'' (''Down to the Great Ship,'' Oct 18).
So be it!
But his article addresses the unique philosophical problems attending this discovery/salvage affair only perfunctorily.


POSTINGS: West St. Gamble; Back Offices
LEAD: For a bigwig in the major leagues of sports, an empty warehouse might seem like a bush way to buy into the Manhattan real estate game.
But John McMullen figures he can take the 60-year-old building on the northeast corner of Hubert and West Streets, whip it into shape by next November and charge about $25 a square foot to downtown companies that need back-office space.


GIANTS CATCHING UP ON PLAYING CATCH
LEAD: A half-season after the Super Bowl, the Giants will finally begin to take the measure of the slick wide receivers they drafted this year.


College in Ohio Covets 'Neglected Park' in Florida
LEAD: Old-timers still tell tales about Hugh Taylor Birch, who at the turn of the century collected three miles of of isolated beachfront property when land was cheap and settlers were few and far between.


KEEPING COSTS DOWN ON BUSINESS TRAVEL
LEAD: THE marketing director of one division of a major food company in White Plains logs 24,000 miles a year visiting company production facilities.
An oil broker in Purchase, operating in international markets, estimates he travels 66,000 miles a year in airplanes.


Eve Gordon, Actress, Wed to Todd Waring
LEAD: The Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in Manhattan was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Eve Gordon, a daughter of Dr.
Mary McDougall Gordon of Saratoga, Calif., and Richard Bennett Gordon of Arlington, Va., to Todd Waring, a son of Douglas Waring of Ballston Spa, N.Y., and the late Gretchen Schoonmaker Waring.


WHAT'S DOING IN BANGKOK
LEAD: When the day is clear or the moon is bright, the traveler descending on Bangkok from the air can see right through one of Thailand's disguises.


MOB TIE SUSPECTED IN SLAYING OF BROOKLYN MAN
LEAD: A Brooklyn man was shot and killed in his family's restaurant late Friday in an incident that the police said might have been mob-related.


Dole Enters, Targeting Bush
LEAD: SENATOR BOB DOLE, Republican of Kansas, last week became the last of the people who have said they are running for President to make his race official.
Mr.
Dole's aim is to wrest the Republican nomination from Vice President Bush, and his message was carefully chosen to highlight the frontrunner's vulnerabilities as a man of privilege and as a second-in-command.


Choreographic Riches Are Reborn
LEAD: THIS HAS BEEN AN AUTUMN OF extraordinary revivals.
The Joffrey Ballet has offered ''Le Sacre du Printemps,'' a conjectural reconstruction by Millicent Hodson and Kenneth Archer of the epoch-making production of 1913, choreographed by Vaslav Nijinsky and designed by Nicholas Roerich.
Martha Graham's ''Celebration'' received its first New York performances in 50 years during the Graham company's recent season.


POSTINGS: Heights Forum; Streetwise
LEAD: Perhaps more than any other retail stretch in New York City, Montague Street has come to typify the battle between old merchants and new money.
Such celebrated cases as the Community Book Store - whose owner put a $53.88 price on Mayor Koch's book ''Mayor'' three years ago to protest a 300 percent rent increase -have directed the spotlight on this narrow street in Brooklyn


YALE'S EASY VICTORY SETS UP SHOWDOWN
LEAD: Yale's quarterback and captain, Kelly Ryan, had his most productive game of the season today as the Elis easily defeated Princeton, 34-19.
This victory, Yale's sixth in a row, set up a grand finale for the Ivy League championship: Harvard against Yale at the Yale Bowl on Saturday.


Sandinistas Launch an Offensive on Capitol Hill
LEAD: FOR more than a hundred years, the United States has done virtually what it pleased in Central America.
And for six years the conflict between the Reagan Administration and the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua has lurched and sputtered inconclusively.
But last week, Reagan policy makers watched events accelerate sharply and sought to keep them from getting out of their control.


Salvador Frees Two Guerrillas
LEAD: Two leftist guerrillas linked to the 1983 slaying of a United States military adviser have been ordered released under an amnesty program that is part of the Central American peace plan.


Pronouncing on Moscow
LEAD: It's tempting to see the Boris Yeltsin story as the end of Soviet ''new thinking'' and a slide back to the days of Stalin's purges.
But caution is in order.
It's fine to applaud loosening of controls and to condemn the old Soviet ways.
It makes little sense, however, to draw profound conclusions about the fate of glasnost, or openness, and perestroika, or reform, on the basis of daily or even monthly events.


FOOLING AROUND AND OTHER FAMILY HABITS
LEAD:  TIME WITH CHILDREN  By Elizabeth Tallent. 158 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.


AUTO CRACKDOWN
LEAD: The Superintendent of the State Police, Col.
Clinton L. Pagano, has issued a special bulletin to troopers advising them that the state's experimental ''no-flunk'' motor-vehicle inspection program in northern counties does not mean they should be lax in enforcing safety regulations.


F. R. Frank Wed To Ms. Donovan
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church of St.
Gregory the Great in Harrison, N.Y., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Maryclaire Donovan, a daughter of Justice and Mrs.
W.
Denis Donovan of Harrison, and Frederick R. Frank, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Willy K. Frank of Hammondsport, N.Y.
The Rev.
Leonard d


The Politics Of the Deficit Outlasts Call For Action
LEAD: TO hear them talk, one would think that Congress and the White House are worried about the crash of the stock market, the fall of the dollar, and the United States budget and trade deficits.


Haig Asserts Cuomo Will Run
LEAD: The movement to draft Governor Cuomo of New York for President got a push today from an unlikely source: former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., a Republican candidate for President.


A THEORY OF EVERYTHING
LEAD: Ever since reading Edwin Abbott's Victorian science-fiction classic ''Flatland'' during my college days, I've held that modern man's belief in science and his faith in religion were not contradictory mindsets.
I'm even more convinced after reading K. C. Cole's article ''A Theory of Everything'' (Oct.


Vietnam
LEAD: To the Editor: Having left Vietnam in 1975, my heart is still poignant with memories from Dalat, the city briefly mentioned in ''Vietnam for Visitors'' (Travel, Sept. 13).


Alexandra Rollins Weds Gordon Upton
LEAD: Alexandra West Rollins, a consultant to the State Department on public administration and the arts, was married at Grace Episcopal Church in New York yesterday to Gordon Allen Upton, a financial-services consultant.
The Rev.
Harold E. Barrett performed the ceremony.


'A BUSINESSOF SECONDS'
LEAD: LIKE their counterparts in instant publishing, executives who produce instant video cassettes tend to describe themselves as high-stakes gamblers.


THE LIFE AND SLOW DEATH OF A CITY CHURCH
LEAD: NEWARK'S Central Ward is a collection of fragments: institutions that have stayed put and grown while most fled, shiny new suburban-style housing built for homeowners, the darker remains of the city of the poor and much cleared land.


Jill Nisbet Gilbert, A Student, Is Wed To James Callahan
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of Our Saviour in New York, Jill Nisbet Gilbert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy H. Gilbert of Lake Forest, Ill., was married yesterday to James Callahan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Callahan of Norwalk, Conn.
The Rev.
Victor J. Sivore performed the ceremony.


A Victorian Monument To Hawaiian Culture
LEAD: IF you are approaching the Bishop Museum by car, soon after you pass Punchbowl Crater in downtown Honolulu you will begin to see tropical vegetation bordering the crowded lanes of traffic -flame trees, mangoes, coco palm.
Just before you reach a major intersection, where the H-1 freeway meets a cross-island trunk route, you get your first glimpse.


A Geneticist in Russia
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Headliners; Surprise Ending
LEAD: Larry Heinemann was not looking for much more than a free meal, some conversation and perhaps a cocktail or two.
Instead, Mr.
Heinemann, a Chicagoan, emerged from the Grand Ballroom of the Pierre Hotel last week as the surprise winner of the National Book Award for fiction.


Judge Delays Transfer of Inmates to a Barge
LEAD: An appellate judge has temporarily barred the New York City Department of Correction from transferring inmates to a former troop barge, but the agency will continue to seek to use the barge as a jail, an agency spokeswoman said yesterday.


Harvard Chagrined by Agreement With Donors
LEAD: Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government was embarrassed this week when the university's undergraduate student newspaper printed internal documents revealing that the graduate school had tentatively agreed to offer special status to a couple in exchange for a $500,000 donation.


On the Endangered List: The 'Instant Book'
LEAD: THE stock market took a tremendous tumble on Oct. 19, but in the publishing industry, at least, no one was prepared to jump.


CONSUMER AGENCY NEEDS RESTRUCTURING
LEAD: LAST April, 7-year-old Michele Snow of Riverside, Calif., was struck in the head by a heavy metal object.
She died three days later.


AT INDIANA, A WEEK IN KNIGHT'S CLASSROOM
LEAD: Bob Knight called Joan Mellen last January, tracking her down at Temple University after reading her review for The St.
Petersburg Times of John Feinstein's book, ''A Season on the Brink.'' No formalities, no introductory pleasantries: he just wanted to let her know that he thought she understood what he was about, the motives behind how he coached, how hard it was to make people learn.


Best Brand Of Baseball
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Brooklyn Refuse Plan Raises Broad Concerns
LEAD: Almost a decade ago, New York City officials proposed a series of waste-to-energy incinerators.
The first was to be built in the Brooklyn Navy Yard by 1984.
Today, construction has yet to begin, delayed by strident community opposition, a lawsuit and changing environmental regulations.


Massachusetts Towns Duel for Nonexistent Honor
LEAD: After two centuries two small Massachusetts towns are still vying for the title ''birthplace of the American Navy.''


PLAN FOR A FABULOUS WEEKEND
LEAD: FOR ALL OF MY FRIENDS WHO HAVE been living out of town for too long, who have been promising each other a splurge on the ultimate, go-for-broke weekend in ''the City'' and asking me for suggestions: here is my Christmas present to you all. (And maybe a couple of ideas for the friends who are here every day.) It's an itemized itinerary for a lively four-day weekend, accompanied by a list of addresses, prices, hours, phone numbers for reservations and information - everything you'll need.


TALKING: Mortgages; Changes That Affect A Loan
LEAD: MANY homeowners who have taken out mortgages think their only obligations to the lender are to make timely payments on the loan and to pay taxes and insurance premiums.
Not so.


Portfolio Insurance Poses the Danger
LEAD: IN a recent interview, Paul A. Volcker, the former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, suggested that program trading was a major cause of the Oct. 19 crash in stock prices. ''It's very hard not to rail at the index futures markets - I don't think these techniques add much to the sum of human endeavor,'' he said.


Extending the Reach of Schools - Down to Infants, Up to Parents
LEAD: THOMAS Sobol was inaugurated last month as New York State's 11th Commissioner of Education, the chief executive officer of the Board of Regents.
In this post, Mr.
Sobol, a 55-year-old former superintendent of schools in Scarsdale, bears the responsibility for guiding probably the most diverse network of local school systems in the country at a time when the quality of public education has become a major political issue.


Boy's Killing Unnerves New Hampshire Town
LEAD: This small New England town struggled with despair after learning that a 9-year-old boy had been shot to death and one of his friends was accused of murder.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Aberdeen  $170,000  125 Van Brackle Road  3-bedroom, 2 bath, 12-year-old ranch; family room, 2 patios; taxes $2,395.
Livingston  $575,000  5 Bushkill Drive  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; deck, C/A, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $7,013.


Yugoslavia
LEAD: To the Editor: Having spent a week in Yugoslavia this summer, I am surprised by Nick Yapp's ''Lost Among the Carnivores in Yugoslavia, a Vegetarian's Beef'' (Travel, Sept. 20).


GUSSYING UP THE PLAIN BLACK BOX
LEAD: TODAY, the person buying a radar detector often drives a Mercedes or BMW; a decade ago detectors were purchased by truckers and would-be auto racers.
It took a while, but detector makers gradually tuned in the upscale market, and business hasn't been the same since.


ECONOMIC CRISIS: WE NEED IDEAS
LEAD: FOLLOWING are excerpts from a panel discussion on ''New Economic Forces,'' held during the Columbus Day weekend by the Sag Harbor Initiative.
The quotations were compiled by Blake Hanson.


JUDGE KENNEDY: TILTING RIGHT BUT NOT FAR
LEAD: Judge Anthony M. Kennedy could slightly shift the balance of the Supreme Court on criminal law and perhaps some civil rights issues, a review of several of his decisions suggests.


Honor In Trying
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Miss Pagnani Has Wedding
LEAD: At St.
Michael the Archangel Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich, Conn., Allyson Anne Pagnani, a daughter of Virginia Marie Riley of Greenwich and Frederick J. Pagnani of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Sloan Martin, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony W. Martin of New Canaan, Conn.
Msgr.


Stephanie Wiley to Wed
LEAD: Stephanie Anne Wiley and Ronald David Sernau, who graduated last year from the Cornell Law School and are associates at New York law firms, plan to be married in March.
Mr. and Mrs.
John Wiley of Columbus, Ohio, have announced their daughter's engagement to the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Sernau of White Plains.


Planned Parenthood Warns of Abortion Surge
LEAD: A study by Planned Parenthood projects a rapid increase in live births, maternal deaths and self-induced abortions worldwide if the Reagan Administration proceeds with a planned cutoff of funds for the group's international division.


Ib Andersen and the Seasons of a Dancer
LEAD: DESPITE GEORGE BALANCHINE'S ''NO-STAR'' policy at the New York City Ballet, the company produced many stars during his 35 years as benevolent dictator.
The last male artist on whom Balanchine created major roles is Ib Andersen, who, almost five years after Balanchine's death, has come into his prime - with little fanfare.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  THE LOST LANGUAGE OF CRANES, by David Leavitt. (Bantam, $8.95.) Philip's parents don't know that their son is a homosexual, but he doesn't know that his father is also gay.
Last year, our reviewer, Phillip Lopate, found the author's preoccupation with sexual orientation ''obsessively repetitious'' but said that the novel ''lingers in the mind, greater than the sum of its problematic parts.


Pace of Change Upsets Traditions for Malays
LEAD: When Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad seeks to justify an unprecedented recent wave of arrests without trial, the closing of newspapers and the banning of public gatherings, he warns of the danger of rising animosity between the Malay people who gave this country its name and the Chinese who have been living among them for generations.


Bob Dole's Problem
LEAD: Senator Robert Dole is a formidable candidate for President: sensible, knowing in the ways of Washington, a conservative who has no time for the fantasies of Reaganomics.
He has shed the meanness of the past, showing us instead a man with compassion for the dependent and rejected in society.


STATION MAKES A QUIET DEBUT
LEAD: LAUREL VLOCK knew Bridgeport needed its own commercial television station after a 1978 survey showed that a majority of the city's elementary schoolchildren thought the mayor of Bridgeport was Edward Koch.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a large bluestone patio about 10 years old, and some of the cement between the flags is coming out of the joints.
Can you tell us how to handle this problem?


2 VETERAN JETS FIND THEY CAN READJUST
LEAD: Bobby Humphery and JoJo Townsell were chosen by the Jets in the 1983 National Football League draft.
Full of vim, vigor and ambition, they figured, as most rookies do, that their talents were exactly what the Jets had ordered.


EXPERTS TO CONVENE ON THE NIXON YEARS
LEAD: HOFSTRA UNIVERSITY, adding to its reputation as the leading academic conference center on Long Island, will assemble 150 scholars, politicians, historians and journalists this week for what is believed to be the first major re-examination of the Presidency of Richard M. Nixon.


ARMY SEEN AS KEY FOR BANGLADESH
LEAD: Immediately before this week's anti-Government riots, President H. M. Ershad dropped in on some of his constituents.
Among the stops was the Ninth Division headquarters of the Bangladesh Army, where he announced financing for a new mosque.


Backfield Bickering
LEAD: The problem with having two top running backs on the same football team is that the game is played with only one football.
That is the conundrum that has been befuddling Coach Tom Landry of the Dallas Cowboys as he has tried to figure out how to get the most out of his two former Heisman Trophy winners, Tony Dorsett, the 33-year-old star who has gained more than 1,000 yards in 8 of his 10 seasons, and Herschel


IOWA RALLY UPSETS OHIO STATE
LEAD: Chuck Hartlieb hit Marv Cook with a 28-yard touchdown pass with six seconds remaining to give Iowa a 29-27 victory over Ohio State in a Big Ten Conference game today.


NURSE WHO DIED IN VIETNAM REMEMBERED
LEAD: MATCHING Fieldcrest towels, sweaters and a wedding gown filled Capt.
Eleanor Alexander's hope chest.
The 27-year-old Army nurse from River Vale had put off marriage until she returned from her six-month stint in Vietnam.


HOFSTRA REACHES PLAYOFFS
LEAD: Mike Codella scored touchdowns on runs of 1-yard each and carried 28 times for 191 yards to set a Hofstra single-season rushing record at 1,187 yards as the Flying Dutchmen defeated the Merchant Marine Academy, 35-14, yesterday at Hofstra Stadium, Hempstead, L.I., to clinch a berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III Eastern Regional playoffs.


Eileen M. Kenny Weds M. E. Helmer in Jersey
LEAD: Eileen Mary Kenny, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene F. Kenny of Basking Ridge, N.J., was married there yesterday to Michael Edward Helmer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William F. Helmer of Morrisville, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Davis, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony.


Chirac in Lisbon for Talks
LEAD: Prime Minister Jacques Chirac of France arrived in Lisbon today for a day of talks with Portuguese leaders on the European Community and international issues, a Portuguese Government spokesman said.


TIFFANY MUSEUM: BENEFIT OR REVENGE
LEAD: WHILE residents in other Connecticut communities lock horns over such social problems as where to construct prisons, put garbage dumps and build low-income housing, here in the tiny western town of Sherman, they argue about Tiffany lamps.


A June Wedding For Janet Lunine
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore H. Lunine of Philadelphia of the engagement of their daughter Janet Lunine to Jonathan Barzilay, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Barzilay of New York.
A June wedding is planned.


A la Carte
LEAD: WHERE are the best onion rings on Long Island?


LET DEMOCRATS BE DEMOCRATS
LEAD:  THE LIFE OF THE PARTY  Democratic Prospects in 1988 and Beyond.
By Robert Kuttner. 265 pp.
New York: Elisabeth Sifton Books/Viking. $18.95.


The Call's Not Close
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


White Supremacist on Radio
LEAD: A radio personality who pays for his own air time has publicly acknowledged white supremacist beliefs and renamed his weekly radio talk show ''Aryan Nations Hour.''


Ellen O'Neill Beach, Teacher, Weds George Mares
LEAD: Ellen O'Neill Beach, a daughter of Victoria Gorcoff Beach of Schenectady, N.Y., and John Arthur Beach of Albany and Syracuse, was married yesterday to George Mares.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marin Mares of Bucharest, Rumania.


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER WROTE HERE
LEAD: I enjoyed reading Roberta Hershenson's article on Scarsdale's historic Wayside Cottage and the Varian family who occupied it from 1763 to 1853.  [ ''In Scarsdale, a Dig Reveals the Past,'' Oct. 25 ]  Your reporter did not mention the following interesting tidbits.
The Wayside Cottage was at one time a Drover's Inn during the Revolutionary period.


Army's Leader in Niger Is Appointed President
LEAD: The army Chief of Staff was appointed as Niger's head of state today in a unanimous vote of the ruling Supreme Military Council, an official statement on state radio said.


Auburn Moves Closer to Title, 27-11; Clemson Repeats
LEAD: Jeff Burger passed for 217 yards and 2 touchdowns today as Auburn thrwarted Georgia, 27-11.


Iraqis Say Warplanes Hit Iranian Oil Targets
LEAD: Iraqi aircraft attacked and set ablaze three oil sites in northwestern Iran today, Iraq's high command said.


Soviet May Address Congress
LEAD: Robert C. Byrd, the Senate majority leader, has formally invited Mikhail S. Gorbachev to address a joint session of Congress while the Soviet leader is in Washington next month for the planned summit meeting with President Reagan, a spokesman for Mr.
Byrd said today.


The Mafia and the Bigots
LEAD: Yes, there is a Mafia, an organized crime network largely made up of Italian-American mobsters.
But Americans haven't yet learned to stop stigmatizing all Italian-Americans because of it.
The positive development is that at last - after years of subterranean murmurings - the subject, and the prejudice, can be openly confronted.


Elisa Gribin to Wed Michael Litchman
LEAD: The engagement of Elisa Margaret Gribin and Michael Jay Litchman has been announced by the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel D. Gribin of Kings Point, L.I.
Mr.
Litchman is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry M. Litchman of Providence, R.I.
A summer wedding is planned.


'WHAT DID YOU EAT?'
LEAD:  LIVING HUNGRY IN AMERICA  By J. Larry Brown and H. F. Pizer.
Illustrated. 212 pp.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $18.95.


Look to Liquidity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I'm well, I'm happy, I'm excited to be here.''
- Rudolf Nureyev, in Moscow.  [ 4:1. ]


MORE THAN A CATHEDRAL: ST. JOHN THE DIVINE By ARI L. GOLDMAN; Ari L. Goldman writes on religion for The Times.
LEAD: EIGHTEEN YEARS AGO, THE RIGHT Rev.
Paul Moore Jr., the newly elected Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of New York, looked through a window of his apartment on the desolate grounds of the Cathedral Church of St.
John the Divine in upper Manhattan and lamented: ''What am I going to do with this place?


Syracuse Rolls On To 10-0
LEAD: Trailing Boston College by 17-0 early in the second quarter today, the undefeated Syracuse football team gave its fans, its coaches and the Sugar Bowl officials something to worry about.
But not for long.


New Yorker Seeks Symbol of Season
LEAD: Carl Miller, a tall, white-haired man in his mid-50's, often spends weekends driving through the countrysides of New York, Connecticut or New Jersey.
Unlike other weekend drivers, Mr.
Miller is not on a pleasure trip.
He is tree hunting.


GIANTS OF THE ROD AND REEL
LEAD: Paul Schullery's history of American fly fishing, like the sport itself, is not for everyone.
Primarily, it's for those who think that ''fly fishing is the best thing there is.'' It might also interest nonangling history buffs, who will be amazed to discover that fly fishing has given rise to as many competing schools of thought as the Weimar Republic.


Guest Observer; Paint It Black
LEAD: THESE BLACK TIMES are getting blacker.


IMMUNIZATION IS THE THEME OF A NEW SERIES
LEAD: ON Friday the United Nations Postal Administration will issue a six-stamp set with the theme ''Immunize Every Child.'' The release publicizes efforts of the World Health Organization (W.H.O) and the United Nations Children's Fund (Unicef) to immunize children by 1990 against the six major communicable diseases: diptheria, measles, poliomyelitis, tetanus, tuberculosis and whooping cough.


A NETWORK FOR REVOLT
LEAD:  APARTHEID'S REBELS  Inside South Africa's Hidden War.
By Stephen M. Davis. 238 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Cloth, $27.50.
Paper, $8.95.


CASUAL AMBIANCE IN NEW CANAAN
LEAD: AT the crossroads between the fast-food getaway and a formal dining experience is the neighborhood family-style restaurant, the place for an informal meal away from home, hearth and kitchen stove.
Every town needs at least one, a place where children are welcome and you can drop by for a hamburger or a steak and feel comfortable wearing jeans.


If It Never Rains Here, What's That?
LEAD: EVERY November, when the calendar insists it's fall but it begins to feel like winter in Washington, D.C., my husband and I start to think about our annual week or two of guaranteed sunshine on the Pacific coast of Mexico.


SANTA CLAUS TO ARRIVE ON A CARROUSEL
LEAD: SANTA CLAUS has come to other towns in shiny convertibles, in helicopters that land on country-club lawns and at railroad stations, but Woodbridge Center's St.
Nick will arrive this year on a new carrousel that will become a permanent attraction.


A RUNNER STUMBLES INTO FITNESS
LEAD: A STUDY disclosed that most women dislike their bodies.
It reported, however, that men tend to see themselves as just about perfect.
This startled me at first.
Then I laughed.
Then I thought about it.


BAKED VEGETABLES OF AUTUMN CELEBRATE THE HARVEST SEASON
LEAD: TURKEY may be the star of the Thanksgiving table, but vegetables play an effectual supporting role.
And since this holiday is the celebration of the harvest, I like to serve a selection.
I bake whole acorn squashes in the oven, not cutting them open until after they are cooked.
Then I slice them in half, scoop out the seeds and add a little butter, salt and pepper.


A Lean Year for Nuts Spells Ruin by Bruin
LEAD: A shortage of beechnuts and acorns, food of choice of New Hampshire's black bears, is driving the bruins to ruin apple orchards and cornfields in territory more populated than their usual mountain terrain.


HARVARD ROUTS PENN AND HEADS TO TITLE MATCH
LEAD: Harvard gave Yale cause for concern about next week's Ivy League showdown when the Crimson trounced the defending champion, Pennsylvania, 31-14, today at Harvard Stadium.


PRESERVATION OF TESTS IN DRUNKEN DRIVING RULED UNNECESSARY
LEAD: Police officers are not required to preserve breath samples for drunken driving suspects who may want to challenge the validity of Breathalyzer tests later, New York's highest court has ruled.


UNSPOILED FESTIVAL IN OYSTER BAY
LEAD: Contrary to the article on Long Island street festivals  [ ''Success Spoils Annual Street Fairs, Oct. 25 ] , the annual Oyster Festival is neither spoiled nor unmanageable.


BUS DRIVERS TAKING RIDER-RELATIONS CLASSES
LEAD: AFTER a long day in heavy traffic, it is easy for a bus driver's nerves to frazzle, and learning to deal with stress and not take it out on overbearing passengers takes training, say NJ Transit officials.


WINNING FRANCO-RUSSIAN ENTENTE
LEAD: WOODMERE can now boast one of the best new restaurants to open on Long Island in recent years.
The food at La Petite Maison Russe harks back to the old Franco-Russian alliance, when Russian Czars imported French chefs.
This small storefront restaurant has reversed those roles.
The chefs are Russian.


President Predicts Pact on Budget; Delay of Benefit Rises Considered
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he expected an agreement on a budget compromise next week as Congressional and White House negotiators considered a three-month delay in Federal pay increases, cost-of-living increases for Social Security and other Federal benefit programs.


Bank Closings
LEAD: To the Editor:


House Panel Suggests a Ban On Georges Bank Oil Drilling
LEAD: The Interior Department should indefinitely suspend plans to lease tracts in the Georges Bank off the New England coast for oil and gas drilling, a House subcommittee recommended Monday.


Beauty; SHADES OF EVENING
LEAD: THE SMOOTH SWOOP


Affordability: How's New York Doin'?
LEAD: AS part of his commitment to help developers produce more affordable housing, Mayor Koch set up the Office of Housing Coordination 18 months ago to expedite projects through New York's complicated regulatory system.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Covert Action Curb  The Congressional Iran-contra committees' report will recommend new rules for reporting covert operations, Congressional officials say.
Page 20.
Role for Afghan King  After 14 years of exile, the Afghan King is being mentioned as a possible key figure in a pact to end the Soviet presence in his country.


Eurotunnel's Day of Reckoning
LEAD: WANTED: Investors.
Must be willing to pony up $1.4 billion for a company that will collect no money for at least six years but will, all the while, stuff billions into a hole in the ground.


Jazz: Braff on Trumpet
LEAD: RUBY BRAFF objects to being called a jazz musician.
He is, he says, an entertainer with a horn.
He once made an album called ''Adoration of the Melody,'' and that is the way he approaches his music.


The Trouble With 'Freedom'
LEAD: Before he went to South Africa in 1983 to see for himself what life under apartheid was like, Sir Richard Attenborough was a self-described ''well-intentioned liberal,'' the sort who protests by not buying South African oranges.
His heart was in the right place.


Upstairs/Downstairs
LEAD: ON THE STREETS OF NEW York, it pays to look up and look down, and not always for the reasons you might think.
Some of the city's most colorful restaurants, shops, clubs and galleries are tucked away in basements or perched in second floors, where lower rents enable entrepreneurs to be more than usually inventive about whatever it is they purvey.


Sale of a Lifetime
LEAD: 'I never thought I'd live to see a painting sell for such a price.
I wonder if there is any painting in the world that would sell for more?'


Dec. 19 Wedding For Miss Danzig
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard S. Danzig of Little Silver, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Anne Phoebe Danzig, to Reed Graham Schneider, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin H. Schneider of New York and Sharon, Conn.
The couple plan to marry Dec. 19.


Correction
LEAD: A report last Sunday on the engagement of Ruth Hefren Kennedy and Robert Sloan Bowers incorrectly identified the future bride's parents.


Is Mbeki's Release a Prelude to Mandela's Return?
LEAD: THE release earlier this month of Govan A. Mbeki, the black leader imprisoned for 24 years, has already changed the chemistry of South African politics and opened a new debate about the prospect of black unity against the Pretoria Government's divide-and-conquer tactics.


Seven Killed in Bombing at Hospital in Beirut
LEAD: Lebanese police officials inspecting site of bombing yesterday at the American University Hospital in West Beirut.
The bomb, which was hidden in a box of chocolates, killed 7 people and wounded 31.
Page 3. (Reuters)


FLYING FISH FROM BARBADOS
LEAD: TO an American raised to revere the bald eagle, the notion of eating a national symbol might sound less than appetizing.
But in Barbados, the self-proclaimed land of the flying fish, the emblem that adorns all the tourist brochures turns up at lunch, dinner and even breakfast, steamed, sauteed, deep-fried and every which way but blackened.


SITTING OUT THE DANCE OF LIFE
LEAD:  THE YEAR OF SILENCE  By Madison Smartt Bell. 194 pp.
New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $15.95.


WITH STRINGS, HANDS AND TUBES, PUPPETRY LIVES IN WATERFORD
LEAD: IN the basement of a barn in Waterford, two students sculptured eyes on clay heads.
Outside, four people lifted and waved six-foot-long forms of copper tubing.


HONDURAS SAID TO RE-EVALUATE HELP FOR CONTRAS
LEAD: The airstrips used to supply Nicaraguan guerrillas are still operating in Honduras, but continued Government support for the rebels is no longer certain, according to Honduran political analysts and several diplomats here.


Picking Out Handcrafts in the Markets of Acapulco
LEAD: ON those rare powder-gray days, or if the cornflower sky becomes too monotonous, many Acapulco vacationers turn away from pools and chaises to their second favorite pastime: shopping.
An impressive part of the population of this tropical resort, estimated at nearly one million, is involved in the production, promotion or sale of handcrafts.


A THEORY OF EVERYTHING
LEAD: K. C. Cole's informative essay on the latest developments in mathematical physics left out only an explanation of why physicists believe that the new and remarkable theory of strings is, as they call it, the theory of everything.
The history of science demonstrates that all progressive research programs not only explain the anomalies left unaccounted for by existing theories, but also reinterpret the domain of observable facts in the application of new conceptual models.


Music: 'Lost in the Stars,' at City College
LEAD: A GENERATION of consciousness-raising makes Kurt Weill's ''Lost in the Stars'' seem ponderous today.
Racial hostility's broad themes are too powerful and pervasive to need simple restatement anymore, making this musical version of ''Cry the Beloved Country'' an all too black-and-white rendering of recent social history.


POSTINGS: Battery Park City; 180 Units in 9 Stories
LEAD: Most anywhere in Manhattan, a 180-unit condominium project would likely climb 30 or 40 stories high.
But not in Battery Park City.
A few days ago, construction crews began excavating a one-acre foundation for a building that will rise only nine stories - in accordance with design guidelines established by the Battery Park City


CANDY THE WAY IT USED TO BE
LEAD: CHRISTMAS, LIKE MANY LESSER OCCASIONS at our house and sometimes no occasion, was marked with chocolate-dipped coffee beans and cats' tongues from Altman &amp; Kuhne, a Fifth Avenue candy shop.
Dolls came from grandmothers and books from my mother, but it was my father who brought home those chocolates in European-looking packages: the coffee beans for the adults - in theory at least - and the cats' tongues, finger-length spatulas of bittersweet, for me and my sister.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
8.41
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.70
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.84
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
9.67
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bedford Hills, N.Y.  $275,000  31 Dwight Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 28-year-old frame ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, cul de sac, walk to station; taxes $2,907.
Peekskill, N.Y.  $236,000  8 Avenue A, Quarry Acres  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 22-year-old raised ranch; eat-in kitchen, walk to station, 2-car garage; taxes $3,411.


SCHOOL SPORTS: New Jersey; Linden Squeaks By
LEAD: Linden's star running back, Kelvin Johnson, scored on a 27-yard run with three minutes left in the game to lift his team to a 19-13 victory over Westfield yesterday at Linden.
It was the eighth success for unbeaten Linden, a strong contender for the North Jersey Section 2, Group IV championship in the playoffs.


Preserving Duke Forest
LEAD: PLANNING steps taken by governmental jurisdictions around Duke University are expected to complicate the university's efforts to bring residential and commercial development to parts of Duke Forest.


MICHIGAN STATE WINS
LEAD: The flowers were bought, sold and fastened to lapels long before the Michigan State Spartans took the field for their historic afternoon.
Lorenzo White's record-setting runs for the roses merely made them appropriate.


RECITALS COMPETE FOR ATTENTION
LEAD: STARTING off today's generous offering of concert opportunities is Philharmonia Virtuosi's ''Bach's Lunch'' series, with a 2 P.M. recital at Concordia College in Bronxville (or come at 12:30 and have an informal luncheon beforehand).
Two glowing Quintets make up the program: Paul Peabody, the concertmaster, and four more of the group's principal string players line up for Schubert's C Major and the guest pianist, Stephanie Brown, joins in for the Brahms F Minor (693-5595).


Italy's Government Falls as Small Party Quits
LEAD: The 15-week-old Government of Prime Minister Giovanni Goria resigned today after the small Liberal Party withdrew from the governing coalition in a dispute over measures to reduce the huge budget deficit.


A Battle Report Direct From the Lower Depths
LEAD: ALTHOUGH LAURIE POVOD HAS not undergone amniocentesis, she and her husband, the young playwright Reinaldo Povod, already know the child she is carrying is a boy.
They know this because Rei's ''buelita,'' his grandmother, follows the ways of santaria, a folk practice that combines yoruba - a mixture of African tribal religions - and Christianity, to which many


An Adoption Proposal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Andrea J. Curran Planning to Wed
LEAD: Prof. and Mrs.
Ward S. Curran of West Hartford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Andrea Jannett Curran to Brian Cullinan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur D. Cullinan of North Conway, N.H.


WHO HAS THE TALENT AND DRIVE?
LEAD: The talent in college basketball has become fairly evenly distributed in recent years, primarily among two dozen or so of the nation's strongest programs.


Elaine La Roche Engaged to Marry Dr. P. R. Donovan
LEAD: The engagement of Marie-Elaine La Roche, a managing director of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York, to Dr.
Peter Richard Donovan, an exploration geologist with the United Nations Development Program in New York, has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Andre La Roche of Cresskill, N.J., parents of the bride-to-be.


Helms Cleared on Chile Leak
LEAD: Senator Jesse Helms, decrying what he called ''the anatomy of a smear,'' said Friday that the Justice Department had cleared him of accusations that he or a member of his staff leaked classified information to officials of Chile's authoritarian Government.


Cheryl Solomon Is Wed
LEAD: Cheryl S. Solomon, an associate in the Brooklyn law firm of Headley &amp; Zeitlin, and David R. Rappaport, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, were married last evening at Temple Gates of Zion in Valley Stream, L.I.
Rabbi Harold Halpern performed the ceremony.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.


Bush Beats Back Robertson Challenge in Florida
LEAD: Vice President Bush won a key ''straw poll'' today, turning back a strong challenge from Pat Robertson, the former television preacher who twice embarrassed Mr.
Bush in highly visible party votes in the last year.


Devils Lose First At Home
LEAD: The Devils allowed five straight power-play goals to the Detroit Red Wings this afternoon and suffered their first loss of the season at home, 6-4.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  AN URCHIN IN THE STORM: Essays About Books and Ideas.
By Stephen Jay Gould. (Norton, $18.95.) This collection of reviews is a perfect volume for fans of Stephen Jay Gould.
For everyone else serious about writing or thinking, ''An Urchin in the Storm'' is nearly a perfect study in method.
Mr.
Gould, a paleontologist with a bent for the subtleties in arguments about nature and nurture and the intricacies of evolutionary theory, teaches at Harvard.


Helms Expresses an Interest In Running for Vice President
LEAD: Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, one of the Senate's most outspoken conservatives, said Friday he might be interested in the Republican vice presidential nomination if the job could be tailored to his liking.


HAWKS, DOVES AND OWLS
LEAD:  THE LONG PEACE  Inquiries Into the History of the Cold War.
By John Lewis Gaddis. 332 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $24.95.


Managua Cardinal Sees Talks Within 3 Weeks
LEAD: Miguel Cardinal Obando y Bravo, expressing guarded confidence in the success of peace efforts in Nicaragua, said here today that he expected formal cease-fire negotiations between the Managua Government and the contra rebels to begin before Dec. 5.


Explosions Rock Texas Chemical Plant, Killing 3
LEAD: Two explosions ripped through a chemical plant near here today, touching off massive fires that burned out of control all afternoon and left at least three people dead and more than 30 injured, the authorities said.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  THE GOLD CADILLAC  Mildred D. Taylor.
Illustrated by Michael Hays. 43 pp.
New York: Dial Books. $11.95. (Ages 8 to 12)


Gale D. Kaufman Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Kaufman of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Gale Deborah Kaufman, who is studying for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University, and Steven Charles Helman, a first-year student at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law of Yeshiva University.


IN EUROPE: The Bill's Due Next Century
LEAD: IT is not just in the United States that people worry about who is going to pay for social security.
Throughout the industrialized world, because of the baby boom's huge presence and low fertility rates, the classic demographic pyramid is narrowing at the base and swelling at the top.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development projects that in its 24 member nations the proportion of the population aged 65 and over will rise from 12 percent now to 22 percent in 2040.


Louise Law Is Married To David Wayne Hoyle
LEAD: Kathryn Louise Law, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Teets Law Jr. of Tenafly, N.J., was married there yesterday to David Wayne Hoyle, a son of the late Rev. and Mrs.
Wayne Edmond Hoyle of Excelsior, Minn.
The Rev.
John Croneberger performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Atonement.


IF I WERE A KEY, WHERE WOULD I BE?
LEAD: I'VE added a new activity to my morning routine.
I call it the key hunt.
After years of feeling that daily searching for my keys is an intrusion, I have given in and officially made room for hunting in between bathing and breakfast.
Now I have a full seven minutes of detective work before I begin to panic.


Correction
LEAD: A dispatch from Philadelphia Oct. 25 about the restoration of a former department store misidentified the leader of a campaign to save the building and misstated her age.
The woman, Eleanor Gesensway, is 51 years old.


A New Image for the Virtuoso
LEAD: THEY MIGHT NOT THINK of themselves quite this way, but they constitute a distinctive group - Murray Perahia, Radu Lupu, Richard Goode, Peter Serkin, Krystian Zimerman, Andras Schiff, among them - prominent pianists who are altering the traditional image of the keyboard virtuoso.


Bix by Kirk
LEAD:  YOUNG MAN WITH A HORN  Starring Kirk Douglas (in photo), Lauren Bacall, Doris Day.
Directed by Michael Curtiz.
Warner Home Video. 112 minutes. $19.98.


WHY NOT MORATORIUM ON DUMP CLOSINGS?
LEAD: I have just learned that because of the huge expense of carting Town of Oyster Bay garbage to Ohio, Wisconsin and perhaps farther west as time goes on, our taxes will be increased by 47 percent.
Why do those in charge not consider a moratorium on closing landfills, giving the towns an opportunity to build proper recycling and resource recovery plants?


Joseph H. McMahon, Wesleyan Professor, 57
LEAD: Joseph H. McMahon, Hollis Professor of Romance Languages and Literatures at Wesleyan University, died Thursday at Middlesex Memorial Hospital in Middletown, Conn., where he was hospitalized after a heart attack on Oct. 21.
He was 57 years old and lived in Middletown.


A NEWCOMER FOR AUTO-FOCUSING
LEAD: NO sooner do I finish complaining about the limitations of auto-focusing cameras than one camera maker makes me eat my words.
Specifically, I recently groused that auto-focusing sensors always aim dead center in the middle of the picture.
This forces picture takers either to frame their subjects accordingly, or to use the pesky ''focus hold'' feature (if the camera provides it).


INMATES BEHIND WHEEL
LEAD: Officials at the Sing Sing Correctional Facility, the maximum-security prison in Ossining, are helping inmates make their getaway - by teaching them driving skills.


Families Torn by Crisis Aided by New Program
LEAD: Last April, Luz Ortiz and her daughter were about to become a sad statistic: another New York City family shattered by domestic violence.
Mother and child had been beating and abusing each other, leading finally to the teen-ager's placement outside the home.


Q &amp; A
LEAD:  Dissatisfied With Broker  Question: Earlier this year, we used a mortgage brokerage firm to get a loan.
Our broker told us that it would take about eight weeks to obtain a mortgage.
The agent who started our work became ill and a replacement took over.
He was incompetent and as a result four months later we had no mortgage.


AVOIDING CHRISTMAS
LEAD: THE 25TH OF DECEMBER WAS THE DAY on which I was born, but that's not the only thing I have against it.
Personally, I never believed in Mr.
Claus.
At least I have no recollection whatsoever of any traumatic moment of disillusionment with the myth.
When his name was finally scrubbed from the tedious list of people to whom I ought to be grateful and, worse, to whom I was compelled to write, I think I was relieved to be free of yet another part of that general collusion between children and parents by which all parties strive to keep alive the wilting hope that the young are guileless.


Dr. Susan Mandel Engaged to Wed Dr. B. J. Kashdan
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Dr. and Mrs.
Perry R. Mandel of Glen Cove, L.I., of the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Susan Elizabeth Mandel, to Dr.
Bennett Jay Kashdan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Kashdan of Fort Lee, N.J.
A February wedding is planned.


Dole Said to Plan Top-to-Bottom Shake-Up of His Campaign Staff
LEAD: Amid signs of increasing turmoil within his Presidential campaign, Bob Dole plans to announce a virtual top-to-bottom shake-up of his organization next week.


Mary Voyatzis, a Teacher of Classics, Is Married to Frederick Frelinghuysen
LEAD: Mary Elis Voyatzis, an assistant professor of classics at the University of Arizona, was married yesterday in Tucson, Ariz., to Frederick Frelinghuysen, a management consultant.
The Rev.
James Tavlarides performed the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Church of St.
Demetrios, assisted by the Rev.
Paul W.


SCHOOL SPORTS: Westchester; Byram Hills Tops Ardsley
LEAD: Despite the loss in the second quarter of the team's leading rusher, Byram Hills defeated Ardsley yesterday, 10-0.
The victory was Byram Hills's ninth without a loss and the sixth shutout of a season in which the Bobcats led Section 1 by allowing only 20 points.


LOCKBAUM LIFTS HOLY CROSS TO 10-0
LEAD: Jeff Wiley and Gordie Lockbaum led unbeaten Holy Cross, the No. 1 team in Division I-AA, to a 40-7 rout of William &amp; Mary today.


Stacy S. Jannis Is Wed To George Tamerlani
LEAD: Stacy Simon Jannis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Paul Jannis of Pittsburgh, and George Tamerlani, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Tamerlani of Brooklyn, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Garret D. Dorsey, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Elliot Burk officiated at the First Unitarian Church in Pittsburgh.


ELIZABETH GALASSO FINE ART TAKES A LOOK AT TRAGEDY
LEAD: GERICAULT'S ''Raft of the Medusa'' dominated the Paris Salon of 1819 but as the first work of art to deal with a topical outrage (the abandonment of shipwreck survivors) it nonplussed its viewers as much as it fascinated them.
This huge canvas, the artist's magnum opus, remains an oddity, being considered more than reportage but somehow less than high art.


SCHOOL SPORTS: Long Island; FARMINGDALE TRIUMPHS
LEAD: Farmingdale (7-1) ended the regular season on strong note yesterday with a 24-0 victory against the Massapequa Chiefs (6-2).


Chess Match: Tough Fight Ends in Draw
LEAD: Gary Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov fought sharply on the terrain of a disputed ending before agreeing to a draw in Game 13 of their world championship chess match in Seville, Spain, Friday.


IN SAN JOSE, THIS YEAR'S SLEEPER
LEAD: Bill Berry was an assistant coach at Michigan State when Magic Johnson led the Spartans to the national championship, a 6-9 guard who opened the backcourt to the big man.
Berry eventually became head coach at San Jose State where, five years ago, he had an opportunity to offer a scholarship to his son, Rickey, a 6-5 guard who reminded some people of


BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 15, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
FICTION
1
1
4
KALEIDOSCOPE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
$18.95.) Three sisters, separated by fate, and the
lawyer whose mission is to find and reunite them.
2
3
7
LEAVING HOME, by Garrison Keillor.


USING SCARECROWS TO SPOOK SPEEDERS
LEAD: THE opening shots were fired in 1968, when the first commercial radar detector - bearing the inflammatory name ''Fuzzbuster'' - made its debut.
In the 20 years since, the war between Smokey and the detectors has shown no sign of abatement.


Hong Kong
LEAD: To the Editor: We recently traveled to Hong Kong and took a copy of the article ''What's Doing in Hong Kong'' (Travel, April 26) with us.


Program Trading Smoothed the Market
LEAD: SINCE Oct. 19 traders, regulators and the investing public have been searching for an explanation for the stock market plunge.
Perhaps we will never understand exactly why this ''correction'' was so violent and why it took place when it did.
Nevertheless, the usual suspects have been rounded up.
High on the list of the accused are stock index futures ''program traders.


New Routes, New Rooms
LEAD: JUDGING by the investment in major new resorts on seven islands and the expansion of hotels and inns on most of the others, optimism on the prospects for tourism in the Caribbean and the Bahamas seems to be as pervasive as straw hats and tanning lotion.
Islands where big new resorts have or are about to open are Anguilla, Antigua, Grand Cayman, the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, the French side of St.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Sartre's Irrational Cheer
A philosopher turned novelist, Iris Murdoch is in a good position to appreciate irrational appeals.
This is from her ''Sartre: Romantic Rationalist'' (Viking).


A Busy Week In Barbados
LEAD: COWS roam fields next to the international airport.


OKLAHOMA ELUDES MISSOURI
LEAD: Rotnei Anderson, a fullback, rushed for 118 yards, and Oklahoma made two late drives for a 17-13 victory over Missouri in a Big Eight Conference game.


With the Kennedy Nomination, The Center Holds
LEAD: THERE was none of the usual suspense or drama to President Reagan's announcement on Wednesday that Judge Anthony M. Kennedy was his latest choice for the Supreme Court.


Raised Consumer Consciousness Can Lower Credit-Card Interest
LEAD: To the Editor:


Marine Spy Rebuts Idea of Moscow Embassy Ring
LEAD: A marine convicted of espionage has convinced Government counterintelligence agents that there was no extensive spy ring in the security detachment at the American Embassy in Moscow and that no Soviet agents were admitted to the embassy, military officials say.


Booklet Seeks to Lower School Dropout Rate
LEAD: The Reagan Administration and school superintendents from large cities have issued a guide to combat the problems that lead more than 3,700 teen-agers to drop out of high school every day.


Braids and Flowers
LEAD: BLACK and white in almost infinite variations is the key to Gloria Sachs's spring collection.


NEWSPAPER PLANT UPSETS NEIGHBORS
LEAD: IF the Valley Stream residents on and near South Cottage Street get their way, operations at Inflight Newspapers Inc., which supplies the two major New York airports and their airlines with newspapers and magazines, will stop between 11 P.M. and 7 A.M.


GHOSTS TO BELIEVE IN: RECALLING BATESON AND MEAD
LEAD: THE true exorcism of ghosts occurs when they are gradually absorbed into the lives of the living.
All last year I was writing dialogues with my father, Gregory Bateson, who died in 1980, an ironic activity because he also wrote dialogues -called by him ''metalogues'' - between a father and daughter, dialogues that were largely but not entirely fictional.


DIONNE, 36, CARRYING LOAD FOR RANGERS
LEAD: These are stressful times not only for the Rangers, who as a group have been somewhat cowed by a seven-game losing streak, but also for Marcel Dionne, who because of injuries to his younger teammates is playing about twice as much as he'd like to.


Report From Milan
LEAD: LET THE FRENCH roll out their bell skirts, pouf sleeves and stiff hoops.
Italy's arsenal of seduction is formed of gentler stuff.
This year, Milan's fashion leaders, a handful of shrewd nonconformists, demonstrated pointedly that sex appeal can be a subtle thing.


High-End Audio Within Reason
LEAD: WE WAITED A WHILE for things to settle.


Left and Right
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stage: The 'Christmas Spectacular,' at Radio City
LEAD: LIKE the giant Christmas tree that adorns the plaza at Rockefeller Center each holiday season, the Radio City Music Hall's ''Magnificent Christmas Spectacular,'' is one of the most visible and popular symbols of cultural continuity in a city where almost everything else seems subject to jarring change.


A THEORY OF EVERYTHING
LEAD: I am impressed by Edward Witten's accomplishments.
However, I think he misses the point when he says: ''One lesson you can learn is don't make mistakes.'' The history of science is fraught with mistakes, made, in some cases, by eminent scientists, including Newton and Einstein.
It is from these mistakes, in most cases, that we learn.


America's Paradoxical Relatinship With Drugs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dance: Company of Men
LEAD: TERRY CREACH and Stephen Koester explored the choreographic possibilities of male movement in an energetic and invigorating program Thursday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
If one could sometimes question the uses to which their energy was put, one had no doubts about these dancers' abilities.


OUT OF A DARKNESS
LEAD: I identified with Frank Wolkenberg's feelings of relief.
That is what I felt when our son was recently diagnosed as having Attention Deficit Disorder.
We received a brief explanation from his psychologist and advice from a neurologist, but Frank Wolkenberg's article was the most I have read on the subject.


Benevolent Boxer
LEAD: IT was just a four-round exhibition to raise money for charity, and, appropriately enough, Mike Tyson seemed to be in an especially charitable frame of mind when he squared off against James (Quick) Tillis in Chicago Friday night.
Anything but his usually fierce self, Tyson played around in the ring, caressing


LAW OFFICES FOR NEWARK
LEAD: THE Newark Legal and Communications Center, a $73.8 million project to provide downtown office space for law firms, is finally becoming a reality.


Question Of the Week; Will Free Agents Be Signed in Baseball?
LEAD: No. I sincerely do not think free agents will be signed in baseball.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  SOUNDS FROM THE '60'S


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a large bluestone patio about 10 years old, and some of the cement between the flags is coming out of the joints.
Can you tell us how to handle this problem?


Opera: 'Walkure' Recast
LEAD: THE Metropolitan Opera's production of Wagner's ''Walkure'' returned to the stage Wednesday evening with a new conductor, Max Epstein, and several new singers in principal roles.
Timothy Jenkins, a man of Wagnerian physical proportions, stepped into the part of Siegmund opposite the Sieglinde of Sabine


About Men; A Fear of Lawyers
LEAD: WHEN MY SON DECIDED several years ago to turn his back on a budding career as a rock saxophonist and become a lawyer, the first question I, who had practiced law for three decades, asked myself was: ''Where have I gone wrong?'' He was accustomed to a profession in which every amplified blast of his horn, every adroit bit of body language on stage, was greeted by an adoring audience with hoots of pleasure and shouts for more.


A Tribute To a Man Of Charity
LEAD: Great deeds were not Donald Savio's lot in life. Small kindnesses were.


'SPLIT SECOND' PERFORMED IN SOUTHPORT
LEAD: LEAVE it to the gutsy Boston Post Road Stage Company to come up with a play that is intended to stir things up.
For openers - indeed, in its first explosive scene - ''Split Second'' by Dennis McIntyre presents a harrowing confrontation, rife with racism, and then winds up raising provoking moral and legal issues.


WITH OUR MOVING WEAPNS, FIGHTING FOR TERITORY ALONG THE MERRIT
LEAD: LIKE most Americans, I own an advanced state-of-the-art weapons system.
Mine is a 1 1/2-ton missile propelled by a finely tuned, highly sophisticated, computer-controlled power plant that, with the slightest touch of the controls, is capable of generating forces several hundreds of times the force that I, alone, a normal mortal, unassisted, can produce.


More Bad Luck
LEAD: THERE'S no such thing as a good time for an injury, but Gary Stevens, the jockey, seems to find particularly bad ones.
In 1985, he suffered broken ribs in a spill three weeks before the Breeders' Cup and missed those races.
Then yesterday, Stevens suffered a broken ankle in an accident at the starting gate before the fourth race at Santa Anita, and will miss the Breeders' Cup races at Hollywood Park Saturday.


PUBLIC HEALTH PERSONNEL GET AN UPDATE ON AIDS
LEAD: BECAUSE they confront AIDS daily in their jobs, 700 New Jerseyans gathered here recently for an official update on the state's No. 1 health concern.


HOW TO INSTALL A WALL CABINET
LEAD: INSTALLING hanging cabinets against a framed wall is a task that many do-it-yourselfers view with trepidation.
Not only must the cabinet's horizontal surfaces be level and its vertical surfaces plumb, but also, for strength, at least some of the fasteners must penetrate the studs that make up the core of the wall.


Far From the Madding Crowd
LEAD: VACATION sweepstakes to Tahiti.
Robert Goulet at the mall.
Ticket giveaways.
These are hardly the techniques used to promote Broadway blockbusters.
But Spokane and Tulsa are a long way from Times Square, and when Pace Theatrical Group Inc. takes such touring productions as ''South Pacific,'' starring Mr.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  GHOST'S HOUR, SPOOK'S HOUR  By Eve Bunting.
Illustrated by Donald Carrick.
Unpaged.
New York: Clarion Books/ Ticknor &amp; Fields. $12.95. (Ages 5 to 9)  I WON'T GO TO BED!
By Harriet Ziefert.
Illustrated by Andrea Baruffi.
Unpaged.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $10.95. (Ages 4 to 8)


Albany Plan for Pesticide Warnings Is Criticized
LEAD: Proposed state regulations that would require businesses and homeowners to post warnings of pesticide sprayings are being challenged by a coalition of restaurant owners, farmers and the pest-control industry.


Yugoslavia
LEAD: To the Editor: I traveled extensively in Yugoslavia, visiting the country more than 10 times since the early 70's.
Although, I must agree with the author that Yugoslavs are carnivorous, as much as Americans and most of the other Europeans, what struck me the most is the abundance of fruit, vegetables, cheese, yogurts and seafood along the Adriatic coast.


The AIDS Secret Worth Keeping
LEAD: Testing to help curb the AIDS epidemic can be either voluntary or compulsory, but that's a choice only in theory.
A compulsory program would drive underground the intravenous drug abusers and gay men who most need to be reached.
No wonder public health officials overwhelmingly prefer voluntary tests.


THE WORLD: Familiar Epithets; In Moscow, the Fall of a New Soviet Man
LEAD: BORIS N. YELTSIN seemed the quintessential new Soviet man, a chest-thumping advocate of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's openness and restructuring and an irrepressible critic of past party failures and hidebound ideology.


Don't Laugh at Laffer
LEAD: To the Editor:


A SMALL DOOR OPENS FOR QUALITY EVENT
LEAD: BRIDGE administrators have argued about processes of selection for almost as long as biologists, and like them continue to disagree.


In Afghan King, a Soft Voice for a Soviet Pullout
LEAD: After 14 years of quiet exile, the king of Afghanistan, Mohammad Zahir Shah, has emerged as a key figure in efforts to negotiate a Soviet withdrawal from his country.


Miss Olson Weds Dan Hofstadter
LEAD: At the Swedish Seamen's Church in New York, Nancy Ann Olson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin R. Olson of Glenview, Ill., was married yesterday to Dan Hofstadter, the son of the late Felice Swados Hofstadter and the late Richard Hofstadter of New York.
The Rev.
Jan Madestam, a Lutheran minister and the pastor of the church, performed the ceremony.


Moderates at Arab Talks Seize the Day
LEAD: AS he stepped to the meeting table, President Hafez al-Assad of Syria stumbled into the seat reserved for his rival Baath Party comrade and now bitterest of enemies, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.


Negotiations Continue On Jersey Beach Trash
LEAD: Attorneys for New Jersey and New York City negotiated by telephone today in an effort to settle out of court the dispute about trash that washed up on New Jersey beaches over the summer.


Stephen Weiss Is Wed To Lauren J. Karassik
LEAD: Lauren Jane Karassik, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Karassik of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, was married last evening to Stephen Lawrence Weiss, a son of Arthur Weiss and Helene Rothstein, both of New York.
Rabbi Marc Gelman performed the ceremony at the Pine Hollow Country Club in East Norwich, L


FATAL CONNECTIONS
LEAD:  THE PEARLKILLERS  Four Novellas.
By Rachel Ingalls. 215 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $15.95.


Anne Congdon to Marry
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Richard R. Congdon of Nantucket, Mass., of the engagement of their daughter, Anne Chapin Congdon, to Whitney Adams Gifford, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles C. Gifford Jr. of Perrysburg, Ohio, and Nantucket.
Miss Congdon, a graduate of Connecticut College, is the Estee Lauder representative at the Higbee Company in Cleveland.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: NASA to Get Disney Center


Youth's Death in Capital Fans Debate on Curfews
LEAD: On a chilly Saturday night last month, 17-year-old Wendell Heard defied his parents' warnings and went to Celebrity Hall, a go-go dance club here.


Anne Webster to Marry Charles Leight
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
George Armstrong Webster of Glen Ridge, N.J., of the engagement of their daughter, Anne Elizabeth Webster, to Charles David Leight, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold C. Leight of Denver.
The couple plan to marry in April.


Julius Gabris, Bishop in Czechoslovakia, 74
LEAD: Julius Gabris, one of four Roman Catholic bishops in Czechoslovakia, has died, the official Czechoslovak press agency reported Friday.
He was 74 years old.


Question Of the Week; Will Free Agents Be Signed in Baseball?
LEAD: There will be dozens of free agentssigned in baseball, just like last year, and they'll sign with the same team they played for this year, except for one major player, Jack Morris.
George is fed up with his second-banana status, and he'll make Jack an offer he can't refuse.
JEFF MARINER


Transactions
LEAD: FRIDAY  BASEBALL


MOVIES
LEAD:  The Silver Chalice  With Paul Newman, Virginia Mayo, Jack Palance, Pier Angeli, Lorne Greene, E. G. Marshall, Natalie Wood. 1954.
Warner Home Video. 135 minutes. $19.98. ''Introducing Paul Newman,'' the opening credits proclaim, and the Biblical-epic buff doesn't need more of a reason than that to sit through this New Testament saga.


THAT QUESTIONNAIRE AT THE DOCTOR'S
LEAD: The questionnaire  [ ''In Doctor's Office, on Trial for AIDS,'' Opinion Page, Sept. 27 ]  was ''disquieting.''


WHY WED? THE AMBIVALENT AMERICAN BACHELOR
LEAD: THE WORD THEY USE IS ''SCARY.''


CLAMOR FOR CUTS IN STATE TAXES QUIETS
LEAD: THE clamor for state tax cuts, which echoed loudly through the State Capitol in late summer and early fall, has quieted in recent weeks after the plunge in the world stock markets and the resulting increased caution about the future pace of consumer spending in Connecticut and the nation.


Folk-Art Legacy of a Lady of Quality
LEAD: ELECTRA HAVEMEYER Webb's legacy of collecting the best in American folk art - achieved with Yankee determination, her share of her family's sugar fortune and a keen eye for hearty, homespun Americana - comes alive in miniature in the exhibition opening today at the National Gallery of Art.
The show, remaining through March, marks the 40th anniversary of the Shelburne Museum, the repository Mrs.


SHOPPERS IN PANIC
LEAD: Poland has announced that average consumer prices will rise by 40 percent in 1988.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 1987
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-22


IN CONCERT WITH SOUSA ON 'TEDDY AND ALICE'
LEAD: WHEN a performance of the Philharmonia Virtuosi Chamber Orchestra in April 1985 turned into a rollicking rendition of Broadway-style tunes, few in the Westchester audience were surprised.


How to Sell the Land, Yet Safeguard It
LEAD: FOUR years ago, when Dr.
Philip Wiedel, a surgeon at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, began to plan for retirement, he and his wife, Monique, decided that they would eventually take up permanent residence in their country home in the southeast corner of Danbury.


Abbie Hoffman Sues for Vote
LEAD: Abbie Hoffman filed suit in Federal court here Thursday to force election officials to count his absentee ballot in the town of New Hope, which could decide the community's deadlocked borough council race.


The Real Dutch?
LEAD:  To the Editor:


PERSPECTIVES: Bedford-Stuyvesant; New 2-Family Houses Without Subsidies
LEAD: IN 1868, the Vincentian Order of the Roman Catholic Church founded a parish and college on Brooklyn farmland and named it after St.
John the Baptist.
The order built a school and a priests' residence and an immense Romanesque church, with a nave 10 stories high and seating for 1,200.


F.A.O. SCHWARZ: THE 12 WEEKS OF CHRISTMAS
LEAD: EXCEPT FOR THE SPINDLY HIGH heels no Christmas shopper would wear, and the lack of a black mink coat, Gale Jarvis could be any of the frantic young upscale parents nervously pondering the goods at F.A.O.
Schwarz, racing from one department to another, ferreting out what's hot and what's not.
But instead of just reading the price tags, Gale Jarvis is changing them.


FICTION
LEAD:  KALEIDOSCOPE.
By Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $18.95.) In her 21st novel, Danielle Steel continues her forays into the life styles of the rich and heartsick.
This time, readers are led to war-torn Europe, where they witness the burgeoning friendship of two Americans, Sam Walker and Arthur Patterson, as well as the heady love affair between Sam and Solange Bertrand, an exquisite Frenchwoman.


Autumn Thaw
LEAD: A group of small sailboats bobbed in the water near the Wavertree at the South Street Seaport.
The mild and sunny weather yesterday should continue through today, with a high temperature in the upper 50's. (The New York Times/Jim Wilson)


Visions Shared By Britain's Artists and Poets In the Days Of Wordsworth
LEAD: TRY NOT TO MISS THE current exhibition at the New York Public Library, ''William Wordsworth and the Age of English Romanticism.'' It would be worth making the effort to see it for the sake of the Turners alone, or for the work of any one of half a dozen of the other artists on view.


Youth Killed in South Africa
LEAD: A 15-year-old youth was killed by fellow blacks as more political violence swept Natal Province in South Africa, the police said today.
A police statement said the boy was killed in the Pietermaritzburg township of Flangspruit on Friday night.
It gave no details.


O'Neill Remains Hospitalized Amid Reports He Has Cancer
LEAD: Former House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. remained hospitalized in satisfactory condition today and his son would not comment on published reports that his father suffers from cancer of the large intestine.


Chaminade Holds Off Farrell
LEAD: Gary Wilkos, the senior quarterback for Monsignor Farrell, sparked a furious fourth-quarter rally yesterday, throwing for two touchdowns and plunging 1 yard for another in the Catholic High Schools Football League playoffs.
But the comeback fell 1 point short as Chaminade foiled a late 2-point conversion attempt and held on for a 21-20 semifinal victory that eliminated


Physician Is Wed To Dr. Scharfman
LEAD: Dr.
Beth Karen Scharfman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Melvin A. Scharfman of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Uri R. Shabto, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Avtalion Shabto of New York.
Rabbis Mordecai Waxman and David Lincoln officiated at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.


Toxic Ash and Costs Worry The Neighbors of Incinerators
LEAD: A fierce debate over the environmental safety and economic wisdom of garbage-burning incinerators has begun as scores of communities around the nation move toward spending billions on their construction.


VISIT TO PLANET OF THE FIT
LEAD: I MADE a surprise landing on Planet of the Fit.
It was a surprise for me because I was unaware of this alien region, only a short drive away, orbiting a remote hemisphere in a nearby mall.


THE LINDBERGH KIDNAPPING: ANOTHER BOOK, ANOTHER CHAPTER
LEAD: IT'S Jersey Justice on trial again - or so it seems to Jim Fisher, author of ''The Lindbergh Case'' (Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, $22.95).


Breaking Through a Murderous Silence
LEAD: HUNDREDS of mourners, many weeping, stood in line late last week to pay respects to 6-year-old Elizabeth Steinberg, the Greenwich Village girl who died Nov. 5 after what the police said was a brutal beating by her adoptive parents.


Mao and Deng: Competition for History's Judgment
LEAD: SINCE the West first encroached on China in the Opium War of 1840, awakening the Chinese to their backwardness, Chinese patriots have searched for the elusive secret of modernization.
Many tried, and failed, leaving China only farther behind.
But in the view of an increasing number of Western specialists, one leader has finally succeeded: Deng


In Tough Campaigns, the Tough Start Early
LEAD: AT this point in the 1960 campaign, not one candidate had formally announced that he was running for President of the United States.
John F. Kennedy waited until Jan. 2, 1960, to make formal his intentions.
Lyndon B. Johnson, the Senate majority leader, runner-up to the Senator from Massachusetts at the Democratic convention and ultimately his Vice President, did not announce until


Louise March, a Folk Art Guild Founder, Is Dead
LEAD: Louise March, a founder of the Rochester Folk Art Guild, a nonprofit artisan's collective farm in Middlesex, N.Y., died of a heart attack yesterday at the Soldiers and Sailors Hospital in Penn Yan, N.Y.
She was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan and Middlesex.


Jane Fishman Is Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Fishman of Bala Cynwyd, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jane Leslie Fishman to Efraim Grinberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gedalio Grinberg of New York.
A March wedding is planned.


Wintering On Florida's Panhandle
LEAD: RACHEL JACKSON, accompanying Andrew when he took control of Pensacola in 1821, prayed to be delivered from the ''vast, howling wilderness'' of the Florida panhandle.
Shortly after the Civil War, residents of Florida's peninsula seriously considered ridding their state of a nuisance by ceding its entire western arm to Alabama for a million dollars.


PRESENTING KABUKI FOR THE COMMON MAN
LEAD: ''TAISHU ENGEKI'' IN JAPANESE means theater for the masses.
Some people call it working-class Kabuki, and that's exactly what it is.


Roger Lewis, Amtrak's First Chief And an Executive in Many Fields
LEAD: Roger Lewis, a former Assistant Secretary of the Air Force, chairman of the General Dynamics Corporation and the first president of Amtrak, died Thursday at his home in Washington.
He was 75 years old.
Mr.
Lewis' career, which began in 1934 in the sheet metal shop of the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, took him over the next 40 years to top jobs in aviation, aerospace, military contracting, railroading and the Federal


Question Of the Week; Will Free Agents Be Signed in Baseball?
LEAD: In reply to the question of free agents in baseball, I have one reply, ''What free agents?''


Miss Ashton Has Wedding
LEAD: Katherine Ashton, a daughter of Mrs. and Mrs.
Robert W. Ashton of New York, was married at Trinity Episcopal Church in New York yesterday to Brian David Young, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Young of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Robert Cowperthwaite performed the ceremony.


POETS UNDERFOOT
LEAD:  CLOSE CONNECTIONS  Caroline Gordon and the Southern Renaissance.
By Ann Waldron.
Illustrated. 416 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


OPERA: CITY ENSEMBLE IN 'TURN OF THE SCREW'
LEAD: BRITTEN'S operas - ''The Turn of the Screw'' among them - test small opera companies but also reward the virtuous among them.
The orchestra parts are finely made, and their original touches speak most clearly through equally fine chamber groups.
Britten's words demand the same kind of clarity; they are meant to be heard and understood at close quarters.


Dance
LEAD: The New York City Ballet returns to the New York State Theater on Tuesday for its 87th season in the city.
The highlights of this first week of the new winter season include two revivals and performances by a new member of City Ballet and several newly promoted dancers.
A centerpiece of the opening-night gala benefit for the company is ''The Concert,'' that goofy but poetic evocation of concertgoing choreographed by Jerome Robbins and last performed by the company in 1984.


If Horseshoe Fits . . .
LEAD: IT has become a familiar ritual among National Football League owners seeking a better stadium deal at home, the grand tour of cities seeking an N.F.L. franchise.
It was just such a mission that took Bill Bidwill, the owner of the St.
Louis Cardinals, to Baltimore, which has been clamoring for a team ever since the Colts' midnight departure for


'I DO NOT BELIEVE IN GHOSTS'
LEAD:  ANGELS FEAR  Towards an Epistemology of the Sacred.
By Gregory Bateson and Mary Catherine Bateson. 224 pp.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $18.95.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD: 'BUTTERFLY' PREMIERE


ABOUT LONG ISLAND
LEAD: THERE have been, heaven only knows, mountains of words devoted to family problems, to the stresses and strains that threaten the tight weave of the domestic fabric.
There have also been wise tomes issued on the effect of television as an isolating agent that can destroy togetherness in the home.
But none of them have touched upon the particular matter that comes between man and wife in our otherwise serene situation.


RoseMary Dugan Marries Kenneth Richard Stevens
LEAD: At St.
Catharine's Roman Catholic Church in Blauvelt, N.Y., RoseMary Dugan, a daughter of Mrs.
Richard D. Dugan of Orangeburg, N.Y., and East Hampton, L.I., and the late Dr.
Dugan, was married yesterday to Kenneth Richard Stevens, a son of Mrs.
H.
John Stevens of New City, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Stevens.


WHY CAN'T A MAN BE MORE LIKE A WOMAN?
LEAD:  WOMEN AND LOVE  A Cultural Revolution in Progress.
By Shere Hite. 922 pp.
New York: Alfred A Knopf. $24.95.


Nuclear Plant Closed by U.S. Is Set to Reopen
LEAD: The Oyster Creek Nuclear Power Plant, which was shut down by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission two months ago because of safety violations, will resume normal operations in about two weeks, according to officials at the plant.


Two Deputies Slain in West; Drunk-Driving Suspect Held
LEAD: Two sheriff's deputies were shot to death at their headquarters while they were booking a drunk driving suspect today, and a man was later arrested with the officers' car.


U.S. to Help Hungary With Capitalist School
LEAD: Deputy Secretary of State John C. Whitehead has announced that an American-style institute of management training will be established soon as a joint United States-Hungarian venture.


Joe Mantegna, Bad Egg For Hire
LEAD: JOE MANTEGNA REVELS IN shady characters: slimy gamblers, cutthroat salesmen, lecherous dentists, mercurial mobsters and Hollywood hucksters.
He plays the type of men who snarl, ''You say I acted atrociously?
Yes I did.
I do it for a living.'' Even his less raffish roles are rarely saintly - a New York actor impersonating an ex-con, an ambitious attorney who ''wants to be Senator after he's President.


America's Paradoxical Relationship With Drugs
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.C.L.A. NEARS A SHOWDOWN
LEAD: Troy Aikman ran for a touchdown and passed for another in a 17-point third quarter today as U.C.L.A. erupted for a 47-14 victory over Washington to remain unbeaten in the Pacific-10 Conference.


Managua Accepts American Role in Truce Talks
LEAD: The Nicaraguan Government has agreed to accept a four-member team of American mediators as part of its effort to reach a cease-fire with United States-backed contra guerrillas, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said today.


Venezuela's Island in the Caribbean
LEAD: CLEARLY a boom is underway on the Venezuelan island of Margarita, 24 miles off the mainland and half an hour by plane from Caracas.
As soon as you alight, you hear the humming, buzzing and slamming of construction work, and you see high-rise buildings that seem to have shot up overnight on near-desert terrain.


ON THEIR TOES
LEAD:  SPREAD A LITTLE HAPPINESS  The First Hundred Years of the British Musical.
By Sheridan Morley.
Illustrated. 224 pp.
New York: Thames and Hudson. $29.95.


Good Values in Thrift Units
LEAD: FEW stock groups have as many handicaps to discourage investors as the savings and loan industry.
Accounting rules are quirky.
Regulatory burdens are onerous.
And a number of the group's bolder players are hip-deep in loans that may not be repaid.
If that were not enough, well-run savings units, selling at historically low valuations compared with their book values and earnings, are plentiful - more plentiful, in fact, than bargain hunters bidding for their stock.


Frankfurt
LEAD: To the Editor: I enjoyed ''What's Doing in Frankfurt'' (Travel, Oct. 18).
I do regret, though, that the article failed to mention two sites that I consider main attractions.
The first is the zoo, with about 6,000 animals.
It is one of the first zoos to attempt natural habitats, a children's zoo and a large house for watching nocturnal animals.


THE BARTLEBOOTH FOLLIES
LEAD:  LIFE, A USER'S MANUAL  By Georges Perec.
Translated by David Bellos. 581 pp.
Boston: David R. Godine. $24.95.


WHO WILL CONTROL THE POPULATION?
LEAD: In reply to the ''Population Bomb'' article: I suggest we first think of all the land improperly used because we grow tobacco.
Some of the food we grow is converted into alcohol.


Risky Markets
LEAD: To the Editor:


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended Oct. 31  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $81,000
304 West 10th Street
275-sq.-ft. studio co-op in a renovated prewar building: fireplace, Hudson River view; maintenance $241, 51% tax-deductible (Broker:


Trumpet: Frank Gordon
LEAD: FRANK GORDON, a jazz trumpeter, put together a bristling sextet for ''Clarion Echoes,'' his debut album on the Soul Note label.
But for his concert Friday at Cooper Union, Mr.
Gordon chose to work in a quartet format, playing standards and blues backed by James Williams on piano, Victor Gaskin on bass and Victor


Gearing Up for the Holidays
LEAD: NO ONE KNOWS HOW MANY PEO-ple visit the renowned Christmas windows at Lord &amp; Taylor on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan. ''We've tried to count,'' says Kenneth B. Schliemann, a divisional vice president for the retailer, who serves as creative director for the Christmas windows. ''But it's tough to discern who's watching and who's simply passing by.


Karole Armitage Readies a Fresh Duality
LEAD: JUST ABOUT ANYTHING OUTRAGEOUS could happen when a renowned punk ballerina and a provocateur of the art world collaborate.
But when Karole Armitage and David Salle convene at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival for a four-day engagement beginning Wednesday to display their latest endeavors - ''The Tarnished Angels'' and ''The Elizabethan Phrasing of the Late Albert Ayler'' - they'll tackle, instead, the somewhat immaculate tradition of ballet with what appears to be reverence.


Iran Panels to Seek Stricter Rules on Covert Acts
LEAD: The report by the Congressional Iran-contra committees will recommend new rules for covert operations that go further than the changes announced earlier this year by President Reagan, according to Congressional officials.


NEW YORKERS, ETC.
LEAD: WHY would a man like Larry Leeds have scores of letters and numbers, like PACETLDTOOC and 3714326598, imprinted on his memory so indelibly that they're still there after more than 30 years?
Especially since Mr.
Leeds is a man who hasn't a clue about the numbers on his license plate, his safe-deposit box or his Social


Reagan Is Skeptical on Peace Effort by Sandinistas
LEAD: Only 24 hours after the Nicaraguan Government offered a cease-fire proposal to the contras, President Reagan accused the Sandinistas today of dragging their feet as they put into effect the Central American peace agreement.


HOW TO INSTALL A WALL CABINET
LEAD: INSTALLING hanging cabinets against a framed wall is a task that many do-it-yourselfers view with trepidation.
Not only must the cabinet's horizontal surfaces be level and its vertical surfaces plumb, but also, for strength, at least some of the fasteners must penetrate the studs that make up the core of the wall.


WITH PREGNANCY, ONE WOMAN BECOMES MORE CONFIDENT
LEAD: I AM a good girl.
Too good.
I've always knuckled under the nearest available authority.
I did what my parents told me to do, then my teachers, then my employers, lawyer and doctors.
A course in assertiveness training helped me to figure out how to get what I want, usually without sacrificing any of the peace


BAKED VEGETABLES OF AUTUMN CELEBRATE THE HARVEST SEASON
LEAD: TURKEY may be the star of the Thanksgiving table, but vegetables play an effectual supporting role.
And since this holiday is the celebration of the harvest, I like to serve a selection.
I bake whole acorn squashes in the oven, not cutting them open until after they are cooked.
Then I slice them in half, scoop out the seeds and add a little butter, salt and pepper.


Downhill Hockey
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Mary Martha Keeley Wed To R. W. Beckler, Lawyer
LEAD: At the Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in Washington, Mary Martha Keeley was married yesterday to Richard William Beckler in a ceremony performed by the Rev.
Peter Ryan.


RUMPELSTILTSKIN ET AL.
LEAD:  THE HARD FACTS OF THE GRIMMS' FAIRY TALES  By Maria Tatar.
Illustrated. 277 pp.
New Jersey: Princeton University Press. $19.95.


FIVE ENGLISH ARTISTS IN A GLASS SHOW
LEAD: ''IN ENGLAND, we have three years of cut-knuckle training, but in America you just go into the studio and get on with it.''


Assault With a Chicken And Other Researches
LEAD: The duel of the frozen chickens is among the claims on file at the Insurance Library Association of Boston.


The Two-Woman Opposition in Bangladesh
LEAD: AFTER the police fired on anti-Government protesters here last week, the leading opposition party in Bangladesh scheduled a prayer service for three slain partisans.
But its leader was unable to attend.
Sheik Hasina Wajed, the Awami League's head, is a woman, and Moslem tradition dictates that women be barred from ceremonies for the dead.


STREETSCAPES: The Coney Island Parachute Jump; For the Boardwalk's 'Eiffel Tower,' Restoration or Regulating a Ruin?
LEAD: AMONG the many advances in military aviation in the 1930's was a tower to train paratroopers patented by Comdr.
James H. Strong in 1936.
He licensed one such six-chute tower for a Chicago amusement park.
But for the 1939-1940 World's Fair in New York, Commander Strong developed a 250-foot high version with 12 parachutes.


THE WORLD: Terrorism; With Latest Bomb, I.R.A. Injures Its Own Cause
LEAD: THE Irish Republican Army rarely second guesses itself about the violent attacks that have claimed hundreds of lives in Northern Ireland in the last 17 years.
But after one of its bombs killed 11 people at a memorial service for veterans in Enniskillen last Sunday, the outlawed organization issued its second apology in five years.


BREAKING THE CRACK MURDERS
LEAD: ON FEB. 15, THIS MAGAZINE published my article ''Crack Murder,'' the story of a veteran homicide detective, Albert E. Cachie, and his investigation of the killing of a Brooklyn crack dealer, James Baker.
Baker had been found dead in the passenger seat of his Mercedes with a bullet wound in his chest and four others from another gun in his head and neck.


FUNERAL HOMES ACCUSED OF BIAS ON AIDS
LEAD: IN a practice that has angered advocates for people with AIDS, some Connecticut funeral homes are charging up to $500 extra to handle the bodies of AIDS patients, while others are turning the bodies away.


Broadcast TV
LEAD: Suspense spreads over varied locales in this week films - a desolate Los Angeles police station, a small-town Texas bar, a high-rise Manhattan publishing office, a ski resort in St.
Moritz and a London theater.


A Korea Candidate Is Forced to Leave Rally for Campaign
LEAD: Kim Young Sam, the South Korean presidential candidate, abandoned a campaign rally today after being shouted down by tens of thousands of supporters of his opposition rival, Kim Dae Jung.


Food Inspection Results
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 25 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


DOCUMENATARY
LEAD:  Roses in December  The Story of Jean Donovan.
A film by Ana Carrigan and Bernard Stone.
Narrated by John Houseman.
First Run Features. 55 minutes. $29.95.
While serving as a lay missionary in El Salvador in 1980, Jean Donovan and three close friends, the Maryknoll Sisters Maura Clarke and Ita Ford and the Ursuline Sister Dorothy Kazel, were murdered by the Government's security forces.


William Rion Bonham, Comptroller, 65
LEAD: William Rion Bonham, comptroller for the law firm of Goldberg &amp; Finmann, died of a heart attack Tuesday at Glen Cove (L.I.) Community Hospital.
He was 65 years old and lived in Sea Cliff, L.I.


Boulez Forgets To Forget
LEAD: I KNOW IT ISN'T FAIR TO FOLLOW CELEBRATED thinkers around waiting for them to contradict themselves.
But who ever said critics were fair?
Of all living composers, perhaps Pierre Boulez has put the most stock in logical argument.
Even his famous polemics in behalf of his own works, though transparent propaganda of an elevated sort, have always had an air of indisputable rationality about them.


Unsafe Foreign Toys Are Seized by Officials
LEAD: Federal officials hoping to beat the Christmas rush have seized imported toys worth $1.35 million in a crackdown on products that fail to meet Federal safety standards.


Bucks Have New Look; Same Old Story for Knicks
LEAD: Don Nelson, who traded 11 seasons of coaching the Milwaukee Bucks for part ownership in the Golden State Warriors, would never recognize the starting lineup his successor, Del Harris, has put together.


Debra L. Wolf Weds M. A. Koenig, Teacher
LEAD: Debra Lynn Wolf and Mark Akulin Koenig were married yesterday at their home in New Rochelle, N.Y., by Rabbi Sandy Bogin.


OUT OF A DARKNESS
LEAD: Reading Frank Wolkenberg's article ''Out of a Darkness'' (Oct. 11) was a remarkable experience for me.
I felt he was describing my life.


Dance: Two by Arpino In a Joffrey Bill of Four
LEAD: FROM time to time in recent years, it has been the fashion to talk of the depersonalization of dancers in the face of rapidly rising technical demands.
Some of that talk has been of the Joffrey Ballet, but the present company is filled with performers in whom expressive personality and technical expertise are merged.


G. W. Bayer Wed To Joanne Blum
LEAD: At the Inwood (L.I.) Country Club last evening, Joanne Lori Blum, the daughter of Gary L. Blum of Manhattan and Harriet E. Blum of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married to Glenn Warren Bayer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Bayer of Lawrence, L.I.
Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony.


Practical Traveler; Approach With Caution: Mopeds for Novice Riders
LEAD: THE entry on getting around by cycle in Bermuda in the 1988 edition of a well-known guidebook includes the following sentences about motorized bicycles, or mopeds: ''If you've never ridden before, don't worry.
You'll have as much time as you need to practice in an open area before hitting the road.


Wagner Put on Hold
LEAD: Susan Wagner tentatively won the Staten Island division of the Public School Athletic League's A Conference yesterday and took its first step toward repeating as league champion.
The eligiblity of one of its players is in question, and the league expects to make an announcement tomorrow that could mean Wagner would forfeit all its games.


REFLECTIONS ON HANUKKAH
LEAD: HANUKKAH IS ABOUT THE MIRACLE of a little clay lamp - the kind of primordial object, commonplace enough, that has turned up by the score in archeological digs in the old lands surrounding the Mediterranean.
It happened once that a lamp of this character - a simple jar hung with a wick - contained only enough oil to last a single day.


2 More Arab Nations Renew Full Ties With Egypt
LEAD: Kuwait and Morocco became the latest Arab nations to resume full diplomatic relations with Egypt today.
Iraq and the United Arab Emirates took similar steps this week.


Bombing at Hospital in Beirut Kills 7 and Wounds 31
LEAD: A bomb hidden in a box of chocolates blew up in the American University Hospital in West Beirut today, killing 7 people and wounding 31, the police said.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  VIOLIN SOLOIST


CLOSELY KNIT
LEAD: IT WAS LIKE HALLOWEEN.
PEOPLE WERE knocking pigs and chickens out of the way and stirring skeins of yarn with a long stick.'' Laura Pearson talks animatedly about the days when her handmade sweaters were dyed in a cauldron over an outdoor fire.
Now only a handful of her designs for Tijuca, her New York knitwear company, are produced under comparably rugged conditions.


DATA BANK: November 15, 1987
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,831.2
$3,795.3
$3,683.3
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
3.8
2.5
2.4
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'87
I Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$134.5
$136.6
$138.0


Recognizing Gaddis
LEAD: I FIRST CAME TO KNOW WILLIAM Gaddis at a writers' conference in the Soviet Union in 1985.
I had heard that he was shy and averse to publicity, but I found that this reputation was based only on his belief that a writer's life and personality should be as little as possible associated with his work.


Giverny
LEAD: To the Editor: In regard to MacDonald Harris's article on Giverny (Aug. 30), my husband and I also traveled there in May; however, we had an experience of which readers of the Travel section should take notice.


Next Week; Can the Giants and Jets Still Make the Playoffs?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Judge Kennedy's Legal Views, in His Own Words
LEAD:  Sexual Privacy


AGENT ORANGE PANEL AIMING TO FINISH IN '90
LEAD: FOURTEEN years after American troops withdrew from Vietnam, a state commission continues to struggle with one of the most controversial results of the war.
The Vietnam Herbicides Information Commission was established by legislation in 1982 for what was to have been a five-year program.
Last July, the commission was reappointed under new legislation for three years to finish its work.


Carolyn G. Logan, Ph. D. Candidate, Is Married to Christopher Foy Rupp
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in Manhattan, Carolyn Gisele Logan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis D. Logan of New York, was married yesterday to Christopher Foy Rupp, a son of Cynthia Foy Rupp of Palm Beach, Fla., and New York, and the late Albert G. Rupp.
The Rev.
Jane Henderson performed the ceremony.


In Bangkok, Prize Winners Talk of Future
LEAD: The hotel was one of Bangkok's most glittering; the buffet tables were heaped with the great cuisines of Asia.
But Abdul Sattar Edhi, in his worn, homespun jacket, chose only a bowl of soup and a piece of flat bread known as naan.


FICTION
LEAD:  JACOB'S LADDER.
By John A. Williams. (Thunder's Mouth Press, $13.95.) If John A. Williams had simply written a political thriller set in West Africa in the 1960's, then ''Jacob's Ladder'' might have emerged as a well-written genre novel featuring a number of sensitive evocations of landscape and mood.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Singing Socialist Of Burlington


Looking Away At Marathon
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Nureyev Returns Home
LEAD: Rudolf Nureyev, the dancer who defected more than 26 years ago, in Moscow.
He was given a visa to see his ailing mother.
Page 4. (Reuters)


Vermont's Republican Party, Shaken by Losses, Adopts More Liberal Line
LEAD: Vermont's Republican Party, the colossus of state politics for more than a century but struggling in recent years, is planning for a political comeback by recasting its image in a new, more liberal light.


PLAN FOR A FABULOUS WEEKEND ... AND WHERE TO TAKE THE KIDS
LEAD: WHILE NEW YORK CITY is always a source of education and fun for kids, during the holiday season it becomes a wonderland.
The weather is often fine in December, so it could be the perfect month for you and your children to explore and rediscover New York City while savoring a enchanting time of year.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline in a listing of Trans-Panama cruises on Nov. 1 misidentified the cruise line that operates the Bermuda Star; it is the Bermuda Star Line.


Alarming Rise in Breast Cancer Indicated by Data
LEAD: Breast cancer may become an increasingly serious problem for women as those of the baby boom generation grow older, Federal health researchers report.


Judge Rejects Dismissal of Charges in Slaying of Denver Radio Host
LEAD: A Federal judge has rejected defense motions for acquittal of four defendants accused of killing Alan Berg, the host of a radio talk show, and closing arguments are scheduled Monday.


Dance: The Joffrey In a Humorous Quartet
LEAD: ONE of the Joffrey Ballet's many virtues is an ability to entertain, which it does through the most serious of artistic enterprises - a repertory that includes the great ballets of all time.


A THEORY OF EVERYTHING
LEAD: The article on Edward Witten and string theory excited the mystic in me.
As Malcolm W. Browne pointed out in the accompanying box, ''Mathematics and Magic,'' the 16th-century cabalists postulated that the world was created by an outpouring of divine emanations, 10 in number, called the Sefirot.
The ''vibrations'' of these realms are accessible to the human senses only in their lowest manifestations.


'SPLIT SECOND' EXPLORES JUSTICE
LEAD: LEAVE it to the gutsy Boston Post Road Stage Company to come up with a play that is intended to stir things up.
For openers - indeed, in its first explosive scene - ''Split Second'' by Dennis McIntyre presents a harrowing confrontation, rife with racism, and then winds up raising provoking moral and legal issues.


Focus: Cleveland; Downtown Making a Comeback
LEAD: WHEN partners in Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue, a law firm, began looking for new offices after 60 years in the same downtown Cleveland location, they never seriously considered a site outside the city's center.


Headliners; New Ending
LEAD: Former Gov.
Marvin Mandel of Maryland is no longer an ex-convict.
Mr.
Mandel was governor when he was convicted in 1977 of taking $380,000 in bribes in return for influencing racetrack legislation.
He served 19 months in jail, paid a $40,000 fine, resigned his office and was disbarred.
Last week, a Federal district judge in Baltimore overturned the convictions of Mr.


DO NEW LIMITS MEAN NEW TRAPS?
LEAD: WHEN the speed limit on some highways returned to 65 miles an hour earlier this year, manufacturers of radar detectors were more than a little concerned.
After all, while commercial radar detectors had been around for 20 years, their business came to life only in 1974, when the highway speed limit was cut to 55 m.p.h.


MENTOR PROGRAM AIDS NEW TEACHERS
LEAD: ''I THINK every new teacher should have a mentor,'' said Linda Prince, a first-year science teacher at Syosset High School. ''In the beginning there are so many questions, and with a mentor you can ask for help without feeling like you're imposing.''


The Handicapped
LEAD: To the Editor: In a Practical Traveler column on July 5 by Dennis Hevesi about adventure trips for the disabled, there was brief mention of the Blue Spruce Lodge in Trout Creek, Mont.
I sent for a brochure and decided to make the trip.
It turned out to be the greatest vacation of my life.


Gunman Surrenders After Detaining Former Wife
LEAD: A North Brunswick man ordered customers out of a post office at gunpoint and held his former wife hostage there for about eight hours today before releasing her and surrendering, according to the police.
The police said no one was injured.
The incident began shortly after noon when the man, Daniel Alfrey, 38 years old, apparently angry that his former wife had a boyfriend, walked into the post office, the authorities said.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Lendl and Jarryd in Final: Top-seeded Ivan Lendl of Czechoslovakia and fifth-seeded Anders Jarryd won their semifinal matches yesterday in the $375,000 Benson and Hedges championships at Wembley, England.
Lendl eliminated Henri Leconte of France by 6-4, 7-6 and Jarryd defeated unseeded Jacob Hlasek of Switzerland by 7-6, 6-1.


WHY 'ONCE A HERO' IS NO MORE
LEAD: DUSTY KAY COULDN'T EVEN produce an ashtray. ''I don't have a thing left here except this can of Hawaiian Punch,'' the television producer said with a scowl, surveying his large, virtually barren corner office for a place to discard his cigarette.
He found only packing cartons.


After 17-Month Delay, Fans Attend Kate Smith Memorial
LEAD: In the flag-draped sanctuary of St.
Agnes Church here, before a two-foot portrait of the late singer Kate Smith, the Rev.
Albert Salmon, looked out on the 700 people who had come to pay to the woman who gave voice to American patriotism.


COOKING FOR ONE, FOREVER
LEAD: I HAVE decided to embrace, provisionally, advice to go on living as much as possible as I did before.
So yesterday at the supermarket I bought loin lamb chops.


BAKED VEGETABLES OF AUTUMN CELEBRATE THE HARVEST SEASON
LEAD: TURKEY may be the star of the Thanksgiving table, but vegetables play an effectual supporting role.
And since this holiday is the celebration of the harvest, I like to serve a selection.
I bake whole acorn squashes in the oven, not cutting them open until after they are cooked.
Then I slice them in half, scoop out the seeds and add a little butter, salt and pepper.


ROUGH LANDING
LEAD: Kevin Maguire of the Sabres hitting the ice after taking check from the North Stars' Brian MacLellan during first period of game friday night in Buffalo.
The North Stars won 5-4, on a goal by Brain Bellows in the third period. (AP)


Islanders' Bottom Line Is Coming Out on Top
LEAD: On many National Hockey League teams, the fourth line is the professional assignment of either last resort or initial opportunity.
Whichever, it can often be a lonely way station at the end of the bench and just a short hop from the minors.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a large bluestone patio about 10 years old, and some of the cement between the flags is coming out of the joints.
Can you tell us how to handle this problem?


A WOMAN'S STYLE FOR ALL SEASONS
LEAD: THERE are women whose taste and bearing project the sort of easy self-assuredness that guarantees they will never look out of style.
Such a woman is Eleanor Graham, who, in the time we have observed her, has yet to look anything but terrific.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Tough Guys  With Burt Lancaster, Kirk Douglas, Charles Durning, Alexis Smith and Eli Wallach.
Directed by Jeff Kanew.
Touchstone Home Video. 103 minutes. $79.95.
Harry Doyle and Archie Long are a couple of venerable thieves who have just finished a 30-year stretch for train robbery.
When the gates of the state penitentiary are finally opened for them, Harry and Archie, played by Burt Lancaster and Kirk


From Sinkhole To Wildlife Lake
LEAD: SIX years ago it was a murky sinkhole that swallowed a three-bedroom bungalow, half a municipal swimming pool and five new sports cars in Winter Park, Fla.
Authorities said then that it was the biggest known sinkhole, about 100 feet deep, 350 feet wide and 300 feet long.


IN DEFENSE OF THE DINER
LEAD: Barbara Klaus's ''Therapy at the Diner''  [ Long Island Sound, Oct. 25 ]  attempts to malign the diner, an institution that students of American culture, artists and photographers have recognized as a most significant expression of the American way of life.
So much so that the Smithsonian has gone to great length to locate an early classic version to be shipped to


DATA UPDATE: November 15, 1987
LEAD:  VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS  (Residential in millions of dollars)
Sept. 87
Sept. 86
Change
New York
476.4
439.8
8%
New Jersey
324.9
352.7
-8%
Connecticut
198.1
228.6
-13%
(Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information Systems)
*2*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Last Week's Tally in Key Eastern States
LEAD:  House of Representatives


If Foreign Investment Ends, So Does Our Binge
LEAD: To the Editor:


HAITIAN ELECTIONS FEARED IMPERILED
LEAD: Two weeks before Haiti is supposed to have its first presidential election in 30 years, the place designated as national election headquarters is still filled with carpenters and the racket of hammers and power saws.


WELCOME TO MY PHANTASMAGORIA
LEAD:  THE ARABIAN NIGHTMARE  By Robert Irwin.
Illustrated. 282 pp.
New York: Viking. $16.95.


Question Of the Week; Will Free Agents Be Signed in Baseball?
LEAD: Definitely.
First of all, the owners were found guilty of collusion last season and a repeat performance on their part is highly unlikely.
Secondly, in our society, the name of the game is winning and several contending teams, including the Yankees, who desperately need frontline pitching, are a free agent or two away from capturing it all.


Carla Friedman Weds Robert Karen, Banker
LEAD: At the Great Neck (L.I.) Synagogue, Carla Renee Friedman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philmore H. Friedman of Jericho and Westhampton Beach, L.I., was married last night to Robert Karen, a son of Mrs.
Murry Schulman of Hollis Hills, Queens, and the late Joseph Karen.
Rabbi Louis Bernstein performed the ceremony.


4 Killed and 4 Are Hurt as a Car Hits Con Ed Truck on F.D.R. Drive
LEAD: Four people were killed and four others were seriously injured early yesterday morning when a car lost control and crashed into a Consolidated Edison work site on the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive in upper Manhattan, the police said.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  East Islip  $230,000  11 Meadow Farm Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old split level; den, solarium, fully carpeted, country setting; taxes $4,200.
Kings Park  $189,000  43 Juniper Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old colonial; den, new kitchen, finished basement, oak floors, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,400.


Data From Paper? It's Elementary
LEAD: THE problem is elementary, but deucedly difficult.
The 56 short stories and four novels that Sir Arthur Conan Doyle wrote about Sherlock Holmes exist on paper - 11,000 pages' worth.
Many Baker Street Irregulars and other admirers of the great detective would like to see the works available in an electronic data base.


SYRACUSE IS TOUGH AGAIN: KNIGHT IS TOUGH, AS ALWAYS
LEAD: IT was a matter of 1 point, but the difference between the champion and runner-up is always greater than the margin of the final score.
To a certain extent, making up that difference is why Rony Seikaly returned to Syracuse this season, when the Orangemen will attempt to win the national championship that slipped away last spring.


CUTTING A DEAL WITH THE INQUISTION
LEAD:  GALILEO HERETIC  By Pietro Redondi.
Translated by Raymond Rosenthal. 356 pp.
New Jersey: Princeton University Press. $29.95.


CREATIVE EXPORTER: Fred P.C. Chao; Taking Laundromats and Chopstick Factories to China
LEAD: LATE in life, Fred P. C. Chao has developed a new career, one that looks a little like taking sand to the beach.


SCHOOL SPORTS: Preps; HOPKINS STOPS FIELDSTON TO RETAIN FAIRCHESTER LEAGUE TITLE
LEAD: Hopkins, the defending champions in the Fairchester League, retained its title with a 31-18 victory over the Southern Division winner, Fieldston.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  YOUTH SCENE  Despite their peers' obvious preoccupation with pop music, some teen-agers are still interested in the classics.
Just how well this interest is translated into achievement should become apparent today, when two youth orchestras and winners of the Great Neck Symphony's Young Musicians Competition take to the stage.


Claudette Irene Gabriel Weds Omer T. Karabey
LEAD: Claudette Irene Gabriel, a daughter of Serge G. Gabriel of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Irene Brofos Gabriel, was married yesterday to Omer Turhan Karabey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ismet Karabey of Istanbul, Turkey.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas L. Stiers performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Greenwich,


RECORDS SPOTLIGHT KENNEDY LOBBYING
LEAD: Judge Anthony M. Kennedy, President Reagan's latest nominee to the Supreme Court, spent at least $65,332 as a part-time lobbyist from 1963 to 1975, when he was named to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, state records show.


Alexandra Bloch Engaged to Wed Lawrence Jeydel
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Bloch of New York and Southbury, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alexandra Bloch, to Lawrence Alan Jeydel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Jeydel of Fair Haven, N.J.
A March wedding is planned.


WORLD WAR II AS A SOVIET PLOT
LEAD:  STALIN'S WAR  A Radical New Theory of the Origins of the Second World War.
By Ernst Topitsch.
Translated by A. Taylor and B. E. Taylor. 152 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $19.95.


Samuel Ach Engaged To Catherine D. Zinke
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
William K. Zinke of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., of the engagement of their daughter Catherine Duryee Zinke to Samuel W. Ach, the son of Sarah C. Ach of Cincinnati and the late Roger W. Ach.
A spring wedding is planned.


Left and Right
LEAD: To the Editor:


GROWING UP TO BE A FIREMAN: REALITY MATCHES THE DREAM
LEAD: IMAGINE volunteering to be a surgeon, a pilot or a train engineer.
Imagine if every man could spend some of his time doing what he aspired to do as a boy.
Just by offering.
Just for the fun of it.
I do.
I'm a volunteer firefighter.


Co-ops Make Inroads in Isolated Inwood
LEAD: LYING amid bridges at Manhattan's northern tip, Inwood is connected to the rest of the island by Broadway and two subway lines, to Washington Heights often by a hyphen, and to several Caribbean islands by a stream of packages that leaves the post office on Vermilyea Avenue from the neighborhood's large Hispanic community.


The New Allure of Treasury Securities
LEAD: WITH the continuing turmoil in the stock market, Treasury securities have taken on new allure.
The biggest attraction is their safety - Treasuries are backed by the full faith and credit of the United States.
But demand for the securities, especially those with maturities of six months or less, has become so strong that it has depressed yields.


COLUMBIA FALLS TO CORNELL
LEAD: In many respects, the football game today against Columbia is one that Cornell would probably like to forget.
The Big Red turned the ball over six times, fumbled two kickoffs, had numerous penalties and let some obvious scoring opportunities slip away.


POSTINGS: In Goldens Bridge; When the Times Call for Flexibility
LEAD: With a sharp contemporary twist, the town-house project of Katonah Close takes its architectural cue from Victorian homes built in nearby Katonah, N.Y., around the turn of the century.
But the unit prices of $325,000 to $375,000 are thoroughly modern - and a bit daunting to some prospective buyers.


Traficant Candidacy Official
LEAD: Representative James A. Traficant Jr. of Ohio, who announced last month that he would seek the Democratic Presidential nomination, has filed a formal statement of candidacy with the Federal Election Commission.


PLAN TO USE OUTSIDERS TO TEACH STIRS FIGHT
LEAD: A PLAN to allow liberal-arts graduates who are not education majors to teach in Connecticut schools has attracted attention from hundreds of people interested in changing careers to teaching.
But it has also split educators.


POLITICIANS, PECKSNIFFERY AND PUBLIC TV
LEAD: THERE IS NO END TO IT; EVERYBODY wants to get into the act.
If it's not sex, drugs and rock-and-roll, then clearly there's too much violence.
Politicians, moralists and other interested parties have always wanted to regulate television.
Pecksniffs love to testify at hearings.
What's different now, however, is that the impulse to regulate television entertainment is being extended to television news.


Passage to Two Continents, Via the Imagination
LEAD: THE GARDENS BETWEEN THE entrances to the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery and the Museum of African Art are now the colors of late fall, dark reds and yellows and evergreen.
When I revisited those newest additions to the Smithsonian Institution, the long queues of the opening weeks had disappeared.
There seemed to be no crowds, and yet there were hundreds of people.


Why Say No to 1,500 Warheads?
LEAD: The centerpiece of next month's superpower summit meeting is to be the signing of a treaty eliminating intermediate-range nuclear forces.
The public and Congressional debate about ratifying the treaty will greatly influence future arms control efforts and our relations with Europe and the Soviet Union.


Dollars vs. Diplomacy: Austerity at State Dept.
LEAD: The American Foreign Service is in trouble.
Experienced diplomats, unsure about their futures, are casting about, sending out resumes in search of late-in-life careers.


Suspected Nazi Fugitive Seized in Argentina
LEAD: Acting on a 14-year-old request from a West German court, the Argentine authorities have arrested a man they identified as Josef Franz Leo Schwammberger, an accused Nazi war criminal, at a ranch in the province of Cordoba.


Question Of the Week; Will Free Agents Be Signed in Baseball?
LEAD: Once a conspirator, twice a fool.
New York's King George (Steinbrenner) will pursue and sign Jack Morris, especially since an arbitrator will determine Morris's salary next year regardless of what uniform he dons.
JEFFREY KANTOWITZ  Fair Lawn, N.J.


Community Rises From Boston Slum
LEAD: A new waterfront community is rising from the remains of the Columbia Point housing project, which has long been considered symbolic proof that public housing has failed.


OUR PERENNIAL SONGBIRDS
LEAD: IT IS SOMETIME AFTER MIDNIGHT IN THE Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel on West 44th Street.
In this pleasantly faded monument of Manhattan gentility, with its red leather banquettes and oak-paneled walls, the gaze of the late-night audience is fastened on a dark-haired sliver of a woman tautly poised beside a piano.


REDS' DAVIS HAS TOP AVERAGE AT PUTTING RUNS ON SCOREBOARD
LEAD: HIS statistical status will provide little solace to the Cincinnati Reds, who squandered their chance to win a division title, but Eric Davis attained a remarkable level of run production efficiency this year.


A Soprano, a Violinist and an Organist
LEAD:  Edith Wiens


A THEORY OF EVERYTHING
LEAD: Prof.
Edward Witten's new constructions may tie in to earlier, undisputed, findings.
In 1982, a team of researchers, led by Alain Aspect, found that it is possible for particles to communicate instantaneously over great distances.
This violates a long-held theory that nothing travels faster than light.


4 Rochester Hospitals Tie Costs to Quality of Care
LEAD: A group of Rochester hospitals has decided to let the amount of money they are paid for their services be determined in part by the quality of care.


Patricia Hertz Married To D. F. Reid in Atlanta
LEAD: At The Temple in Atlanta, Patricia Hill Hertz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jennings Hertz Jr. of Atlanta, was married last evening to Douglas Foster Reid, a son of Mrs.
Thomas R. Reid of St.
Clair Shores, Mich., and the late Mr.
Reid.
Rabbi Alvin Sugarman performed the ceremony.


BATTEN DOWN FOR THE COLD WEATHER
LEAD: THE lawn should be as short as possible for winter to eliminate the chances of disease, especially snow mold; if the grass was not cut before storing the mower, set the cutting blade at 1 1/2-inches or a bit lower, if possible, and mow one more time; if a few leaves remain, they will be chopped up by the blades and can remain as mulch, but rake off thick layers of leaf mulch.


OUT OF A DARKNESS
LEAD: I am the mother of a 9 1/2-year-old boy who has ADD with hyperactivity.
After our son was diagnosed three years ago, we decided not to use medication, and our pediatrician backed us up on this.
We work on teaching him appropriate behavior and self-control.


2 MAN PLAY FROM SOUTH AFRICA


HOW TO INSTALL A WALL CABINET
LEAD: INSTALLING hanging cabinets against a framed wall is a task that many do-it-yourselfers view with trepidation.
Not only must the cabinet's horizontal surfaces be level and its vertical surfaces plumb, but also, for strength, at least some of the fasteners must penetrate the studs that make up the core of the wall.


City Hall Notes; Koch's Views Travel South Of New York
LEAD: Mayor Koch is a man of many opinions, some of which have to do with municipal affairs.


Opera Gives Its Regards to Broadway
LEAD: THE TERM ''CROSSOVER'' MIGHT SEEM AL-most synonymous with ''music'' in this age of fusion, eclecticism and cross-cultural borrowings.
Everybody mixes genres these days, as old traditions crumble and new ones arise.
But the most controversial and prominent form of crossover of late has been the incursion of opera singers into the linked worlds of the Broadway musical and the pre-rock popular song.


WATERBURY SYMPHONY BUILDS 'GLOWING YEAR'
LEAD: WHEN Mario DiCecco, a violinist, founded the Waterbury Symphony 50 years ago, a great brass section was at hand.
Musicians moonlighted in the mills for income.


Corrections
LEAD: A map on Nov. 1 with an article about a museum in Vermillion, S.D., reversed the labels for two neighboring states; they were Iowa and Minnesota.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''President Reagan can say what he wants.
Unless his statements are backed up by budget-deficit cuts, the dollar will continue to trade lower.'' - Yani Budiman, a vice president of Chemical Bank


Rock: Love and Rockets
LEAD: A Song by Love and Rockets proclaimed ''No New Tale To Tell'' in the group's concert Thursday night atthe Beacon Theater, and truer self-descriptions were rarely sung.


The Embattled Mrs. Aquino
LEAD: A GLIMPSE OF THE BEDSIDE READING OF President Corazon C. Aquino only deepens the riddle presented by this most unusual and misunderstood leader.
On a low table, beside her bed with its flowered coverlet, in her cool and quiet house surrounded by sandbagged bunkers, light reading is notably absent.


PARENT INVOLVEMENT IN SCHOOLS PRESSED
LEAD: IN WHAT is the largest public-relations campaign the Kean administration has ever started on behalf of public schools, New Jersey is trying to increase the role parents play in education.


Giving New Life to Philadelphia's Skyline
LEAD: THE WAY PEOPLE TALKED about One Liberty Place when plans for this skyscraper were announced a few years ago, you would have thought that this was not a new building but some sort of nuclear weapon.
One Liberty Place would be the ruination of Philadelphia, cried the project's opponents, the sign that this somewhat genteel city had sold out to real-estate developers and become just like anyplace else.


Of Jams And A Family
LEAD: PAUL H. SMUCKER WAS worried when he looked down the table during a board of director's meeting of his little country company some years back.
To be sure, he knew everyone there.
Seated around him were Willard E. Smucker, his father; Welker J. Smucker, his uncle; Aunt Winna Smucker; Aunt Wilma Smucker, and her husband, Harold


Classical Music
LEAD: When music followers talk about the good old days of instrumental performance, it is never quite clear what they mean.
In general, this is intended as a reference to the Romantic school and its progeny, but what was that?
After all, there are those who grew out of this 19th-century tradition with a taste for frank emotionalism and textual liberty-taking, and there also are those who favor removed, intellectualized interpretations.


Counting the Hungry - a Contentious Census
LEAD: EVEN after five years of economic expansion, there are reports of hunger in America, among farmers in Kansas, elderly people in the Ozarks and homeless people in big cities from Houston to New York.
But no one knows how many Americans are hungry, and attempts to estimate their number are highly controversial.


Pop Music
LEAD: It's a good week for New York bands with international tastes.
Saqqara Dogs, a trio that performs Monday and Tuesday at Dance Theater Workshop (219 West 19th Street), keep the world on a guitar string.
Their songs, mostly instrumentals, are built on repeating riffs that might come from Africa, the Middle East or the Bronx; the spiky, danceable tunes mix exotic instruments - especially dumbek (drum) and mbira (thumb piano) - with Western electronics, for sparse, minimal funk.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: English Colleges  Question:I am interested in attending the summer school sessions offered by Oxford or Cambridge University in England.
Where can I get information on classes and arrangements? - P. E., Woodside, Queens  Answer:There are several sources to approach - aside from writing to individual colleges in both cities.


THE WORLD: Terrorism; Army of Scholars Study Terrorists' Visions
LEAD: TERRORISM, since it burst anew on the international scene in the early 1970's, particularly in the Middle East, has spawned a small army of researchers and specialists, including government officials, political scientists, journalists, psychologists, and others, trying to understand its causes and the best ways of putting a stop to it.


The Imaginary Hero: Don't Leave Home Without Him
LEAD:  CAPTAIN VINEGAR'S COMMISSION  By Philip Glazebrook. 333 pp.
New York: Atheneum. $19.95.


Should Taxpayers Pay for the City's Political Campaigns?
LEAD: AFTER nearly two years of scandals, and more than a year of talk about reform, New York City's government is now likely to approve public financing of municipal election campaigns.


Vienna
LEAD: To the Editor: Your article on ''Vienna's Love of the Trolley'' (Travel, Aug. 23) reminded me of my own experience.
First of all it was very amusing to see official signs along the Ringstrasse track saying ''Warum so schnell'' (Why so fast).
At one point we were tooling along at a very comfortable speed when coming around the corner on a narrow street we were stopped by a small car parked halfway across the tracks.


MUSIC
LEAD:  Bobby McFerrin: Spontaneous Inventions  Directed by Bud Schaetzle. 1986.
HBO/Cannon Video. 48 minutes. $29.95.
Bobby McFerrin's array of vocal techniques - hums, clicks, hisses, glottal stops, chest thumps - enables him to mimic a cappella an entire jazz ensemble.
In each tune he seems to find a new way to accompany himself.


37,000-Unit Rise in Housing Seen in New York City
LEAD: New York City gained 37,000 units of housing between 1984 and 1987, according to city officials.


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


ACCOUNTANTS SEEK TO IMPROVE IMAGE
LEAD: ACCOUNTING, an industry whose expansion has mirrored that of Long Island's economy, continues to see a growing demand for its services.
But leaders in the field now fear that recent criticism of mistakes in the industry, as well as the increasing workloads brought on by the new tax law, will hinder their efforts to find enough qualified young recruits.


Irving Lazar Is to Auction Hite's New Book
LEAD: Shere Hite has retained the literary agent Irving Lazar to auction the paperback rights to her book ''Women and Love,'' which has come under increasing attack by academic specialists.


Rangers Halt Losing Streak
LEAD: For the first time in three weeks, the Rangers skated away from a game with something other than sinking spirits and a premonition of disaster.
In the locker room afterward, instead of sulking and guilt, there were handshakes and laughter and, at long last, cause for congratulations.


UNIVERSAL HEALTH REALTY INOME TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSAL HEALTH REALTY INOME TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,418,000
-
Net inc
2,191,000
-
Share earns
.26
-
9mo rev
10,260,000
-
Net inc
6,672,000
-
Share earns
.78
-
The trust began operations in December 1986.


WALTHAM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WALTHAM CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
988,000
784,000
Share earns
.27
.21
9mo net inc
3,040,000
2,089,000
Share earns
.82
-
The year-ago 9 months' share earnings was not available; the company became public May 22, 1986.


Jackson Supporters Block Efforts By Black Democrats on Strategy
LEAD: The formal establisment of a black Democratic group in the South foundered somewhat this weekend as supporters of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson labeled its efforts a ''stop Jesse movement'' and defeated resolutions that they said would dilute their candidate's strength.


2 New Features In Sports Monday
LEAD:  On Your Own: Skiing.
If you give your skis a regular tuneup, you'll be able to leave your skiing partners in a cloud of powder, page C10.
Keeping Fit.
Many scientists agree that, to be fit, you should burn 2,000 calories a week.
How to stoke your furnace, page C11.


Accident at Denver Is Latest in a Series Of Blows for Airline
LEAD: The fatal accident involving a Continental Airlines jet in Denver yesterday represents another serious setback to the nation's third-largest airline, which has been plagued by a stream of consumer complaints and negative publicity all year.


Vast Cosmic Object Downgraded to a Mirage
LEAD: An enormous glowing blue arc in the distant universe, observed earlier this year and thought to be one of the largest objects yet detected in the cosmos, turns out to be an optical illusion caused by the light-bending effects of gravity, astronomers reported yesterday.


Converted Radioactive Waste Used to Fertilize in Oklahoma
LEAD: The Kerr-McGee Corporation, after years of tests and studies, is spraying thousands of acres of pastureland in eastern Oklahoma with a fertilizer recycled from radioactive wastes.


Music: Chamber Group
LEAD: PUTTING Franz Schreker and George Perle side by side on Saturday night's New York Chamber Symphony program at the 92d Street Y seemed at first a miniature history lesson in cause and effect.
The bond between them is Alban Berg.
Schreker's music early in this century opened Berg's imagination to the stage devices he would later use in ''Wozzeck''; Mr.


Tornadoes Hit Eastern Texas, Leaving 9 Dead
LEAD: Tornadoes swept across more than 200 miles of eastern Texas today, leveling scores of homes and buildings and leaving nine people dead and at least 132 injured.


Sports World Specials; Spring Tourists
LEAD: For baseball fans who went into a slump after the World Series, the start of the basketball and hockey seasons has brought the annual reawakening.
It is a sure sign, they know, that spring training is a mere three months away and the exhibition season just a few weeks beyond.


Washington Talk; Not Smitten With Smoot
LEAD: The current revival of interest in the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930 has been surprisingly widespread.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-12


Peter Bogyo Married To Ahna McCracken
LEAD: Ahna McCracken, the daughter of James McCracken and Sandra Warfield of New York, was married yesterday to Peter Bogyo, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen W. Bogyo of Tarrytown, N.Y.
Dr.
Barbara Raines, an Ethical Culture leader, officiated at the Lotos Club in Manhattan.


Flourishing Deer
LEAD: The deer hunting season opens in southern New York today and the odds are that the deer will continue to outwit the hunters.


FERROFLUIDICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FERROFLUIDICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,261,000
5,175,000
Net inc
665,000
b50,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


U.S. Diver Dies in Antarctica
LEAD: A 22-year-old California research assistant died Saturday in a diving accident under the ice of Antarctica, the National Science Foundation announced.
The diver, Mark T. Macmillan of San Jose, was pronounced dead by Navy doctors at McMurdo Station, the American scientific outpost on the continent.


No to a Veterans' Department
LEAD: President Reagan, who rode into office as the nemesis of Big Government, now rides around Washington as the defender of an indefensible cause: elevating the Veterans Administration to a cabinet-level department.
Yet that seems likely; bipartisan majorities in Congress appear ready to roll.


We All Know What's Wrong With High School
LEAD: To the Editor:


ESI INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESI INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,755,070
10,982,789
Net inc
898,519
b283,983
Share earns
.18
.06
Shares outst
5,052,255
4,520,256
9mo rev
76,806,337
32,765,568
Net inc
2,812,056
b1,015,582
Share earns
.57
.21
Shares outst
4,910,034
4,599,700


WILLIAMS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILLIAMS INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
22,412,410
13,111,935
Net inc
650,787
302,241
Share earns
.27
.16
Yr rev
88,353,760
46,780,091
Net inc
1,873,194
838,209
Share earns
.90
.45


Moonshine Is Undermining Moscow's Temperance
LEAD: The Government's heralded crackdown on liquor sales has apparently spurred a compensatory boom in the home-brewed vodka known as samogon, with hundreds of thousands of thirsty Soviet citizens arrested this year as moonshiners.


Giants Beat Eagles On Allegre's Kicks
LEAD: A punishing, back-and-forth struggle between the Giants and Eagles that sidelined Lawrence Taylor, Joe Morris and Brad Benson came down to a bare-footed kicker's 39-yard field-goal attempt today.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  Industrial Production...
Oct.
Capacity Utilization...
Oct.
Tuesday  Inventory-Sales...
Sept.
Wednesday  Housing Starts...
Oct.
Thursday  None  Friday  Consumer Price Index...


CADMUS COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CADMUS COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
35,146,000
27,599,000
Net inc
1,324,000
b823,000
Share earns
.22
.14
b-Reflects the accrual accounting method for healthcare benefits, which reduced net by $425,000.


After Year as Cooperative, Hunts Point Assesses Gains
LEAD: Market results on a recent morning at the Hunts Point Terminal in the Bronx were, as always, mixed: radishes and papayas closed higher, spinach and cantaloupes took a dive, while leeks and lemons held about steady.


FIRST CONNECTICUT SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST CONNECTICUT SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENT CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
699,506
597,013
Share earns
.69
.59
6mo net inc
1,341,525
1,134,621
Share earns
1.32
1.12


Judge Delays Decision In 'Platoon' Video Case
LEAD: A Federal judge has let stand for the time being an appeals court decision that halted the distribution of ''Platoon,'' last year's best-picture Oscar winner, for the home video-cassette market.


Miss Vosburgh Is Married To Robert Milner Frieden
LEAD: Tracy Vosburgh and Robert Milner Frieden were married yesterday at Wolf Trap Farm Park for the Performing Arts in Vienna, Va.
Rabbi Sheldon Ezring officiated.


GRAPHIC PACKAGING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAPHIC PACKAGING
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,252,000
12,050,000
Net inc
60,000
56,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo sales
38,825,000
33,064,000
Net inc
473,000
792,000
The company went public May 14.


Congress Says El Salvador Misuses U.S. Aid
LEAD: A bipartisan Congressional caucus charged today that United States aid to El Salvador was being largely misused by the Salvadoran military and ruling party to conduct the civil war against rebel forces.


How Jersey Dealt With Child Abuse
LEAD: Responding to a series of child-abuse deaths over the last six years, New Jersey has strengthened its capability to detect, investigate and prevent such cases, according to Thomas Blatner, the former director of New Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services.


HI-PORT INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HI-PORT INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
24,579,000
3,605,000
Net inc
601,000
78,000
Share earns
.30
.05
9mo sales
38,887,000
9,103,000
Net inc
718,000
b111,000
Share earns
.40
-


Police Beat 4 Reporters Covering Nairobi Riots
LEAD:  Student demonstrators fleeing from the police yesterday during rioting at the University of Nairobi, Kenya.
Reporters from four news organizations, Associated Press, United Press International, the British Broadcasting Corporation and Deutsche Presse-Agentur, were beaten and detained by the police while covering the unrest, which began when five students were arrested at about midnight Saturday.


Iowa Poll Shows Simon and Dole as Leaders
LEAD: Senator Paul Simon of Illinois has emerged as the clear leader in Iowa in the contest for the Democratic Presidential nomination, according to a new poll that was made public today.


Robert D. Moss; Lawyer, 70
LEAD: Robert D. Moss, a trustee and assistant to the president of the New York-based F. W. Olin Foundation, died of cancer Tuesday at his home in Scottsdale, Ariz.
He was 70 years old.


Williams Leads Redskins By Lions
LEAD: Doug Williams, replacing an ineffective Jay Schroeder, threw first-half touchdown passes to Kelvin Bryant and Gary Clark today to spark the Washington Redskins to a 20-13 victory over the Detroit Lions.


Walter Frese, 81, Dies; Ex-Harvard Professor
LEAD: Walter F. Frese, professor emeritus at the Harvard Business School and an authority on government accounting systems, died Wednesday of pneumonia at the Sancta Maria Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 81 years old and lived in Belmont, Mass.


Question Box
LEAD: QUESTION: A recent Sports of The Times column on free agency in pro football mentioned the Dayton Triangles as being among teams that had moved to other cities.
What happened to them?


BBDO Worldwide Gets Pepsi International Job
LEAD: In an unrelated development BBDO Worldwide, a Pepsi-Cola agency for 24 years, has been assigned headquarters advertising responsibilities for Pepsi-Cola International, a job it had six years ago.


Exhibition Shows Toscanini as Musician and Anti-Fascist
LEAD: Arturo Toscanini's influence on 20th-century orchestral works is assured; now, with the opening today of the exhibition ''Arturo Toscanini, 1915-1946: Art in the Shadow of Politics,'' the outspoken record of his anti-Fascism is fully documented.


G.M. Market Outlook for '88
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation will not regain the market share it lost last year in its 1988 model year, according to Lloyd E. Reuss, the company's executive vice president.


ST. JOHN GAINS FINAL IN UPSET
LEAD: For the second straight day, the Catholic High Schools Football League semifinals refused to go according to form.
St.
John the Baptist of East Islip, L.I., upset top-seeded St.
Anthony's, 12-11, yesterday on the Friars' field in South Huntington, L.I.
The Cougars moved into next Saturday's C.H.S.F.L.


Dallas Chief Leaves At Neiman-Marcus
LEAD: Neiman-Marcus Group Inc., the company that owns the Neiman-Marcus, Bergdorf Goodman and Contempo Casuals specialty store chains, has announced the resignation of David L. Dworkin, president of the Neiman-Marcus division.


EX-SPEAKER FACES SURGERY
LEAD: Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the former Speaker of the House of Representatives, left a Wash-ington hospital today and was admitted to a Boston hospital for rectal surgery., hospital officals said.
The 74-year-old Massachusettes Democrat is scheduled to undergo surgery of the rectum in several days, said Kathleen O'Donnell, a spokeswoman for Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.


U.S. Policy Conflict on Computers
LEAD: Two months before the Defense Department blocked the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from obtaining a Japanese-made supercomputer, the Air Force installed a $33 million computer system built largely by the same manufacturer, according to Government and industry officials.


Elizabeth W. Lawrence; Hospital Review Council Member, 78
LEAD: Elizabeth W. Lawrence, a member of the New York State Hospital Review and Planning Council from 1973 to 1982, died of cancer of the pancreas on Thursday at the Elizabethtown (N.Y.) Community Hospital.
She was 78 years old and lived in Elizabethtown.


SIPPICAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIPPICAN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,125,000
13,111,000
Net inc
894,000
1,033,000
Share earns
.21
.25
9mo rev
40,615,000
34,671,000
Net inc
2,557,000
2,544,000
Share earns
.60
.61


AMERICAN CITY BUSINESS JOURALS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CITY BUSINESS JOURALS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,044,000
6,134,000
Net loss
3,923,000
1,325,000
9mo rev
52,599,000
16,750,000
Net loss
12,057,000
4,449,000


Fordham Receives Chance to Play On
LEAD: Fordham was selected for the Division III playoffs yesterday, and the invitation put the Rams in a postseason football game for the first time in 46 seasons.


Going Out Guide
LEAD:  Views


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Lendl Overpowers Jarryd: Ivan Lendl captured his seventh Grand Prix title of the year yesterday, defeating Anders Jarryd, 6-3, 6-2, 7-5, in the final of the $375,00 Benson and Hedges championship in Wembley, England.
The first prize of $75,000 increased the 27-year-old Lendl's earnings for 1987 to just short of $1 million.


SEIBELS BRUCE GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEIBELS BRUCE GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,550,124
c2,209,213
Share earns
.49
.31
9mo net inc
b10,101,655
cd2,419,430
Share earns
1.40
-
b-After a capital gain of $704 for the quarter and capital losses of $4,585 for the 9 months.


AMPLICON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMPLICON INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,739,000
16,535,000
Net inc
1,667,000
1,106,000
Share earns
.26
.22


The Race Factor: Do Educators See Differences?
LEAD: Adelaide L. Sanford remembers when her nephew was suspended from a Roman Catholic high school in Queens.
He had been handed a brand-new textbook by his teacher, who later retrieved it, presented the book to a white student instead and gave her nephew a frayed copy in its place.


COAST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COAST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,517,000
c2,265,000
Share earns
.37
.56
9mo net inc
b6,974,000
c6,435,000
Share earns
1.73
1.59
b-Includes tax credits of $300,000 for the quarter and $2,200,000 for the 9 months.


Debt Delay For Wheeling
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge has granted the Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corporation another extension giving management the exclusive right to file a plan for settling the company's debts.
Judge Warren W. Bentz made the decision Friday over the objection of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, Wheeling


We All Know What's Wrong With High School
LEAD: To the Editor:


WORLDS OF WONDER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WORLDS OF WONDER (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
49,705,000
61,708,000
Net loss
b43,045,000
c4,075,000
Share earns
-
.18
6mo sales
72,658,000
85,193,000
Net loss
53,451,000
c2,803,000
Share earns
-
.13


EQUIPMENT COMPANY OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EQUIPMENT COMPANY OF AMERICA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,982,000
3,825,000
Net inc
121,000
c208,000
Share earns
.05
.09
9mo sales
14,755,000
11,198,000
Net inc
b511,000
c527,000
Share earns
.21
.23


McNeil, Klecko Power the Jets
LEAD: It wasn't a pretty game, but the Jets' 16-9 victory over Kansas City this afternoon may have convinced Coach Joe Walton that leadership and emotion - qualities he has believed to be missing - have returned to the team.


Novel Recruits
LEAD: Among the myriad of National Collegiate Athletic Association rules governing the recruitment of athletes is one that prohibits a college from identifying the players it hopes to sign.


FAMILY SHOPPING NETWORK reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAMILY SHOPPING NETWORK
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,291,529
1,020,636
Net inc
56,762
11,360
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
2,921,476
2,273,812
Net inc
149,632
25,740
Share earns
.04
.01


GRAF IS BASKING AS OTHERS PURSUE
LEAD: THE thought crossed her mind when she was in Los Angeles recently, basking in the sunshine, savoring her accomplishments this year.
Only 18, Steffi Graf of West Germany has already accumulated enough fame and fortune to last a lifetime, and fulfilled her ambition to become the No. 1 tennis player in the world.


Nimble Soldiers of the Commercial Wars
LEAD: On commercial issues they are the Government's elite force, striking at Japan, the European Community, Brazil and others that maintain barriers against imports from the United States.


Dance: Jamaica Troupe Celebrates Anniversary
LEAD: THE stage came alive with the first and closing dances on a program presented by the National Dance Company of Jamaica on Saturday night at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College.
But there were some fairly long stretches in between.


Where School Is More Than School
LEAD: What's the most valuable public resource in New York's poor communities?
In many, it's the school building, and New York's Board of Regents thinks it could be used more extensively.
The board has launched an experimental program whose results could have interest far beyond New York.


The Move to Ban Chemical Weapons: Big Strides and Many More Hurdles
LEAD: For years, talks on banning chemical weapons have been stymied by Moscow's refusal to accept extensive on-site verification measures.


Julie T. Hoover Weds Marvin S. Cohen
LEAD: Julie Tarachow Hoover, a daughter of Sophia Tarachow of New York and the late Dr.
Sidney Tarachow, was married yesterday at the Excelsior Club to Marvin Sidney Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mordecai Cohen of Charleston, S.C.
Rabbi David Lincoln officiated.


AIRLINE AND UNION REACH AN ACCORD
LEAD: United Airlines and the union representing 21,000 mechanics and ground workers reached a tentative contract agreement late today, averting a nationwide strike that threatened to shut down the airline, a union official said.


Brazil Parley Rebuffs Sarney
LEAD: In a major setback for President Jose Sarney, a special commission preparing a final draft of Brazil's new constitution called today for presidential elections to be held next year.


'Onion Field' Killer, On Parole, Is Arrested
LEAD: One of two men convicted in the 1963 slaying of a policeman that was chronicled in the book ''The Onion Field'' has been arrested on a drug charge, the police reported Saturday.


Pakistani Persecution Charged
LEAD: The spiritual leader of the Ahmadi Moslem sect, on a visit to the United States, has blamed the Government of Pakistan and some Moslem clergymen there for what he calls ''the continuing legalized persecution'' of the Ahmadis in Pakistan, where the sect is concentrated.


Soviet Stages Nuclear Test, 19th Underground This Year
LEAD: The Soviet Union staged an underground nuclear explosion today on the steppes of Central Asia to improve Soviet military technology, the official Tass news agency said.


VMX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VMX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,271,000
5,618,000
Net loss
1,498,000
1,598,000


L.T.'S GREAT CHASE
LEAD: BUDDY RYAN might as well have slapped Lawrence Taylor across the face with a glove.
In another of his provocative proclamations, the outspoken coach of the Philadelphia Eagles was ''not sure'' if Lawrence Taylor would be able to catch Randall Cunningham yesterday when the Giants' All-Pro linebacker was assigned to run down the Eagles' scrambling quarterback.


STAGE: 'BREAKING THE CODE'
LEAD: ''BREAKING THE CODE,'' the new London import at the Neil Simon Theater, is yet another English drama about a sensitive genius whose homosexuality leads to his crucifixion by the hypocritical establishment.
But if Hugh Whitemore's flawed, discursive play shares many of the symptoms of its well-worn genre, it finally pulls away from the sentimentality of ''Another Country'' and ''Prick Up Your Ears'' and all the recent rest.


Faberge Sets Arden Date
LEAD: Faberge Inc. remains confident it can buy Elizabeth Arden, one of the world's largest makers of prestige cosmetics, despite industry rumors that the deal will become another victim of October's stock market crash.


UPPER PENINSULA POWER CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UPPER PENINSULA POWER CO (OTC)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
57,933,000
54,577,000
Net inc
4,395,000
3,399,000
Share earns
2.81
2.14


Apple Sets Repurchase
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc., like many other companies taking advantage of lower share prices, said Friday that it would repurchase up to an additional five million shares of its common stock.
Based on Friday's closing price, the repurchase would be valued at about $186.3 million.
Apple's stock closed down $1.50 a share Friday, at $37.25, in over-the-counter trading.


INTERNATIONAL RECOVERY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL RECOVERY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,627,603
940,043
Net inc
204,173
b4,966
Share earns
.06
-
6mo rev
16,589,545
2,162,054
Net inc
514,494
11,629
Share earns
.15
.01
Shares outst
3,337,912
2,180,000


AMERICAN TECHNICAL CERAMCS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN TECHNICAL CERAMCS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,094,000
4,431,000
Net inc
109,000
b109,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


SOUTHWEST WATER COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWEST WATER COMPANY (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,227,000
8,485,000
Net inc
1,127,000
1,265,000
Share earns
.51
.65
Shares outst
2,177,000
1,922,000
9mo rev
23,592,000
21,401,000
Net inc
2,211,000
2,185,000
Share earns
1.09
1.13
Shares outst
2,015,000
1,911,000


AMERICAN SCIENCE &amp; ENGIEERING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN SCIENCE &amp; ENGIEERING (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,170,000
4,967,000
Net loss
709,000
240,000
6mo rev
8,752,000
9,830,000
Net loss
894,000
178,000


Short-Term Auctions to Fill Week
LEAD: The Treasury has scheduled a full slate of short-term offerings this week, consisting of bills due in 3, 6 and 12 months as well as two-year notes.


Knicks Learning At Last
LEAD: A common pre-game ritual in National Basketball Association dressing rooms is watching films of an opponent's previous game.


GOVERNOR ENTERS HOSPITAL
LEAD: Governor William A. O'Neill checked into St.
Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford this afternoon, suffering a very high temperature and flu-like symptoms, Jon Sandberg, his press secretary, said.
Mr.
O'Neill's tempera-ture reached 103 degrees and his doc-tors ordered him to stay overnight for observation, Mr.


Municipal Bond Units In Retreat
LEAD: Having suffered for months from a dearth of new bond issues and ruinous price-cutting, municipal bond departments on Wall Street predict a further contraction of the industry.


TransCanada's Bid for Encor
LEAD: TransCanada PipeLines Ltd., which has been seeking a greater presence in western Canada's energy exploration lands, said Friday that it planned to offer $8.75 a share, or $6.64 in United States currency, to acquire the Encor Energy Corporation.


Joffrey Revives a Nijinsky Classic
LEAD: The Joffrey Ballet's new production of ''Le Sacre du Printemps,'' which is to be performed at City Center on Nov. 17 and 21, has become one of the most talked-about hits of the dance season.


11th-Hour Pact Sought On Jersey Beach Debris
LEAD: Lawyers for New Jersey and New York City worked down to the wire today to avoid going to court to settle their dispute over garbage that fouled the state's beaches in the summer.


ARTHUR MILLER READING
LEAD: To mark the publication of his auto-biography, ''Timebends: A Lift,'' Ar-thur Miller is to give a reading from the work tonight at 8, at the Vivian Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center.
The book is published by Grove Press, which is sponsoring the read-ing with Lincoln Center Theater.
Ad-mission is free.


Departure at Case Unit Of Tenneco Is Surprise
LEAD: The announcement that Jerome K. Green, the 51-year-old president and chief executive of the J. I. Case Company would resign, effective Dec. 1, has surprised most industry analysts.


After Three Weeks, a Budget Mouse
LEAD: Black Monday sent waves of apprehension around the globe.
But the shock caused only a rumble in official Washington.
After three weeks of deficit-reduction negotiations it's still politics-as-usual.
Instead of finding courage, almost everyone is scrambling to evade blame for raising taxes or paring popular programs.


Outdoors; Casting Calendar Aside
LEAD: HAVING bade summer farewell, I was startled by the three-day warm spell earlier this month that ended the night the moon was full.


Bridge: For Some Options Traders, Tournaments Are Diversion
LEAD: The qualities for bridge expertise closely match the requirements for success in trading stock options, which some consider a game.


Lintas Relinquishing Timberland Account
LEAD: Lintas: New York announced Friday that it had resigned the account of the Timberland Corporation because it could not agree with the new management on basic strategy.
The account, billing about $4 million a year, came to the agency in 1985.


HPSC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HPSC INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,918,000
5,344,000
Net inc
1,358,000
1,571,000
Share earns
.25
.27
9mo rev
17,160,000
15,654,000
Net inc
4,069,000
4,573,000
Share earns
.74
.79


Belgrade Raises Prices, Freezes Wages
LEAD: The Federal Government sharply increased the prices of basic foodstuffs and other necessities and froze wages at midnight Saturday in an effort to hold down Yugoslavia's extraordinarily high inflation.


Unidentified Woman Found Slain in Bronx
LEAD: The body of a woman who had been slain was found in a wooded area of Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx on Saturday, the police said.


Music: Russell Sherman Plays Beethoven
LEAD: RUSSELL SHERMAN has long held a special niche in Beethoven interpretation in this country.
He is a pianist whose interpretations seem to be continually renewed by intellectual and imaginative inquiry, whose response to the issues posed by the music at hand is always specific.
The Beethoven Society presented him Saturday afternoon at Alice Tully Hall with the New England Conservatory Chorus and Orchestra, in the Fourth Piano Concerto and the Choral


GRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,509,000
5,290,000
Net inc
510,950
411,750
Share earns
.18
.14


Judy Wolf Is the Bride Of Dr. Jeffrey S. Nevid
LEAD: Judy Wolf, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mayer Wolf-Racker of Fresh Meadows, Queens, and Dr.
Jeffrey S. Nevid, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Nevid of Brooklyn, were married yesterday in New York Harbor aboard the yacht Tampa VI.
Rabbi Allen Block officiated.


Mexico City Journal; Grandfather Fed the Rabbits as He Battled Stalin
LEAD: Lenin lies in his tomb on Red Square, and Stalin is interred at the Kremlin Wall.
But the ashes of Leon Trotsky, theoretician of the Bolshevik Revolution and founder of the Red Army, remain in exile and oblivion in the quiet garden of the small house here where he was assassinated by a presumed Soviet agent 47 years ago.


In Minnesota, Democrats Evoke Past
LEAD: There was no hand-wringing, no nervous questioning of old values.
Hubert H. Humphrey's oratory was applauded once more and Walter F. Mondale carried the sad but sweet aura of vindication.


Ordeal for Homeless Students in Suburbs
LEAD: While most of her classmates are still asleep, Tareebia Wakley is up at 6 A.M. each weekday to get ready for a 45-minute bus ride from a motel in Poughkeepsie to Oakside Elementary School here.


'Frankie and Johnny' To Get Commercial Run
LEAD: The Manhattan Theater Club production of Terrence McNally's ''Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune'' is to begin a commercial Off Broadway run on Dec. 4 at the Westside Arts Theater, 407 West 43d Street.
The comedy, which stars Kathy Bates and Kenneth Welsh, opened at the theater club's main stage at the City Center on Oct.


FIRST COLUMBIA FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST COLUMBIA FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
5,403,000
b1,956,000
9mo net loss
7,878,000
b11,019,000
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $483,000 and $1,469,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


STARR SURGICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STARR SURGICAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,495,000
2,661,000
Net inc
384,000
269,000
Share earns
.05
.04
9mo rev
9,896,000
6,909,000
Net inc
976,000
550,700
Share earns
.14
.08


AMBASSADOR FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMBASSADOR FINANCIAL GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
79,846
960,100
9mo net inc
b63,691
c603,887
Share earns
.03
-
b-Includes a tax loss carryforward of $35,690.
c-Net loss


The Other Victims: Four Case Studies of Fatal Child Abuse
LEAD: In the last weeks of her life, 5-year-old Tamika Greene had repeatedly been whipped with an electric cord, forced to overeat until she threw up, and finally poisoned.
Last summer, her father was convicted in Manhattan of murdering her and another child.


NEW TESTS IN RIVALRY FOR SLICE
LEAD: THE J. Walter Thompson Company and Batten, Barton, Durstine &amp; Osborne made creative presentations to Pepsi-Cola U.S.A. for its Slice soft drink last Thursday and were sent back to the drawing boards, according to agency sources.


INTEGRATED GENETICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTEGRATED GENETICS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,998,471
4,608,513
Net loss
914,513
b1,603,159
Share earns
-
.16
9mo rev
9,168,975
6,432,699
Net loss
1,674,312
3,085,990
b-Net income


BALCHEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALCHEM CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,787,000
1,522,000
Net inc
104,000
85,100
Share earns
.09
.07
9mo sales
4,943,200
4,245,800
Net inc
267,600
201,200
Share earns
.22
.17


Business and the Law; Big Courtroom For Toxic Web
LEAD: A FORMER school building near San Francisco became a court house earlier this month for one of the largest pollution lawsuits ever brought.


Market Place; Using Odd Lots As an Indicator
LEAD: FOR a brief period last month, small investors who buy in odd lots - that is, fewer than 100 shares - greeted the plunging prices of Black Monday as a buying opportunity.


BRENNER COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRENNER COMPANIES INC
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,453,000
7,070,000
Net inc
138,000
168,000
Share earns
.08
.10
Yr rev
31,876,000
31,693,000
Net inc
1,372,000
1,293,000
Share earns
.85
.80


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Aetna Life and Casualty Co., Hartford, named Ronald E. Compton executive vice president.


STENDIG INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STENDIG INDUSTRIES
Year to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
49,256,000
36,473,000
Net inc
b1,482,000
c1,643,000
Share earns
1.01
-
b-After a credit of $114,000 representing a partial reversal of a provision for loss on disposal of discontinued operations and a tax credit of $643,000.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Senator's Surprise
LEAD: As a junior member of the Senate, Wyche Fowler Jr., Democrat of Georgia, was the last to speak Friday at a hearing on legislation for changing the way Congress oversees the Central Intelligence Agency.


New Questions About Louvre Pact
LEAD: As calls for a new international meeting to help reassure world financial markets have increased in recent days, so has the debate about whether a currency agreement reached last February was the underlying cause of the stock market plunge last month.


Critic's Notebook; Did 'PACO'S STORY' DESERVE ITS AWARD?
LEAD: WHAT happened?
That was the question everyone was asking last week, following the news that ''Paco's Story'' by Larry Heinemann had won the 1987 National Book Award for fiction.
Members of the literary community had widely regarded Toni Morrison's novel ''Beloved'' as a virtual shoo-in for the prize (with ''The Counterlife'' by Philip Roth also a strong contender) and the announcement last Monday evening that Mr.


PRETORIA RAISING ANTE IN ANGOLA WAR
LEAD: South Africa's offensive against Cuban-backed Government troops in southeastern Angola is the biggest intensification of the 12-year-old Angolan civil war, according to South African military analysts.


The Tennis Racquet, Reshaped Another Time
LEAD: It has been close to a decade since the first oversized tennis racquets came onto the market, and two decades since Jimmy Connors played with his first steel racquet.
Now comes another oddity: a racquet that its manufacturer, Wilson Sporting Goods Company of River Grove, Ill., says will set a new standard.


Just How Far, And How Fast, For Fitness?
LEAD: HOW fit is fit?


A Mourning Ulster Abstains From Violence
LEAD: Solemn memorial services replaced demonstrations as the focus of attention here today as Northern Ireland marked the anniversary of a landmark treaty signed two years ago by Britain and Ireland in an effort to bring peace to this troubled province.


Giant European Fund's Cautious Stance
LEAD: At the headquarters of the Robeco Group, the largest group of investment funds under single management outside the United States, its managing director, Nicholas Veer, has decided that it is ''too late to be bearish'' on America, so he plans just to let the dust settle from the stock market collapse.


Petras P. Griskevicius; Lithuanian Chief, 63
LEAD: Petras P. Griskevicius, the longtime Communist Party leader in the Soviet Baltic republic of Lithuania, died suddenly Saturday, the official Tass press agency reported today.
He was 63 years old.
Tass did not give the cause of death.
The son of a tailor, Mr.
Griskevicius had been leader of the Lithuanian party since February 1974.


Beatrice Reassigning 4 Brands to West Coast
LEAD: Beatrice/Hunt-Wesson has reassigned four brands to its West Coast ad agencies that had been handled by the J. Walter Thompson Company, Chicago.
Beatrice and J.W.T. announced earlier last week that they had agreed to part company after five years.


The Editorial Notebook; Why the Underclass Is Still Under
LEAD: Explanations for the appearance of a black urban underclass have ranged from the fanciful to the frivolous, from behavioral distortions wrought by the welfare system to the transplantation of a Southern sharecropper culture to big-city ghettos.


A Leading Chinese Dissident Is Freed After 6 Years in Jail
LEAD: A prominent dissident active in the Democracy Wall movement in the late 1970's has been freed after a six-year jail term, Chinese sources said today.


U.S., After a Debate, Accepts Soviet Offer To Examine Radars
LEAD: The United States has accepted a Soviet offer to inspect several old radars that some conservative senators have asserted may violate the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty, Administration officials said today.


Wildlife Fund Executive Named to Smithsonian
LEAD: Thomas E. Lovejoy, executive vice president of the World Wildlife Fund, has been named by the Smithsonian Institution as its assistant secretary for external affairs.


FIRST FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
249,000
332,000
Share earns
.22
-
Year-ago share earnings are not available, the company went public in April.


FLARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLARE INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
810,715
200,718
Net inc
222,389
b574,871
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Fuchs to Play Carnegie Hall
LEAD: Joseph Fuchs, violinist, is to play works by Tartini, Beethoven, Mozart, Tchaikovsky and Ernst on Wednesday at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
In addition to his performing career, Mr.
Fuchs is on the faculty at the Juilliard School.
Katsurako Mikami is to appear with Mr.
Fuchs as pianist.
Tickets cost from $5 to $17.


REAGAN VOWS VETO
LEAD: The Senate is poised to approve a major housing bill for the first time in seven years, setting up a possible veto battle with President Reagan, who says the legislation is a budget-buster.


WORLDWIDE COMPUTER SERVCES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WORLDWIDE COMPUTER SERVCES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,922,921
3,640,170
Net inc
93,162
66,369
Share earns
.05
.03
9mo sales
11,236,832
10,024,908
Net inc
289,734
222,008
Share earns
.15
.11


EATON FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EATON FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
536,000
783,000
Share earns
.14
.20
6mo net inc
1,346,000
1,523,000
Share earns
.34
.39


Falling Dollar Leaves Pentagon Facing Deficit
LEAD: The recent tumble in the dollar's value has left the Pentagon facing a deficit of at least $325 million in the fund used to pay overseas allowances to American military personnel, the Defense Department's comptroller says.


2 Distaff Favorites Pull Out of Event
LEAD: A busy weekend of Kentucky bloodstock sales has altered the lineup for Saturday's Breeders' Cup Distaff.
Coup de Fusil and Family Style, two of the favorites, have been withdrawn from the race, leaving a field of just six.


Jazz: Town Hall Concert
LEAD: FOUR young musicians were given a push into the spotlight by three established performers in a concert at Town Hall on Friday evening.
Sponsored by a take-out food service, the concert's title, ''Culinova and All That Jazz,'' was a bit misleading.


Horse Racing; It's Off to the Races (or to Rest) for the Breeders' Cup
LEAD: ''THERE is only one day,'' begins the advertisement that is saturating national magazines this week, ''when the world's finest Thoroughbreds come together on the same track and championships are decided.
That one day is the Breeders' Cup.'' That one day is Nov. 21, a date that has invalidated the advertisment's claims.


COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,137,244
8,425,870
Net inc
674,357
333,695
Share earns
.13
.06
9mo rev
29,742,781
26,433,325
Net inc
2,275,860
b1,537,144
Share earns
.44
.29


S.E.C. Studies Bridge Loans
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission chairman, David S. Ruder, said Friday that the S.E.C. was examining whether the billion-dollar bridge loans offered by leading brokerages created liquidity problems for the firms during the recent market free fall.


Ballet: Joffrey in 4 Works by Arpino
LEAD: THE Joffrey Ballet devoted its program Saturday night at the City Center to four works by Gerald Arpino, its resident choreographer and associate director.
They were not the same four works that had been originally announced.
Injuries to dancers made the scheduled program impossible to present.
Nevertheless, ''Birthday Variations,'' ''Valentine,'' ''L'Air d'Esprit'' and ''The Clowns'' were all by Mr.


Taft? Hartley? The Names Ring a Bell, but Why?
LEAD: Anybody remember Representative Fred A. Hartley Jr.?
A New Jersey Republican with 20 years in the House who was briefly chairman of the Education and Labor Committee?
Wait a minute, wasn't he Hartley of the Taft-Hartley Act, the restrictive 1947 labor law that the unions bitterly fought and are still mad about?


How to Reach Out and Vote for Someone
LEAD: To the Editor:


X-Ray Laser Could Lead To Greater Insecurity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Topeka Journal; Helping Hand Comforts the Hungry
LEAD: A cold wind reddened the faces of babies and worried young mothers and annoyed unshaven drifters who lined up outside St.
Joseph Church today for lunch.


Books of The Times
LEAD:  SPANGLE. By Gary Jennings. 869 pages.


Keep Old Glory Flying in Equatorial Guinea
LEAD: To the Editor:


Panel Says N.S.C. Post Should Be Civilian Job
LEAD: The Iran-contra Congressional committees are expected to recommend in their final report that national security advisers should not be selected from among the ranks of military officers, according to Congressional officials.


WILLIAMS, A L CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILLIAMS, A L CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
71,514,000
48,489,000
Net inc
10,153,000
6,588,000
Share earns
.41
.27
9mo rev
206,529,000
147,838,000
Net inc
28,976,000
19,287,000
Share earns
1.17
.78


INQUIRY IS BEGUN ON BLASTS IN TEXAS
LEAD: A damage assessment team today began investigating two explosions that ripped apart a chemical plant, blowing out windows six miles away and touching off a huge fire and killing three people.


Rock: Petrol Emotion
LEAD: WITH a tangle of guitar riffs and shouts of defiance and frustration, That Petrol Emotion played a high-adrenalin set Friday night at the Ritz.
That Petrol Emotion hails from Northern Ireland and was founded by Sean O'Neill, formerly the guitarist for a punk-pop band, the Undertones.
And while Mr.


Plane Crashes in Snow at Denver; 26 of the 82 Aboard Are Killed
LEAD: A Continental Airlines DC-9 jetliner crashed this afternoon while taking off in a severe snowstorm here, killing 26 people and injuring 56, officials said.


Spain Is Bullish on Its Market
LEAD: Alongside of Wall Street and other financial capitals, Spain's tiny stock market represented a speck in the international scheme of things in October as share prices plunged around the world.
The Spanish are philosophical about the lack of attention, though.


No Headline
LEAD: Hard experience has taught the nation's bankers to be skeptical of Congress.
Still bitter about the moratorium on expanded banking businesses that was imposed by Congress last summer, they have started a new lobbying campaign to defend their industry's interests on Capitol Hill.


T ROWE PRICE ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*T ROWE PRICE ASSOCIATES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
33,840,000
29,443,000
Net inc
b6,810,000
4,832,000
Share earns
.92
.65
9mo rev
99,407,000
82,139,000
Net inc
b15,753,000
11,503,000
Share earns
2.13
1.55


WEYENBERG SHOE MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEYENBERG SHOE MANUFACTURING CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
28,252,000
25,478,000
Net inc
1,046,000
998,000
Share earns
.95
.84
9mo sales
83,676,000
77,868,000
Net inc
3,425,000
2,830,000
Share earns
3.10
2.37


Spy Scandal: U.S. Embassy Still Troubled
LEAD: Diplomats who glance up on their way to the handball court or the hair salon at the new American embassy residential compound in Moscow see a defiant exclamation overhead.


Soneni D. Bryant Marries David M. Smith, an Editor
LEAD: Soneni Denise Bryant, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James O. Bryant of Piscataway, N.J., was married yesterday to David M. Smith, a son of Martin J. Smith of the Bronx and the late Selma Smith.
Presiding Judge Joan Robinson Gross of the Municipal Court of Union County, N.J., performed the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency hotel in New Brunswick, N


GILBERT ASSOCIATES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GILBERT ASSOCIATES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
57,642,000
61,316,000
Net inc
1,731,000
1,983,000
Share earns
.32
.37
9mo rev
180,516,000
179,955,000
Net inc
5,558,000
5,445,000
Share earns
1.04
1.02


New York Is Fighting Spread of Sweatshops
LEAD: From outside, the building in Corona, Queens, looked as if it had been abandoned years ago.
A layer of grime coated the windows and a rusting metal grate stretched across the storefront.
But Charles DeSiervo knew better.
He found a battered door on the side and pushed it open.


A $1.62 Billion Deal at Age 26
LEAD: While other students at the Harvard Business School were merely studying mergers and acquisitions, Warwick Fairfax was buying $22 million worth of shares in Australia's oldest media company.


O'Rielly Leaves Year-Old Shop
LEAD: Curvin G. O'Rielly, partner and creative director of the French-owned O'Rielly O'Brien Clow/RSCG, is quitting the year-old company he helped found.


ARMY WILL CLOSE CHILD-CARE CENTER
LEAD: The Army announced it is closing and demolishing a child-care center at its base at the Presidio after allegations that as many as 60 youngsters were sexually abused there.


FIRST FARWEST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FARWEST CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
44,959,000
35,251,000
Net inc
b196,000
c163,000
Share earns
.15
.11
Shares outst
1,309,000
1,310,000
9mo rev
127,363,000
99,099,000
Net inc
b947,000
c670,000
Share earns
.72
.48


Marlene Dietrich Sells Jewelry Items at Auction
LEAD: Collectors of Marlene Dietrich memorabilia bid eagerly for the movie star's cigarette cases and powder compacts during a jewelry auction late last week night.


Still Big After All These Years
LEAD: SOONER or later, the cycles get them all.
The Game - Harvard versus Yale - is a good excuse to tailgate, but usually produces little more than the bragging rights for beleaguered heads of commerce.
The Big Game - California versus Stanford - makes national news only when a student musician is run over at the end of a last-second kickoff return.


Bowl Picture Clear Despite Restriction
LEAD: Notre Dame fans tossed oranges onto the field when the Irish soundly whipped Alabama, 37-6, at South Bend, Ind., Saturday, but Notre Dame is headed for the Cotton Bowl, according to its associate athletic director.


Account
LEAD: *
Option America, Boston, a commodity concern, to Barry Blau &amp; Partners, Fairfield, Conn., for advertising and direct response marketing.


People
LEAD: *
Michael T. Rogers is joining Campbell-Mithun, Chicago, as executive vice president/director of creative services.


7 Unlikely Nations Join Winter Games
LEAD: Among the record 60 countries who expect to compete in the Calgary Winter Olympics, which begins in mid-February, are seven who have no prior experience in the Winter Games.


Opera: 'Don Pasquale'
LEAD: THE Western Opera Theater, the touring wing of the San Francisco Opera that has been visiting the boroughs outside of Manhattan regularly in recent seasons, brought ''Don Pasquale'' to Queens College on Saturday night.
Between Donizetti's sparkling score, the energy of four lively performers in the leads, the reasonably trim orchestra under Patrick Summers and the generous sprinkling of gags from old movies and new sitcoms, this '


Deficit Talks: Politics Takes Seat at Table
LEAD: Since the day President Reagan sent his $1 trillion dollar 1988 budget to Congress last January, Democratic leaders and some Republicans in Congress have called for a meeting with Mr.
Reagan on deficit reduction.


TRIANGLE HOME PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRIANGLE HOME PRODUCTS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,632,000
7,047,000
Net loss
42,000
b45,000
Share earns
-
.04
9mo sales
20,147,000
20,254,000
Net loss
89,000
57,000
b-Net income


Washington Talk: Briefing; Marijuana Caper
LEAD: Each week The Washington Post publishes a long list of crime news, reporting homicides, sexual assaults, robberies and break-ins by street address in column after column.
The other day it included without comment this entry in the Northwest district:


Cadillac's Allante Is Struggling to Find Its Niche
LEAD: The two-seater, $55,000 Allante model was billed as the ''new spirit of Cadillac'' when it was introduced last March.
But judging from sales thus far, the spirit may still be willing, but consumer interest is weak.


Colts Beat Dolphins As Dickerson Stars
LEAD: Eric Dickerson rushed for 154 yards and one touchdown, and Dean Biasucci kicked four field goals today as the Indianapolis Colts routed the Miami Dolphins, 40-21.


MOSCOW FORUM AUDIENCE RAISES QUESTIONS ABOUT THE YELTSIN AFFAIR
LEAD: The comments and questions from the audience about last week's public repudiation of Boris N. Yeltsin by the Communist Party bristled with anger and disillusionment.


BARRISTER INFORMATION SYSEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARRISTER INFORMATION SYSEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 25
1987
1986
Revenue
9,284,000
8,152,000
Net inc
366,000
16,000
Share earns
.12
.01
6mo rev
17,546,000
13,715,000
Net inc
421,000
b558,000
Share earns
.14
-


'85 Soviet-U.S. Talk Led To First Joint Venture
LEAD: It was Independence Day in the United States when the first Soviet-American business joint venture began.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Conflicting Computer Policy  Although the U.S. barred M.I.T. from buying a Japanese computer, the Air Force had previously installed a unit from the same company.
Page D1.
Arc Is a Space Illusion  An enormous blue arc in the distant universe turns out be an optical illusion, astronomers said.


INSTITUFORM EAST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSTITUFORM EAST (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,532,820
3,774,296
Net inc
589,530
332,753
Share earns
.13
.07


ARDEN INTERNATIONAL KITCHNS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARDEN INTERNATIONAL KITCHNS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,747,271
2,494,523
Net inc
97,869
75,897
Share earns
.03
.03
9mo rev
7,175,550
6,826,989
Net inc
136,748
50,106
Share earns
.05
.02


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


STAR TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STAR TECHNOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,069,000
11,849,000
Net inc
b597,000
c705,000
Share earns
.04
.05
Shares outst
15,183,000
14,228,000
6mo rev
18,124,000
20,122,000
Net inc
b1,306,000
c824,000
Share earns
.09
.06
Shares outst
15,148,000
14,213,000


AMERIBANC INVESTORS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERIBANC INVESTORS GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,200,000
1,912,000
Share earns
.35
.36
Shares outst
6,375,000
6,200,000
9mo net inc
6,598,000
5,632,000
Share earns
1.05
1.06
Share earnings are fully diluted.


L.I. Hospital Investigates 11 Cases
LEAD: The authorities are investigating at least 11 cases in which elderly patients at a Long Island hospital either died or encountered serious breathing difficulties while under the care of the same registered nurse, the president of the hospital said yesterday.


WATTS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WATTS INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
41,825,000
32,773,000
Net inc
4,538,000
3,160,000
Share earns
.36
.27


Nets Come Close But Lose Again
LEAD: With Otis Birdsong and Orlando Woolridge, the injured offensive guns, back in the lineup, the Nets came closer to victory tonight than at any other time this season.
But in the end, the Nets lost to the Washington Bullets, 113-109, and remained the only team without a victory.


Pieter Menten Dies; Nazi War Criminal Was Collector of Art
LEAD: Pieter Nicolaas Menten, the most notorious Nazi war criminal in the Netherlands, died here Saturday in a nursing home, according to Dutch television.
He was 88 years old.
No cause of death was given.
Mr.
Menten, a wealthy art collector, was convicted in the killings of dozens of Jews in the Polish village of Podhoroce while he was a translator with an SS unit of the German


Military Contractors Squeezed
LEAD: The military contracting industry, which was riding high only several years ago as the Reagan Administration pursued the largest arms buildup in American peacetime history, is now heading into what may be its most difficult and competitive era.


TSO FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TSO FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
78,340,000
35,121,000
Net inc
5,366,000
2,725,000
Share earns
.59
.30
Shares outst
9,088,000
9,064,000
9mo rev
210,048,000
88,518,000
Net inc
9,888,000
5,005,000
Share earns
1.09
.71
Shares outst
9,076,000
8,419,000


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Nov. 15, 1987:
MONDAY
Baxter Travenol Labs
First Interstate Bancorp
Century Tel Enterprises
NAFCO Fin'l Group
TUESDAY
Briggs &amp; Stratton
Longs Drug Stores
Coleman Co
Mohasco Corp
Duquesne Light
Ohio Edison
FGIC Corp
Public Service Enterprise
Foote Cone &amp; Belding
Tuscon Elec Pwr
Harsco Corp
Tyco Labs
Kellwood Co
WEDNESDAY
Amer Intl Group
Kansas Pwr &amp; Lt
Belding-Heminway
Kay Jewelers
Bowater Inc
Marine Midland Banks
Centex Corp
Morse Shoe Inc
Combustion


Big-Ticket Purchasing Seems Steady, for Now
LEAD: The stock market's historic collapse on Oct. 19 so far appears to have caused barely a ripple in the spending habits of people who like imported cars, exotic vacations and high fashion.


ADVANTAGE COS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANTAGE COS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,542,000
1,097,000
Net inc
207,000
b163,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
11,130,000
2,995,000
Net inc
364,000
b290,000
Share earns
.14
-
b-Net loss


Law That Expunges Child-Abuse Complaints Needs Changing
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHEELABRATOR TECHNOLOIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WHEELABRATOR TECHNOLOIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
243,400,000
220,900,000
Net inc
6,300,000
5,000,000
Share earns
.22
-
9mo rev
743,200,000
591,000,000
Net inc
18,500,000
3,500,000
Share earns
.64
-


TV Review; 'Poor Little Rich Girl,' on Hutton
LEAD: NBC's ''Poor Little Rich Girl,'' starring Farrah Fawcett as the Woolworth heiress Barbara Hutton, opens with a recording of Bing Crosby singing ''I Found a Million-Dollar Baby at the Five and Ten Cent Store.'' That is the highlight of the five-hour mini-series that starts tonight at 9 and concludes Tuesday, beginning at 8 P.M.


Lawmakers Are Wary Of Delaying Benefit Rise
LEAD: Republican and Democratic legislative leaders refused today to rule out reductions in cost-of-living increases in Social Security and other benefit programs, but agreed that major political hurdles stood in the way of such cuts.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''The price is high - but it is to prevent us having to pay an even higher price later.''


ZEHNTEL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZEHNTEL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Sales
8,914,000
10,039,000
Net loss
b1,728,000
c225,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Includes merger costs of $526,000 incurred in connection with the previously announced merger agreement with Teradyne.


Man and Woman Die In a Bronx House Fire
LEAD: A man and a woman died in their Bronx home early yesterday in a fire that was not deemed suspicious, the fire department said.


Dance: Juilliard Performs
LEAD: PROGRAMS presented by the Juilliard Dance Ensemble, the performing group of the Juilliard School's dance division, have sometimes seemed intended less to entertain audiences than to give as many students as possible the chance to get on stage in dance of suitable technical levels choreographed by associates of the school.


Bronx Residents Fighting Plans Of a Developer
LEAD: A battle has broken out in the Bronx over the future of the peaceful acreage where U Thant lived when he headed the United Nations.


Payment by Venezuela
LEAD: The Venezuelan Government will repay $250 million in principal owed to private foreign banks by mid-December, Finance Minister Hector Hurtado said Friday.
He told reporters the amount would be sent within 30 days from Monday as specified under terms of Venezuela's $20.3 billion rescheduling accord with private foreign banks.


British Airline In Other Talks
LEAD: Sir Adam Thompson, the chairman of British Caledonian Airways, said today that his company has held serious merger talks with six or seven European airlines in case a planned takeover by British Airways fails.


DIMENSIONAL MEDICINE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIMENSIONAL MEDICINE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,017,239
377,815
Net loss
524,177
424,343
6mo sales
3,697,636
796,490
Net loss
897,951
661,089


Hospital Workers' Chief Loses in Power Struggle
LEAD: A divided hospital workers union, announced voting results yesterday that gave a narrow victory to union officers urging lessened authority for the local's president.


WHEN SKIS ARE WELL TUNED, THEY HUM AS THEY GLIDE
LEAD: TUNE-UPS.
We give them to our cars, our bodies, our golf and tennis games.
Why should skis be any different?
They're not.
And the tune-ups they need are every bit as sophisticated as those we seek in the body shops.


How We Got Here
LEAD: Members of Congress and representatives of the White House are negotiating a modest deficit reduction that may be necessary to restore ''the confidence of the market'' - assuming anything can do that.
But even a strong attack on the deficit would not approach the underlying problems of the U.S. economy.


Wshington Talk: Briefing; Protecting the Press
LEAD: Soviet officials are scheduled to come to the United States next week to inspect an installation in Utah intended to dispose of chemical weapons.
The idea is to demonstrate the technology for getting rid of chemical weapons if a treaty banning them is signed.
But the Washington press corps may want to think twice before trying to cover this inspection.


The Stage: Tom Cayler In Performance Works
LEAD: ''DID you know that the French used to write etiquette books on when and where it was proper to pick their body lice?'' asks Tom Cayler, an actor and writer, early in his performance piece, ''Jerkismo and Other Male Myths.''


EARTH TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EARTH TECHNOLOGY
Qtr to Aug 28
1987
1986
Revenue
6,380,089
6,661,729
Net inc
391,117
b620,533
Share earns
.21
.22
Yr rev
24,393,450
23,299,525
Net inc
966,772
876,318
Share earns
.52
.31
Shares outst
1,874,429
2,844,550


Denver Inquiry In Crash Centers On Role of Snow
LEAD: Officials investigating the fatal crash of a Continental Airlines jet in Denver said yesterday that prime interest had focused on the hazards of snow buildup on early-model DC-9 aircraft such as the one that crashed Sunday.


MICRON PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICRON PRODUCTS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
903,000
787,000
Net inc
112,00
92,000
Share earns
.06
.06


Patterns
LEAD:  Profits and Proust


Devil Rookie Eager to Learn
LEAD: His composure and efficiency under pressure are dazzling for an 18-year-old rookie, but Brendan Shanahan of the Devils wants to do much more before he is satisfied with himself.


COPLEY PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COPLEY PROPERTIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
901,000
1,315,000
Share earns
.22
.33
9mo net inc
2,634,430
4,227,000
Share earns
.65
1.05


McMahon Is Hot, But Elway Is Hotter
LEAD: John Elway won a quarterback duel with Jim McMahon tonight, throwing for 341 yards and three touchdowns as the Denver Broncos rallied twice to beat the Chicago Bears, 31-29.


ACTING OUT ONE'S PRIVATE FEARS
LEAD: They are not young, not beautiful, simply two ordinary people in their 40's, both of them alone.
They met at work - she's a waitress, never married; he's the short-order cook, divorced - and for six weeks they observed each other warily before he finally asked her out.
They enjoyed the date and ended up in bed - but now that the love-making is over, she wants him to leave.


Smoking Out Smokers
LEAD: During this week of the Great American Smokeout, countless smokers are taking a break from cigarettes that could be permanent.
Look at what happened when New York City's Beth Israel Hospital imposed a smoking ban last spring.


Disbarred Lawyer Is Sentenced in Weapons Case
LEAD: A disbarred lawyer convicted of plotting to export a stockpile of weapons to Thailand was sentenced today to four years in prison by a Federal judge.


MEDICORE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDICORE INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,084,298
4,079,385
Net inc
b272,134
c158,318
Share earns
.06
.04
9mo rev
13,976,673
11,500,118
Net inc
b856,521
cd72,088
Share earns
.18
-
b-After tax credits of $7,137 for the quarter and $57,312 for the 9 months.


Southmark In Merger Pact
LEAD: The Southmark Corporation has signed a letter of intent to merge with a subsidiary of the I.C.H.
Corporation, creating an insurance and financial services company with more than $20 billion in assets, the companies said today.


Major Decisions in Insider Trading Law
LEAD: Trading of securities by company executives based on inside information has been illegal throughout much of the history of corporate America.
It was not until the 1960's that Federal authorities sought to broaden the notion of ''insider'' to include printers, financial analysts and journalists.
Following are some of the major developments - before yesterday's Winans decision - in insider trading law.


CONCERT: NEW WAVE COMPOSERS
LEAD: ELLIOTT SHARP and Peter Zummo, the two composers who led ensembles last weekend at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave program, share a taste for Minimalism and guided improvisation; they're both grouped with downtown New York new music.
But the two halves of their shared program at Carey Playhouse were as different as a stroll in Central Park and a subway odyssey - one whimsical and ruminative, one visceral and noisy.


Aliens Balk at Old 'Skeletons'
LEAD: Neftali Valencia, a Colombian who has worked steadily since he arrived in New York City in 1980, should have been the perfect candidate for citzenship under the new United States immigration law.
Instead he believed that applying would alert agents to an earlier run-in with the law and end with his being thrown out of the country.


JOHN HANCOCK INVESTORS TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHN HANCOCK INVESTORS TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,392,629
3,537,650
Share earns
.50
.52
9mo net inc
10,218,857
10,834,866
Share earns
1.49
1.61


ENVIROSAFE SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENVIROSAFE SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,149,000
9,765,000
Net inc
1,511,000
c1,362,000
Share earns
.39
.45
Shares outst
3,841,000
3,000,000
9mo rev
29,407,000
21,539,000
Net inc
b3,038,000
c2,026,000
Share earns
.88
.67
Shares outst
3,449,000
3,000,000


Eurotunnel Share Issue Succeeds
LEAD: Eurotunnel, the British-French consortium that plans to build a tunnel underneath the English Channel, announced today that major financial institutions had agreed to underwrite a crucial share issue to raise more than $1 billion for the project.


TO-FITNESS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TO-FITNESS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
356,671
522,518
Net loss
690,767
625,719
9mo sales
2,397,598
1,291,290
Net loss
1,226,792
1,687,160


ROUSE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROUSE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
98,224,000
91,352,000
Net inc
b764,000
6,206,000
Share earns
-
.11
9mo rev
277,213,000
240,751,000
Net inc
b7,860,000
15,114,000
Share earns
.12
.27
Shares outst
47,452,000
46,614,000


ENSOURCE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENSOURCE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,470,000
7,647,000
Net loss
919,000
528,000
9mo rev
22,224,000
28,027,000
Net loss
1,273,000
1,485,000


'Composers on Stage,' Series at Town Hall
LEAD: ''Composers on Stage,'' a two-part discussion and performance series featuring composers, performers and critics, is to begin Friday at 7 P.M. at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street.
Appearing in the first part are to be the composers Milton Babbitt and Mario Davidovsky, with Judith Bettina, a soprano; John Hollander, a poet; Edward Rothstein, a music critic, and the group Speculum Musica, which will perform ''Philomel'' and ''Phonemena'' by Mr.


GOLDFIELD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOLDFIELD CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,588,538
2,505,345
Net inc
b73,168
d1,575,633
Share earns
-
.06
Yr rev
2,858,355
6,957,077
Net loss
b385,228
cd1,626,843
Share earns
-
.06
b-Includes tax loss carryforwards of $26,340 for the quarter and a loss from discontinued operations of $98,853 for the year.


CALLAHAN MINING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALLAHAN MINING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,961,000
9,627,000
Net inc
558,000
990,000
Share earns
.07
.14
9mo rev
28,263,000
22,618,000
Net inc
2,543,000
b560,000
Share earns
.34
-


The Latest Concern About Sex: The Perils of the Papilloma Virus
LEAD: MEDICAL scientists are struggling to understand a sexually transmitted virus that has already infected many Americans, causing genital warts in millions of people and probably contributing to cancer in thousands of people.


Arizona Governor, on TV, Denies Breaking Law
LEAD: Gov.
Evan Mecham, who is facing a drive to oust him from office, went on television tonight to deny criminal wrongdoing in failing to properly report a $350,000 loan he received during his campaign for Governor last year.


GUY F ATKINSON COMPANY OF CALIORNIA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GUY F ATKINSON COMPANY OF CALIORNIA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
249,900,000
245,700,000
Net inc
1,490,000
344,000
Share earns
.17
.04
9mo rev
708,200,000
626,100,000
Net inc
4,050,000
3,270,000
Share earns
.46
.37


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (AUSTIN) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (AUSTIN)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
43,000
b1,944,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


STARRETT HOUSING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STARRETT HOUSING CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
38,040,000
28,782,000
Net loss
b8,103,000
c1,355,000
Share earns
-
.13
9mo rev
93,185,000
73,184,000
Net loss
b5,912,000
c3,517,000
Share earns
-
.32


CONQUEST EXPLORATION CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONQUEST EXPLORATION CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,531,000
3,542,000
Net loss
3,325,000
2,753,000
9mo rev
10,541,000
13,753,000
Net loss
6,440,000
4,286,000


Results Plus
LEAD:  Horse Racing


Bus Crash in Spain Kills 10
LEAD: A bus carrying 55 workers to Madrid overturned this morning about six miles from Toledo, in central Spain, killing at least 10 workers and injuring 37, the police said.


Concert: Pomerium Musices
LEAD: WILLIAM BYRD'S vast, legacy of Tudor music was the subject of a Sunday afternoon concert by Pomerium Musices and the New York Consort of Viols at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church.
Five pieces for viols (or, in one case, reconstructed for viol consort from a keyboard piece) alternated with five Latin hymns and three English madrigals, and voice and viols combined for two larger concerted pieces: ''Out of the Orient Crystal Skies'' and the verse anthem ''Christ Rising Again.


Mitterrand Knew of Iran Arms Sales
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand acknowledged tonight that he had been informed of a French company's illegal arms sales to Iran in 1984 and said that he tried to have them stopped.


HARKEN OIL &amp; GAS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARKEN OIL &amp; GAS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
112,337,000
648,000
Net inc
854,000
10,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
30,654,672
13,917,071
9mo sales
307,369,000
3,082,000
Net inc
2,637,000
50,000
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
25,769,604
13,622,356


PRO-MED CAPITAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRO-MED CAPITAL (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
829,366
-
Net inc
302,306
-
Share earns
.09
-
9mo rev
2,362,541
-
Net inc
957,436
-
Share earns
.29
-
There are no comparable results since the company previously reported earnings on a semiannual basis.


Tennessee Prisons Calm as Building Goes On
LEAD: Wracked by riots two years ago that left one inmate dead and $11 million in damage, Tennessee's prisons have calmed down since the state started to revitalize its decaying correction system.


Text of Decision by Supreme Court in Securities Fraud Case
LEAD: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16 - Following is the text of today's Supreme Court decision in the case of David Carpenter, Kenneth P. Felis and R. Foster Winans Jr. vs.
United States, written by Justice Byron R. White, who delivered the opinion of the Court.


SOUTHEASTERN MICHIGAN GAS ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHEASTERN MICHIGAN GAS ENTERPRISES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
19,490,000
12,983,000
Net loss
1,536,000
1,069,000
Shares outst
4,165,000
3,641,000
9mo rev
122,314,000
123,360,000
Net inc
4,702,000
5,288,000
Share earns
1.01
.93
Shares outst
3,821,000
3,369,000


US SHELTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*US SHELTER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,358,000
29,998,000
Net inc
175,000
b767,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
50,935,000
82,011,000
Net loss
528,000
2,961,000
b-Net loss


Europeans Ask U.S. for Resolve
LEAD: European finance ministers today called for a renewed commitment by the United States and its main trading partners to correct trade imbalances and stabilize the dollar.


Diabetics' Risk From Exercise
LEAD: Regular exercise is one of the best prescriptions for maintaining good health, but even this can have unexpected risks for young diabetics.


Prague Awaits the Glasnost Invasion
LEAD: For many Czechoslovaks, the Soviet Union, which led the 1968 invasion that ended the brief cultural and intellectual flowering of the ''Prague Spring,'' has become the main hope for a widening of freedom in their severely restricted country.


PEC ISRAEL ECONOMIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEC ISRAEL ECONOMIC CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,485,851
3,917,171
Net inc
2,423,640
1,592,812
Share earns
.33
.22
9mo rev
17,825,477
9,984,884
Net inc
7,145,589
3,769,862
Share earns
.97
.52


Music Noted in Brief; Folk Songs Reset For Chamber Society
LEAD: One of the cleansing properties of American music's turn toward simplicity is a literal respect for one's sources.
Ever since Haydn, composers have been transforming popular art to meet their more esoteric needs, but it was nice to come upon Robert Beaser's seven ''Mountain Songs'' for flute and guitar at Alice Tully Hall on


INVESTOR'S TITLE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INVESTOR'S TITLE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,680,006
2,534,000
Net inc
575,740
565,326
Share earns
.20
.20
9mo rev
7,743,055
6,343,828
Net inc
2,115,917
1,346,340
Share earns
.75
.48


Rock: Squeeze, At Garden
LEAD: EVERY few years, a band comes along to take up the Beatles' challenge: How much cleverness can be slipped between the lines of a catchy, concise rock song?
Since 1974, Squeeze's songwriters and guitarists, Glenn Tilbrook and Chris Difford, have been packing their songs with bright ideas.
Mr.
Tilbrook's music makes implausible chords, tricky melodic lines and even full-fledged dissonance sound natural; Mr.


Insider Trial Winds Down
LEAD: Closing arguments are expected to be heard today in United States District Court in Manhattan in the trial of David W. C. Clark, the New York lawyer implicated in the insider trading ring that included R. Foster Winans, a former columnist for The Wall Street Journal.


NEC Chip Output
LEAD: The NEC Corporation plans to start mass production of four-megabit dynamic random access memory chips, the next generation of computer chips, in late 1989, an NEC spokesman said.
It seems that NEC will be the first producer to be able to make the chips available commercially.
The company also plans to increase production of one-megabit D-RAM's from 500,000 units a month, to 2 million units a month by March 1988.


Yeltsin Is Hospitalized, Editor of Izvestia Says
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin, the former ally of Mikhail S. Gorbachev who was dismissed last week as head of the Moscow Communist Party organization, has been hospitalized, the editor of the Soviet Government newspaper Izvestia was quoted as saying today.


UNITED COMPANIES FINANCIAL CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED COMPANIES FINANCIAL CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
65,117,131
47,850,603
Net inc
1,743,059
3,019,229
Share earns
.47
.82
9mo rev
176,027,633
126,719,670
Net inc
6,681,997
7,615,700
Share earns
1.82
2.10





PLAYERS INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLAYERS INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,914,900
1,055,600
Net inc
b14,100
c256,700
6mo rev
3,722,800
1,821,300
Net inc
b58,100
c412,700
Share earns
.01
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $3,400 and $10,700 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Cattle Prices Advance; Grain, Soybeans Mixed
LEAD: Cattle futures prices rose slightly yesterday as traders awaited a Government report that, when it was released after the close of trading, showed 11 percent more cattle on feed than a year earlier.


Israeli Writers at the Y
LEAD: Three Israeli writers - Amos Oz, Anton Shammas and Natan Zach -will read from their works at 8 P.M. on Dec. 7 at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
In addition to his writing, Mr.
Oz - who won Israel's Bialik Award for literature last year - also teaches English and works on a kibbutz.
Mr.
Shammas, an Israeli Arab who writes in Hebrew and Arabic, also produces television programs.


Head of School Accuses Police Of Mauling Her
LEAD: The principal of a small private school on the Lower East Side has complained that seven police officers seeking a 12-year-old robbery suspect forced their way into the school, arrested and manhandled the principal when she demanded to see a warrant, then conducted a classroom-to-classroom search, sending some students fleeing in fright.


Feedback In Typing Program
LEAD: IN the film ''Star Trek IV,'' the crew of a 23d century spaceship goes back in time, to Earth of the late 20th century, to save the whales.
To do so they need a computer, and they find one in a Bay Area factory.


Sunset Casts an Eerie Glow on a Bridge's Gossamer Threads
LEAD: As the sun made its inexorable way toward the horizon yesterday, its cloud-filtered rays illuminated a solitary worker silhouetted among the cables of the Brooklyn Bridge.
The South Street Seaport completed the autumn study of lower Manhattan. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


HAUSERMAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAUSERMAN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
33,274,000
28,939,000
Net loss
2,492,000
b1,400,000
Share earns
-
.60
b-Net income and after a tax credit of $1,415,000 and a gain of $3,242,000 from an accounting change.


TELE-COMMUNICATIONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELE-COMMUNICATIONS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
474,351,000
163,109,000
Net loss
2,445,000
b595,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
1,245,063,000
475,287,000
Net inc
40,900,000
54,678,000
Share earns
.25
.36


INTEGRATED RESOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTEGRATED RESOURCES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
281,954,000
214,890,000
Net inc
b14,816,000
6,007,000
Share earns
.85
-
9mo rev
805,873,000
550,324,000
Net inc
b36,335,000
c2,881,000
Share earns
1.76
-


BANNER INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANNER INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
203,489,000
36,428,000
Net inc
b2,357,000
b4,829,000
Share earns
.33
1.04
Shares outst
5,477,000
4,630,000
b-Includes income from discontinued operations and businesses held for sale of $506,000 for the latest quarter and $12,000 for the year-earlier period, the year-earlier period also includes an extraordinary gain of $1,300,000.


WASHINGTON, GEORGE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON, GEORGE CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b618,673
321,582
9mo net loss
c2,814,735
c1,272,957
b-Includes capital gains of $192,483.
c-Includes capital losses of $295,910 and $5,093 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Nurse Accused of Killing L.I. Patients With Drugs
LEAD: A 25-year-old registered nurse, who officials said was trying to pose as ''a hero,'' was accused today of injecting fatal amounts of muscle-paralyzing drugs into several patients at a hospital here.


SALEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SALEM CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
23,037,000
21,042,000
Net inc
b284,000
99,000
Share earns
.23
.06
9mo rev
63,594,000
54,270,000
Net inc
b1,693,000
c182,000
Share earns
1.36
-
b-Includes a U.K.


Old Planes Restored for a Journey Into the Past
LEAD: AS the first century of powered flight approaches its completion, historians and technical experts are redoubling efforts to save and restore a few of the aircraft that helped to shape modern history.


ANDERSON JACOBSON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANDERSON JACOBSON INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,589,000
9,202,000
Net loss
791,000
1,195,000
6mo rev
19,109,000
18,531,000
Net loss
1,405,000
2,324,000


'Seeing' Inside Rocks
LEAD: A new acoustic scanning device developed by a Stanford University geophysicist is enabling scientists to ''see'' the internal structure of rocks.
The instrument is proving effective in predicting the fluid permeability of rocks, knowledge that can be useful in oil exploration, hydrology and the disposal of hazardous wastes.


Howard Fills Gap In Jets' Secondary
LEAD: By the start of the third quarter, the storm had completely engulfed Arrowhead Stadium in Kansas City, Mo.
Black clouds hung overhead and rain descended in sheets.
But for Carl Howard, the Jets' cornerback, the fog was just beginning to lift.


Cello-and-Piano Pieces By Bennington Teacher
LEAD: Lionel Nowak was born in 1911 and has taught for many years at Bennington College.
Mr.
Nowak is a composer as well - a fact his Bennington colleagues chose to honor at Merkin Hall Sunday night.


G.O.P. IRAN REPORT DEFENDS PRESIDENT
LEAD: The final minority report prepared by eight Republicans on the Congressional Iran-contra committees says the majority report of the panels reaches ''hysterial conclusions.'' It reads ''as if it were a weapon in the ongoing guerrilla warfare'' between Congress and the White House, the minority report says.


LEISURE CONCEPTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEISURE CONCEPTS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,449,576
523,292
Net inc
227,543
39,536
Share earns
.07
.01
9mo rev
3,200,767
1,582,111
Net inc
624,289
194,652
Share earns
.20
.07
Shares outst
3,112,246
2,795,968


CRONUS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRONUS INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
19,746,000
21,035,000
Net inc
438,000
d27,252,000
Share earns
.08
4.98
9mo sales
59,224,000
60,114,000
Net loss
b7,069,00
cd26,543,000
Share earns
-
4.86


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1987
LEAD:  The Insider-Trading Scandal


James C. Brennan, 77, Retired Bank Official
LEAD: Joseph Cantwell Brennan, a retired chairman and trustee of the Emigrant Savings Bank in New York and a prominent Roman Catholic layman, died last Thursday after a heart attack at his home in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old.


Mesa Reports Its Holdings
LEAD: Mesa Limited Partnership, the oil-and-gas concern headed by T. Boone Pickens, disclosed today that it was part of a group of investors that owned 4.8 percent of the Homestake Mining Company, a gold production company, at the end of September.


OAK INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OAK INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
46,205,000
34,742,000
Net inc
b15,323,000
de3,348,000
Share earns
.20
-
9mo sales
135,712,000
109,158,000
Net inc
c12,452,000
e63,105,000
Share earns
.17
1.14


Steel Output Down 3.6%
LEAD: Steel production fell to 1.798 million tons in the week ended Saturday, a decrease of 3.6 percent from the previous week's 1.866 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute reported yesterday.
The industry's production was at 83.3 percent of capacity during the week, compared with 86.4 percent in the previous week.


OFFSHORE LOGISTICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OFFSHORE LOGISTICS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,290,000
15,820,000
Net inc
b2,857,000
c928,000
Share earns
.17
-
b-Includes a gain of $1,459,000 from the forgiveness of debt and a tax credit of $115,000.


Reagan-Wright Argument Grows On Central America Policy Role
LEAD: President Reagan and Jim Wright, the Speaker of the House, stepped up their angry argument today over the Administration's Central American policy and the Speaker's role in the region's delicate peace negotiations.


Campaign Scorecard
LEAD: For those who are ''having trouble keeping track of who's done what'' in the Presidential campaign, the Washington publication Roll Call is offering what it bills as a ''Moral Scorecard.''


O.E.C.D. Sharply Reduces U.S. Growth Forecast
LEAD: Economists at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said today that they had substantially revised downward their 1988 growth forecast for the United States economy in the wake of last month's stock market plunge.


O'Neill's Doctors Confident as He Faces Surgery
LEAD: Former House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. will undergo surgery for rectal cancer on Wednesday, and his outlook is ''very favorable,'' his doctor said today.


HARMON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARMON INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,954,000
12,012,000
Net inc
705,000
475,000
Share earns
.10
.05
9mo sales
40,543,000
33,243,000
Net inc
935,000
1,409,000
Share earns
.21
.29


Oil Rigs Increase in U.S.
LEAD: The number of operating rotary rigs, an indicator of the oil industry's health, rose by 33 last week, to 1,174 -a big jump over last year's 910 rigs, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
In Canada, the weekly rig count fell by 38, to 277, compared with 113 a year ago, when oil prices touched bottom.


N.B.A. Notebook; Sparrow Fitting In With Bulls
LEAD: Players who have been traded often speak of the difficulty in making the transition from one team to another, especially in the midst of a season.


Simon Cites Character
LEAD: If this is the year of the character issue in Presidential politics, then Senator Paul Simon's first set of television commercials, which begin running in Iowa this week, suggest that he may be out to corner the market.


PRAXIS BIOLOGICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRAXIS BIOLOGICS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,859,000
4,229,000
Net loss
517,000
b989,000
Share earns
-
.09
9mo rev
9,371,000
10,906,000
Net inc
504,000
1,871,000
Share earns
.04
.17
Shares outst
13,448,000
10,955,000


NEW YORK CITY TO SELL NOTES
LEAD: New York City plans to sell up to $325 million of short-term notes in a competitive sale between Nov. 24 and Dec. 15, city officials announced yes-terday.
In order to sell the notes when market conditions are most favora-ble, the city plans to give prospective underwriters 24 hours' advance no-tice of the bidding deadline.


Momentum in Dollar Eases
LEAD: The dollar ended substantially higher yesterday but below the day's highs after remarks by President Reagan reawakened worries among dealers over progress in the United States budget deficit talks.


Garvey in Second Senate Bid
LEAD: Edward R. Garvey announced his candidacy today for the Democratic nomination for the Senate seat being vacated by Senator William Proxmire.
Mr.
Garvey, a former deputy State Attorney General and onetime executive director of the National Football League Players Association, made an unsuccessful bid last year to oust Senator Robert W.


UNITED EDUCATION &amp; SOFTARE reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED EDUCATION &amp; SOFTARE (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,833,000
8,250,000
Net inc
1,661,000
b665,000
Share earns
.47
.22
9mo rev
54,972,000
23,617,000
Net inc
2,891,000
b1,265,000
Share earns
.83
.42


New Storms Strike Gulf Coast; Death Toll at 12
LEAD: New storms with heavy rain and high wind struck the Gulf Coast from East Texas to Mississippi today, causing new damage and stalling efforts to clean up wreckage left by tornadoes.
An oil worker was killed in Texas.


ALATENN RESOURCES reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALATENN RESOURCES (OTC)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
157,979,612
116,216,371
Net inc
3,853,414
4,535,954
Share earns
1.69
1.99


Chun Says Violence Threatens Election
LEAD: President Chun Doo Hwan, formally announcing that South Korea's presidential election would be held Dec. 16, warned today that repeated incidents of campaign violence had created a ''serious threat to a fair election and a frontal challenge to development of genuine democracy.''


Bavarian Court Convicts American in AIDS Case
LEAD: A former United States Army cook with AIDS was sentenced to two years in prison today by a court in the Bavarian city of Nuremberg for attempting to inflict ''grievous bodily harm'' by practicing unprotected sex.


Zoos Act To Restore Bali's Birds
LEAD: IN an effort to replenish the population of Jalak Bali birds on their native island in Indonesia, 10 zoos in the United States have shipped 40 of the birds to Indonesia.


'Insider' Definition In New Law Urged
LEAD: The Supreme Court's 4-to-4 decision today on whether a former Wall Street Journal reporter, R. Foster Winans, had violated the nation's securities laws prompted members of Congress, securities lawyers and law professors to urge passage of legislation that would clearly define illegal insider trading.


Violin: Nathan Milstein Plays at Fisher Hall
LEAD: IT should come as no surprise that, at the age of 82, Nathan Milstein is not the steely-sure violinist he once was.
But if he struggled at various points during his recital Sunday afternoon in Avery Fisher Hall to keep the bow steady and the tone full and even, Mr.
Milstein got across the essential aspects of his artistic vision.


RESORTS INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RESORTS INTERNATIONAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
118,060,000
112,696,000
Net loss
b6,965,000
c43,468,000
Share earns
-
6.76
9mo rev
348,038,000
325,883,000
Net inc
b5,926,000
d3,284,000
Share earns
.92
-


O'Rourke Seeks 10% Rise in Westchester Budget
LEAD: The Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, today announced a proposed 1988 budget of $850.3 million, a 10.3 percent increase from this year's.


GRAHAM-MCCORMICK OIL &amp; GAS PARTNERSHIP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAHAM-MCCORMICK OIL &amp; GAS PARTNERSHIP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,656,000
3,430,000
Net loss
1,883,000
2,934,000
9mo rev
12,448,000
16,655,000
Net loss
4,084,000
15,829,000


Harold E. Vick, 51, A Tenor Saxophonist
LEAD: Harold E. Vick, a tenor saxophone player, composer and arranger, died last Friday of a heart attack at his home in Manhattan.
He was 51 years old.


Edward Roesler Jr., 82, Ex-Banking Executive
LEAD: Edward Roesler Jr., a former banking executive and member of the New York Stock Exchange, died Saturday at his daughter's home in De Bary, Fla.
He was 82 years old and lived in Portola Valley, Fla.


4 Ships Reported Raided in Gulf
LEAD: Shipping officials said today that Iranian speedboats had attacked an American-owned supertanker and three other ships in the southern Persian Gulf in response to Iraqi air raids last week on Iran's shuttle tankers.


JASON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JASON INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
17,717,000
16,500,000
Net inc
294,000
73,000
Share earns
.09
.03
9mo sales
56,268,000
53,695,000
Net inc
1,454,000
809,000
Share earns
.53
.32


EHRLICH BOBER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EHRLICH BOBER (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,564,000
7,782,000
Net loss
519,000
b1,346,000
Share earns
-
.66
Shares outst
3,487,000
2,054,000
b-Net income


TV Review; A&amp;E OFFERS 'THE STORY OF FASHION'
LEAD: WHAT'S new?
Fashion, of course; it must be new by definition.
When its moment is gone, it is history. ''The Story of Fashion,'' a six-part series on cable's Arts &amp; Entertainment Network, has been looking at the last 100 years or so of haute couture.
The third episode, at 8:30 tonight, concentrates on winds of change: what forces sweep fashion?


Bearing Summit Gifts
LEAD: When Mikhail S. Gorbachev comes to Washington next month for the summit meeting between the Soviet Union and the United States, the Soviet leader will not be empty-handed.
To complement the exchange of words, according to preliminary planning, there is to be an exchange of art, and the Russians are to lend a Rembrandt painting to be displayed at the National Gallery of


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD:  Ashland Oil Inc., Ashland, Ky., a diversified energy company, named G. William Jones senior vice president in addition to his position as president of APAC Inc., Atlanta, a contract construction and construction materials subsidiary.
Bangor America Inc., a diversified sweater and knitwear maker, appointed David M.


New York City Reaches Accord With Jersey on Floating Garbage
LEAD: Officials of New York City and New Jersey announced today that they had reached an understanding on the broad outline of a plan to help assure that garbage from the city does not wash up on the Jersey Shore.


JOHN HANCOCK INCOME SECURIIES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHN HANCOCK INCOME SECURIIES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,357,321
3,482,595
Share earns
.37
.38
9mo net inc
10,147,570
10,755,614
Share earns
1.10
1.18


ENZO BIOCHEM CO reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENZO BIOCHEM CO (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,549,000
2,689,000
Net loss
2,275,000
b334,000
Share earns
-
.03
Yr rev
11,957,000
9,421,000
Net loss
1,600,000
b1,460,000
Share earns
-
.13


2 Chip Companies Announce Cutbacks
LEAD: Two leading Silicon Valley semiconductor manufacturers have announced retrenchments in connection with recent acquisitions.


TURNER BROADCASTING SYSEM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TURNER BROADCASTING SYSEM INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
152,085,000
156,294,000
Net loss
38,253,000
44,308,000
9mo rev
459,311,000
400,968,000
Net loss
104,006,000
121,411,000


Open School Obligation
LEAD: Parents in many communities find plenty of reason to complain about schools, but only those who make a point of getting involved deserve a hearing.
And their numbers are dwindling as more and more parents work outside the home.
In New York City this week, they have a chance to regain their grip on that crucial involvement: It's Open School


Brooklyn Mother Accused of Killing Daughter, 2
LEAD: A 20-year-old mother was arrested last night and charged with killing her 2-year-old daughter, the police said.


MEYERS PARKING SYSTEM reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEYERS PARKING SYSTEM
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,766,000
12,021,000
Net inc
40,000
b166,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
38,915,000
36,235,000
Net inc
260,000
c309,000
Share earns
.10
.11
b-Net loss


BISHOPS GATHERING FOR SUBDUED TALKS
LEAD: After a year of emotional and often rancorous relations with the Vatican, the nation's Roman Catholic bishops gathered here today for their annual meeting in a subdued and business-like atmosphere.


Transactions
LEAD:  FOOTBALL


SAZTEC INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAZTEC INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,562,935
1,176,178
Net loss
362,348
b44,580
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income  Share earnings have been adjusted for both quarters to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split payable Dec.


Chess Game A Draw
LEAD: Gary Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov agreed to a draw today after 21 moves in the 14th game of their world chess championship match.


Rules Revised by Judge On Cameras in Courts
LEAD: The rules governing the use of television and still cameras and tape recorders during an 18-month test in New York State courts were announced yesterday by the chief administrative judge of the state courts.
The judge, Albert M. Rosenblatt, said


High-Priced New Hotel Begins Wide Campaign
LEAD: The dear old Beaux Arts Gotham Hotel, at its prime location on the southwest corner of Fifth Avenue and 55th Street, has gone through a lot of phases in its transformation to the Hotel Maxim's de Paris, with swimming pool and sauna on the roof.
While the renovation is a long way from complete, the hotel is moving into its promotion phase.


Scouts Aide Held in Sex Case
LEAD: An executive with the New York Council of the Boy Scouts of America was arrested yesterday on charges of sexually abusing an 11-year-old Scout over a two-year period, the police said.
The official, James Vila, 39 years old, of Annandale, N.J., was accused of threatening and fondling the Scout at Public School 155 at 319 East 117th Street in Manhattan.


BLOOMFIELD SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLOOMFIELD SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
3,572,000
1,548,000
9mo net loss
1,538,000
b5,389,000
Share earns
-
2.43
b-Net income and after an extraordinary credit of $8,500,000.


SEQUA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEQUA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
301,958,000
82,104,000
Net inc
b16,866,000
c7,472,000
Share earns
1.45
.94
9mo sales
874,786,000
269,682,000
Net inc
b48,314,000
c29,289,000
Share earns
4.15
3.68


Black Witness Describes Beating in Howard Beach
LEAD: A 37-year-old black man vividly testified yesterday that he was repeatedly beaten with bats and tree limbs by a gang of white youths who, yelling racial slurs, chased him and two other black men through the streets of Howard Beach, Queens.


Sports People; Too Much Glasnost?
LEAD: John Thompson, coach of the 1988 Olympic basketball team, sees no harm in American college teams playing teams from the Soviet Union.
But he's not too keen on teaching Soviet teams the finer points of the game.


Giuliani Sees Case Aiding Prosecution
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, said yesterday that the United States Supreme Court's ruling against R. Foster Winans meant that his office ''was free to go ahead now'' with insider trading cases.


Modern Bride Sold For $50 Million
LEAD: Reed International, the British parent of the Cahners Publishing Company, said it had acquired Modern Bride from Diamandis Communications Inc. for $50 million in cash.
Additionally it agreed to pay Diamandis $13.7 million in consulting fees.


VMS STRATEGIC LAND TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VMS STRATEGIC LAND TRUST
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
3,518,903
-
Per share
.29
-
9mo net inc
8,659,358
-
Per share
.72
-
Year-ago amounts are not available; the company went public Dec. 31, 1986.


HENDERSON WAIVED BY KNICKS
LEAD: General Manager Al Bianchi continued the process of composing his own version of the Knicks yesterday.
Gerald Henderson, the playmaker with two championship rings who arrived from Seattle a year and four days ago, was waived, and the Knicks picked up Tony White, a rookie who was waived last week by the


Susan Wagner Appeals
LEAD: Susan Wagner High School, which had the only undefeated football team in the Public School Athletic League, announced yesterday that it has appealed a decision by the league's commissioner that forced Wagner to forfeit eight of its nine victories this season because it used an ineligible player.


Problem at Seabrook Utility
LEAD: The Public Service Company of New Hampshire could face an involuntary bankruptcy petition at any time, the company acknowledged today, but a spokesman said that negotiations with creditors were continuing and that the utility was hopeful that it could reach agreement without bankruptcy.


NRM ENERGY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NRM ENERGY CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
14,727,000
9,814,000
Net loss
b7,759,000
8,226,000
9mo rev
41,967,000
43,005,000
Net loss
b31,665,000
9,954,000
b-Includes losses from sale of oil and gas properties of $1,644,000 for the quarter and $10,294,000 for the 9 months.


Saudi Arabia Resumes Full Ties With Egypt
LEAD: Saudi Arabia announced today that it had resumed full diplomatic relations with Egypt, becoming the seventh Arab country to do so in the last six days.


VSE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VSE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,564,056
25,495,842
Net inc
550,207
815,793
Share earns
.30
.44
9mo rev
84,182,549
74,665,889
Net inc
1,978,450
2,367,364
Share earns
1.08
1.29


Big Fund-Raisers Keep Gore Waiting
LEAD: At a recent political roast here, Senator Albert Gore Jr. was introduced by a comedian impersonating Nathan Landow, the leader of a group of Democratic fund-raisers that helped convince the Senator to run for President.


Three String Players Of Vienna Symphony
LEAD: The Vienna String Trio displays many of the best traits of musicians steeped in the Austro-German tradition.
The ensemble, made up of principal players in the Vienna Symphony Orchestra, gave a concert sponsored by the Austrian Institute Saturday evening in Weill Recital Hall.


RUSSIANS REPORTED TO BE WITHHOLDING KEY MISSILE DATA
LEAD: Three weeks before the scheduled meeting of President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, major verification issues remained unresolved today in talks aimed at wrapping up a treaty banning medium- and shorter-range missiles.


LEUCADIA NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEUCADIA NATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
5,628,000
bc14,267,000
Share earns
-
1.01
9mo net inc
2,214,000
c32,175,000
Share earns
.16
2.21
b-Net income  c-After income from discontinued operations of $2,960,000 for the quarter and $8,036,000 for the 9 months, and an extraordinary gain of $2,553,000 for both periods.


Harmonic Choir Offers A Musical Alternative
LEAD: David Hykes and the Harmonic Choir make music that encourages new modes of listening.
A number of recent musical developments have been leading in a similar direction.
Very long compositions, static compositions, and process compositions all suggest alternatives to the linear cause-and-effect mode of listening appropriate to classical music.


Safeguards Seen as Effective In Hospitals Despite L.I. Case
LEAD: The New York State Department of Health and the 280 general hospitals it regulates have safeguards to protect patients from mistakes by medical personnel, accidents and improper or inappropriate care, state officials said yesterday.


LDBRINKMAN CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LDBRINKMAN CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
17,828,000
12,693,000
Net loss
b1,204,000
c1,321,000
Yr rev
76,309,000
52,399,000
Net inc
b1,985,000
c1,970,000
Share earns
.14
.12
b-After income from discontinued operations of $950,000 for the quarter and $833,000 for the year.


Joseph M. White; Pharmaceutical Consultant, 67
LEAD: Joseph M. White, a consultant to pharmaceutical companies for 30 years, died of congestive heart failure Thursday at his home in Alexandria, Va.
He was 67 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in SportsMonday this week showing the College Top 20 in football listed Oklahoma State incorrectly.


IMMUCELL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMMUCELL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
134,690
51,270
Net loss
251,835
113,574
9mo rev
861,527
220,720
Net loss
442,191
317,500


Runaway Locomotives Travel 30 Miles Before Being Stopped
LEAD: Six unmanned locomotives traveled more than 30 miles today at speeds up to 55 miles per hour before dispatchers were able to guide them onto a siding where they crashed into empty boxcars and stopped, officials said.


Joseph F. Heffernan; Opera Photographer, 64
LEAD: Joseph F. Heffernan, the photographer for the Metropolitan Opera House, died of lung cancer Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Our Towns; Playing to Win: Java, Kittatinny And a Headache
LEAD: Sunday night, Frank Stull had trouble sleeping.
The eighth-grade teacher kept worrying that he hadn't told his star pupil, Bob Herbstzuber, every last fact for the state geography championship.
Had he mentioned that Cairo is the biggest city in Africa?
That Java is the most densely populated island in


PLENUM PUBLISHING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLENUM PUBLISHING CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,489,501
9,156,696
Net inc
2,650,899
2,107,397
Share earns
.46
.36
9mo sales
29,161,316
28,001,430
Net inc
11,337,141
8,611,874
Share earns
1.96
1.49


U.S. AIDE DELAYED CONTRA ARMS CASE
LEAD: A Federal prosecutor acknowledged today that he briefly held up an investigation last year into arms smuggling to the Nicaraguan rebels but said he did so only because the case had become clouded by unfounded allegations against a United States Senator.


ROCKWOOD HOLDING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCKWOOD HOLDING CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
35,893,000
39,088,000
Net loss
3,632,000
b1,609,000
Share earns
-
.41
9mo rev
111,643,000
121,682,000
Net inc
2,784,000
6,484,000
Share earns
.70
1.64


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-14


New Tiffany Strategy Pays Off for Chairman
LEAD: Since last month's stock market plunge, William R. Chaney, the chairman and chief executive of Tiffany &amp; Company, has watched his company's stock fall from more than $30 a share to under $20.


Fed Aide Sees Better Feeling
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board's vice chairman, Manuel Johnson, said today that confidence in the financial system was returning after the stock market plunge of Oct. 19.


Measuring Knowledge
LEAD: REPORTS on what American students don't know always get top billing.
Adults, overlook what they themselves don't know, urge schools to get tough.
Lost in the process are proposals to make schools better rather than tougher.


Bonn May Let Deficit Rise
LEAD: The West German Government, under pressure from abroad to contribute to the world's economic growth, said today that it was prepared to risk a higher than projected 1988 budget deficit.


Webb Names Chief
LEAD: As expected, directors of the Del E. Webb Corporation today elected Philip J. Dion as chairman and chief executive of the gaming, real estate and recreation concern based in Phoenix.
Mr.
Dion, who is 42 years old and has been a Webb executive since 1982, succeeds Robert K. Swanson, who resigned unexpectedly for health reasons earlier this month.


PATRICK PETE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PATRICK PETE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,683,820
1,520,171
Net inc
141,674
113,288
Share earns
.02
.02
9mo rev
5,093,084
5,059,569
Net inc
416,931
b8,872,120
Share earns
.06
-
b-Net loss


Market Place; Global Bonds: High Returns
LEAD: THE spotlight has been on the United States stock market this year, first as it rose steadily to a peak in late August and then when it tumbled last month.


INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL EQUIPMENT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL EQUIPMENT INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
549,000
680,000
Net loss
260,000
490,000
Yr rev
2,440,000
2,956,000
Net loss
662,000
b186,000
b-After a gain from discontinued operations of $145,000.


Careers; Managers Found by Computer
LEAD: MOVE over, management recruiters.
Stanford University is going to poach on your territory with a computerized system to help companies find managers.


Beverly Hilton Sold Once More
LEAD: Merv Griffin may have signed off his last talk show, but he is back in the spotlight again, announcing today that he would buy the Beverly Hilton Hotel.


Kodak to Market New AIDS Test
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company said it would market what it called the first test ever that permits physicians to detect in their offices exposure to AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.
The tests will be marketed under the trade name Sure Cell.
Kodak said they are able to produce results in three to 15 minutes.


Turning Point Nears In Production of Fuel For Hydrogen Bombs
LEAD: WITH aging, faltering plants its sole source of supply, the Federal Government must soon decide whether to build expensive new facilities to produce tritium, a vital and perishable ingredient of nuclear bombs.


New York City Seeks to Acquire Times Sq. Hotel
LEAD: The Koch administration said yesterday that it would seek to acquire a 750-room hotel near Times Square as a long-term residence for the homeless, and as the site of a work-release program for New York City jail inmates.


COUNTRY WIDE TRANSPORT SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COUNTRY WIDE TRANSPORT SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
19,024,086
14,844,666
Net inc
826,362
421,759
Share earns
.19
.15
Shares outst
4,400,000
2,900,000
9mo rev
51,555,333
41,113,258
Net inc
1,872,075
887,478
Share earns
.48
.31
Shares outst
3,889,000
2,900,000


Israel Says Arab Boat Taken
LEAD: A military spokesman said today that the Israeli Navy had intercepted a boat belonging to Al Fatah, a Palestinian guerrilla organization, forced it to dock at an Israeli port and arrested all of its passengers.
The 250-ton tugboat Nadija, flying a Honduran flag, was stopped last Saturday somewhere west of the Israeli coast, the announcement said.


Chemical Cuts Jobs At Credit Card Unit
LEAD: The Chemical New York Corporation said it would eliminate 575 jobs by transferring its credit card operations in Chicago to its main processing facility at Jericho, L.I. and by closing its unprofitable merchant credit card processing services in Chicago.
The company said it expects to begin consolidatng its credit card operations in January and to complete the process by March 31.


NOVAR ELECTRONICS CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOVAR ELECTRONICS CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,223,189
4,722,777
Net loss
1,277,872
b57,692
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
13,026,156
13,558,634
Net loss
1,304,570
b428,237
Share earns
-
.16


WRATHER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WRATHER CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
34,348,000
29,398,000
Net inc
271,000
c1,393,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
92,594,000
84,332,000
Net loss
b1,353,000
4,893,000
b-Includes a gain on sale of assets of $1,291,000.


LSB INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LSB INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
41,252,694
42,268,237
Net loss
b903,621
c1,063,403
Share earns
-
.18
9mo sales
128,602,464
129,140,785
Net loss
48,413
c2,462,227
Share earns
-
.39


2 Named to Key Campaign Posts As Shakeup of Dole Staff Begins
LEAD: Two longtime Republican workers were named today to key positions in the Bob Dole Presidential campaign amid signs that the organization would undergo further shifts in the next few days.


OMNICORP LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OMNICORP LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,742,968
1,268,920
Net inc
233,481
b188,959
Share earns
.06
-
9mo sales
5,459,891
3,072,180
Net inc
158,537
b603,379
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
3,621,542
2,621,542


Small Plane Crashes on Hillside In Wisconsin, Killing 8 on Board
LEAD: A corporate airplane flying from Chicago apparently broke up in flight and crashed on a wooded ridge near here today, killing all eight people aboard, the authorities said.


Sports People; Busy Hockey Whistles
LEAD: National Hockey League officials believe that N.H.L. referees are responding to a need by making more penalty calls this year, but at least one general manager suggests they may be going too far.


PUBLICKER INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUBLICKER INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,540,000
3,079,000
Net loss
1,835,000
238,000
9mo rev
12,391,000
10,310,000
Net loss
3,600,000
b276,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


PANATECH RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PANATECH RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,679,900
1,919,000
Net inc
42,500
b443,200
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
7,849,100
1,919,000
Net inc
308,100
b652,100
Share earns
.08
-


Expanding Oceans
LEAD: Two British scientists have predicted that the warmer global temperatures caused by the ''greenhouse effect'' will cause the world's oceans to rise in the next 40 years by at least four to eight centimeters (1 1/2 to 3 1/4 inches).
This would result purely from the expansion of the water caused by the higher temperature.


LAWRENCE INSURANCE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAWRENCE INSURANCE GROUP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,059,000
1,677,000
Share earns
.28
.25
9mo net inc
5,434,000
4,275,000
Share earns
.76
.64


Nurse Known as Dedicated Worker
LEAD: Richard Angelo, a Long Island nurse who officials say has acknowledged injecting several patients with fatal doses of drugs, was known as a dedicated worker whose life revolved around hospital emergency rooms and intensive-care wards.


Wallace G. Taylor, Corporate Treasurer, 68
LEAD: Wallace G. Taylor, former treasurer of the American Cyanamid Company, died Nov. 8 of complications resulting from a heart ailment at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in Fort Lee, N.J.


UNIT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,016,000
5,136,000
Net loss
2,004,000
802,000
9mo rev
21,906,000
19,927,000
Net loss
b34,768,000
7,500,000
b-Includes a $29,400,000 writedown on drilling equipment.


N.A.S.D. Acts to Widen Public Access to Market
LEAD: Responding to an outcry of criticism following last month's stock market plunge, the National Association of Securities Dealers yesterday announced four proposals that it said would improve public access to the over-the-counter market.


Philistines Get Some Image Help
LEAD: An ancient metropolis being excavated by archeologists at this site 20 miles southwest of Jerusalem is providing evidence that the Philistines - long associated with hedonism and a lack of culture - may actually have been an urbane and industrious lot.


RENT-A-WRECK OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RENT-A-WRECK OF AMERICA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
827,758
834,124
Net loss
18,545
89,347
6mo rev
1,569,984
1,637,640
Net loss
11,402
83,619


LIFECORE BIOMEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIFECORE BIOMEDICAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
774,000
759,000
Net loss
16,000
236,000
The company said the first quarter results reflect the acquisition of Orthomatrix Inc. in February, and the restatement of financial figures to include Orthomatrix's results.


Ex-General in Panama Backs Accusations Against Leader
LEAD: A former military commander says accusations that Panama's military leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, has been involved in political assassination, drug trafficking and election rigging are ''correct'' and ''legitimate.''


The Dance: Charles Moore, Ghana to Vaudeville
LEAD: THE Charles Moore Dance Theater went from a festival in Ghana to American vaudeville theaters and dance halls during its program Sunday afternoon at the Triplex of Manhattan Community College.
It was a pleasure to watch the company make that journey.


How Many in Babylon?
LEAD: To the Editor:


CARPENTER TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARPENTER TECHNOLOGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
115,240,000
117,369,000
Net inc
2,086,000
b1,146,000
Share earns
.23
.13
b-After an extraordinary charge of $1,700,000 for the closing of a division.


HODGSON HOUSES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HODGSON HOUSES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,890,618
3,188,413
Net inc
166,245
183,092
Share earns
.14
.15
9mo sales
11,275,596
9,674,069
Net inc
639,149
698,530
Share earns
.54
.59
Year-ago results are restated.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD:  Bowater Industries P.L.C., London, a maker of paper products, said about 3.6 million, or approximately 97 percent of Rexham Corp.'s common shares outstanding, had been tendered and accepted under its tender offer that had expired Friday.
Crown Central Petroleum Corp., Baltimore, will sell assets of its oil and gas exploration and production division to an Amoco Corp.


BARUCH-FOSTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARUCH-FOSTER CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,115,159
1,916,558
Net loss
452,485
688,337
9mo rev
6,507,161
6,405,313
Net loss
608,238
b1,586,285
b-Includes a writedown of $1,048,276 on oil and gas properties and reserves.


Unilever Profit Climbs by 25%
LEAD: Unilever P.L.C. said today that its third-quarter pretax earnings jumped 25 percent, to $:400 million, or about $696 million, helped by contributions from Chesebrough-Pond's Inc., which it acquired late last year.
Worldwide sales in the third quarter rose 11 percent from the period a year ago, to $:4.65 billion, or about $8.09 billion.


IGI INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IGI INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,940,196
4,853,510
Net inc
251,554
b282,419
Share earns
.03
.04
9mo sales
12,158,599
14,368,133
Net inc
683,706
b643,654
Share earns
.09
.09
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $140,043 for the quarter and $154,087 for the 9 months, and tax credits of $18,498 and $271,506 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 17, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


CNW Bid Raised $1, to $31 a Share
LEAD: The CNW Corporation, parent of the Chicago and North Western Transportation Company, said that after consultation with CNW's special committee of six independent directors, an investor group led by the buyout firm, Gibbons, Green van Amerongen of New York had increased its offer to buy the railroad company by $1, to $31 a share, or $578 million.


COMMONWEALTH SAVINGS ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMONWEALTH SAVINGS ASSN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
27,755,000
4,885,000
The company said in the latest first quarter, it provided $18.6 million in reserve allocations for possible losses on loans, accrued interest, other receivables and real estate.


QUOTATIONS OF THE DAY
LEAD: ''The President pointed out to the Speaker the confusion that arises and the misleading impressions that can be left if members of Congress, without coordination with the executive branch, involve themselves in complex negotiations with foreign heads of government.''  - Marlin Fitzwater, President Reagan's spokesman.


CANDIDATE SCRUTINY GIVING NEXT GENERATION PAUSE
LEAD: Every now and then in her teen-age years, Andrea Kramer, a student at Harvard Law School, used to wonder whether her carousing would ever hurt her if and when she decided to run for political office.


What the Market Needs Is a Fed It Can Trust
LEAD: To the Editor:


JUSTICES, 8-0, BACK U.S. ON CONVICTION OF WALL ST. WRITER
LEAD: The Supreme Court today upheld, by 8 to 0, the convictions of a former Wall Street Journal reporter and two other men on Federal mail and wire fraud charges for using advance knowledge of articles about publicly traded stocks to make illegal profits.


PRESIDIO OIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRESIDIO OIL CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,259,000
1,463,000
Net loss
314,000
b218,000
b-Net income  Year-ago first quarter net did not cover preferred stock requirements.


Stage: 'Romance Romance,' 2 Plays
LEAD: HE market of the heart is wryly charted in ''Romance Romance,'' the bright new musical that opened last night at the Actor's Outlet Theater.
Barry Harman, who wrote the book and lyrics for ''Olympus on My Mind,'' has found inspiration in a pair of Continental writers of another era.
Arthur Schnitzler and Jules Renard may have been only boulevard psychologists, but their comments on the pulls and tugs of sex are as up to date as the latest Hite


TM COMMUNICATIONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TM COMMUNICATIONS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,702,714
1,185,240
Net loss
603,667
145,587
9mo rev
7,730,995
9,460,356
Net loss
1,179,154
b1,617,529
Share earns
-
.21
b-Net income and includes a gain of $1,480,000 from sale of radio-format subsidiary.


Put More Teeth in Parole
LEAD: There's nothing wrong with parole that adding teeth won't solve.
For the last year and a half, New York has tried tougher enforcement.
It works, handsomely, but needs to be made tougher still.


KUHLMAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KUHLMAN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
40,776,000
38,315,000
Net loss
708,000
514,000
9mo sales
123,038,000
111,508,000
Net loss
823,000
b836,000
Share earns
-
.17
b-Net income


Philadelphia Journal; AGING PATRONS SEAL RESTAURANT'S FATE
LEAD: Fourteen years ago, a one-time Peace Corps trainee and former antiwar militant named Steve Poses opened a storefront restaurant in downtown Philadelphia.


To Envoys: Go Directly to Congress
LEAD: It was a most unusual pilgrimage.
Nine foreign ambassadors, from France to Fiji, filed into the office of Deputy Secretary of State John C. Whitehead earlier this month, cast aside their diplomatic politesse and protested that the United States was not paying its bill for the United Nations peace-keeping force in southern Lebanon.


CSS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CSS INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,606,000
8,719,000
Net inc
b1,537,000
c1,748,000
Share earns
.30
.37
9mo sales
43,849,000
20,075,000
Net inc
b4,688,000
c3,801,000
Share earns
.90
.81


DICK CLARK PRODUCTIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DICK CLARK PRODUCTIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,606,000
8,976,000
Net inc
94,000
1,612,000
Share earns
.01
.23
The company attributed the decline in latest first quarter earnings to a one-time gain of $3,051,000 in the year- ago quarter from the sale of reruns sydications rights for ''TV's Bloopers &amp; Practical Jokes.


BUDGET DRIVE SLOW AS DEADLINE NEARS
LEAD: The budget talks slowed today as White House and Congressional negotiators said it was unlikely that they would agree now to some limit on cost-of-living increases for Social Security and other Federal benefit programs.


Connecticut Governor Is Tested for His Fever
LEAD: Gov.
William A. O'Neill, who was hospitalized Sunday with what his staff called flulike symptoms, was tested today to determine the cause of a persistent fever, according to the St.
Francis Hospital and Medical Center.


AMERICAN MEDICAL BUILDINGS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MEDICAL BUILDINGS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,889,000
6,132,000
Net inc
352,000
b644,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
36,787,000
19,564,000
Net inc
1,386,000
b405,000
Share earns
.13
-


GATEWAY COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GATEWAY COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,405,098
3,335,399
Net loss
128,665
b441,959
Share earns
-
.10
9mo rev
9,916,716
8,280,432
Net inc
728,144
1,015,489
Share earns
.15
.22


Prudential Real Estate Chooses Backer
LEAD: Backer Spielvogel Bates, one of the largest components of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, announced yesterday that it had become the agency for Prudential Real Estate, which will franchise a nationwide chain of real estate offices a la Century 21.


FOR JULIE ANDREWS, THE SOUND OF A DIFFERENT MUSIC
LEAD: Julie Andrews, Hollywood's perennial beacon of sweetness and light, is busy rediscovering her identity as a singer.
The 52-year-old star, who has not given a concert in nearly a decade, is bringing a lavish one-woman show to the Westbury Music Fair tomorrow for four nights.


PHILIP CROSBY ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILIP CROSBY ASSOCIATES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,059,000
10,062,000
Net inc
205,000
323,000
Share earns
.03
.04
9mo rev
37,133,000
33,325,000
Net inc
b1,813,000
3,182,000
Share earns
.26
.42


Thatcher Urges Budget Action
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher today urged White House and Congressional budget negotiators to act decisively and said big cuts in United States deficits were needed to restore confidence to the world's financial markets.


When the Mind Dies But the Brain Lives On
LEAD: MIRACULOUS recoveries from prolonged comas are the stuff of movies and fairy tales.
But although medical advances have opened the way for more coma patients than ever to survive, most linger in a limbo state of unconsciousness, somewhere between life and death.
Few of these patients, even if they can be kept alive indefinitely and even if they appear to awaken and sleep regularly, have any hope of full recovery.


Reports of the Iran-Contra Committees: Excerpts From the Minority View
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the introductory chapter of the minority report of the Congressional Iran-contra committees, which was made available to The New York Times today.
It was signed by Representatives Dick Cheney, William S. Broomfield, Henry J. Hyde, Jim Courter, Bill McCollum and Michael DeWine and Senators James A.


At Annual West Side Party, Tenants Renew Ties
LEAD: There was a dinner party Sunday night at 905 West End Avenue, a grand affair on the calendars of the residents in the 53 apartments there.


An Unlucky Lottery Winner
LEAD: A man who won $50,000 in the state lottery died the next day, officials said today.
Clarence Kinder, 77 years old, won the money Thursday on a televised lottery show.
He died Friday night of a heart attack, said his stepdaughter, Lucy Bell. ''Thursday was the greatest day of his life,'' she added.


G.M. Will Spin Off Diesel Engine Unit
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it would spin off part of its diesel engine manufacturing business to a joint venture it is forming with the Penske Corporation of Red Bank, N.J.
The venture, to be called the Detroit Diesel Corporation, will take over the heavy-duty diesel manufacturing business of G.M.


COCAINE TRIAL NEARS FOR WEST VIRGINIA MAYOR
LEAD: Jury selection began today in the drug trial of Mayor Mike Roark after the judge ruled that prosecutors could not present evidence of cocaine use unless it was included in the indictment.


MONARCH CAPITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONARCH CAPITAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b15,567,000
c14,850,000
Share earns
1.95
1.77
Shares outst
7,572,000
8,390,000
9mo net inc
b36,896,000
c53,567,000
Share earns
4.61
6.36
Shares outst
7,757,000
8,423,000


MAUNA LOA MACADAMIA PARTERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAUNA LOA MACADAMIA PARTERS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,085,000
3,406,000
Net inc
403,000
1,378,000
Share earns
.09
.31
9mo sales
3,897,000
3,406,000
Net inc
746,000
1,317,000
Share earns
.16
.29


IDB COMMUNICATIONS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IDB COMMUNICATIONS GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,087,000
1,696,000
Net inc
502,000
135,000
Share earns
.12
.04
Shares outst
4,206,000
3,042,000
9mo rev
7,749,000
4,241,000
Net inc
1,119,000
507,000
Share earns
.27
.17
Shares outst
4,123,000
3,042,000


PATRICK INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PATRICK INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
35,758,000
32,618,000
Net inc
603,000
365,000
Share earns
.43
.26
9mo sales
96,487,000
92,680,000
Net inc
1,243,000
1,058,000
Share earns
.89
.82


COSMO COMMUNICATIONS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COSMO COMMUNICATIONS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
15,579,000
9,777,000
Net loss
86,000
b176,000
9mo sales
34,073,000
18,848,000
Net loss
834,000
425,000
b-Net income


Cyprus-LTV Steel
LEAD: The Cyprus Minerals Company said it had filed claims totaling $1.07 billion against the LTV Steel Company and alternate claims of $722 million against its parent company, the LTV Corporation.
Cyprus, based in Englewood, Calif., said the claims stem from LTV's Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing in July 1986 and its subsequent rejections of two long-term coal supply contracts.


Citizens Want to Know
LEAD: Whitty Cuninggim started by explaining what had first moved her. ''I was a bride in 1939.
My playhouse was disrupted and I didn't know why.
When my husband was sent off to war, my mother-in-law said: 'Don't worry.
God will send him back.' I wasn't satisfied.
He came back, but I decided by cracky, I may not be able to do anything about it but from now on I'm going to know why.


DIVERSIFIED HUMAN REOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIVERSIFIED HUMAN REOURCES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,151,961
3,892,717
Net loss
300,295
b103,692
Share earns
-
.06
9mo rev
17,411,224
10,740,664
Net loss
555,650
b243,087
Share earns
-
.15


Trial Opens for Colombian in Drug Smuggling
LEAD: Carlos Lehder Rivas dreamed of buying his own nation and becoming the ''king of cocaine transportation,'' a Federal prosecutor said today at the opening of the Colombian's trial on drug-smuggling charges.


JONES INTERCABLE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JONES INTERCABLE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,014,000
6,483,000
Net inc
1,297,000
37,000
Share earns
.10
-


FARRAGUT MORTGAGE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FARRAGUT MORTGAGE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
1,088,000
-
9mo net loss
5,913,000
-
The company said prior year results are not available, since the bank changed its fiscal year to Dec. 1 from April 30.


FITCHBURG GAS &amp; ELECTRIC LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FITCHBURG GAS &amp; ELECTRIC LIGHT CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,682,577
10,032,581
Net inc
b42,770
347,533
Share earns
-
.09
9mo rev
38,794,111
38,096,500
Net inc
b3,135,087
2,483,527
Share earns
1.85
1.35


BERKEY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BERKEY INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
34,122,000
38,666,000
Net loss
2,085,000
2,969,000
9mo rev
99,380,000
119,480,000
Net loss
8,548,000
b13,729,000
b-Includes a loss of $129,000 from discontinued operations.


Bruce Let Go by Ohio State
LEAD: Earle Bruce, dogged by criticism after three consecutive losses, was dismissed today as the head football coach at Ohio State.
Shortly after the administration's action, Rick Bay, the school's athletic director, resigned in disagreement.


The Making of a Scholarly Best Seller
LEAD: Simon &amp; Schuster gave Allan Bloom a modest $10,000 advance and published an equally modest 10,000 copies of his scholarly and somewhat abstruse book.
Eight months later, ''The Closing of the American Mind'' has been a best seller for 29 weeks, has sold an astonishing 445,000 copies and is about to make its author a millionaire.


BROWN, TOM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROWN, TOM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,300,000
3,986,000
Net inc
17,000
b1,959,000
9mo rev
8,857,000
8,284,000
Net inc
167,000
b4,184,000
b-Net loss  Preferred dividend requirements exceeded net income in the latest third quarter and 9 months.


JUSTICES ALLOW SCRUITINY OF AGENT ORANGE DATA
LEAD: Over the protest of seven chemical manufacturers, the Supreme Court today let stand an appeals court order that the companies allow Vietnam veterans who sued them see research documents on the herbicide Agent Orange.


After a Half Century in Office, Carolinian Is Calling It Quits
LEAD: Thad Eure, North Carolina's Secretary of State, who says he has held statewide elective office longer than anyone in the nation, said today that he would not seek another term.


6 Arrested in Violence Against Cabbies
LEAD: Six men were arrested in three days in a crackdown on violence against cabdrivers, the police said yesterday.


COMPUTER PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER PRODUCTS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,847,000
29,338,000
Net inc
607,000
842,000
Share earns
.03
.04
9mo sales
84,175,000
86,698,000
Net inc
723,000
b5,662,000
Share earns
.04
-


Walter C. Iooss Sr.; Jazz Bassist, 73
LEAD: Walter C. Iooss Sr., a jazz bassist, died of a heart attack Sunday at his home in Riverhead, L.I.
He was 73 years old.


TWO PESOS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TWO PESOS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,331,000
3,357,000
Net inc
267,000
254,000
Share earns
.04
.05
Shares outst
7,317,000
5,117,000
6mo rev
11,309,000
4,981,000
Net inc
568,000
105,000
Share earns
.08
.02
Shares outst
7,175,000
4,317,000


F.T.C. Acts to Bar Acquisition by Dun
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission voted unananimously to have its staff seek a preliminary injunction blocking the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation's acquisition of Information Resources Inc.


Texas Supreme Court Gave Texaco Fair and Equal Treatment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Winans's Optimistic Illusions Finally Shatter
LEAD: He had thought things were looking up.
R.
Foster Winans said he felt good after the United States Attorney returned his passport and allowed him to take a monthlong vacation in Italy to visit a friend studying there.


Hearing Opens on Airplane Crash in Detroit
LEAD: A witness to the Aug. 16 crash of a Northwest Airlines plane that killed 156 people testified today that the wing flaps were in the proper takeoff position but the jet took longer to get off the ground than expected.


COMPUTER ENTRY SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER ENTRY SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,427,000
17,403,000
Net inc
373,000
575,000
Share earns
.17
.11
9mo rev
53,696,000
52,765,000
Net inc
2,191,000
1,450,000
Share earns
.41
.27


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  As the World Turns


Sikorsky Accused of Compromising Copter Safety
LEAD: The former top aviation safety engineer for Sikorsky Aircraft says he quit over management practices that compromised helicopter flight safety, according to court papers.


Status of Taylor Not Yet Determined
LEAD: Because Lawrence Taylor is Lawrence Taylor - or perhaps because Bill Parcells is not, as usual, letting on - the Giants refused to say today that Taylor will be unable to play next Sunday at New Orleans for the first time in his National Football League career.


Having, and Sharing, It All
LEAD: A woman who considers herself one pillar of a two-career-couple-with-kids finds herself fed up with the bleak image accorded this kind of family.


Tokyo Stocks Rise 0.7%
LEAD: Stock prices rose seven-tenths of 1 percent on the Tokyo Stock Exchange today as optimism increased that the United States would devise a deficit-cutting plan.
The 225-share price index gained 167.18, to 22,615.43.
But the volume of 300 million shares was down from Friday's 600 million.


The Law Against Fraud
LEAD: Here are excerpts of the two provisions of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 involved in the Winans case.
Reference to ''the Commission'' means the Securities and Exchange Commission.


SPORTSMAN'S GUIDE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPORTSMAN'S GUIDE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,208,561
5,406,251
Net inc
101,003
c118,590
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
11,571,828
6,194,698
Net loss
b522,717
394,310
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $159,943 from an accounting change.


Going For Inner Gold
LEAD: THE Mahre brothers have retired, leaving Bill Johnson - the 1984 downhill champion - as the only member of the United States men's ski team with an Olympic souvenir.


CALIFORNIA WATER SERVICE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALIFORNIA WATER SERVICE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
34,957,000
34,320,000
Net inc
5,919,000
5,168,000
Share earns
2.10
1.83
9mo rev
88,391,000
83,733,000
Net inc
b14,391,000
10,099,000
Share earns
5.09
3.55


FLUKE, JOHN MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLUKE, JOHN MANUFACTURING CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 25
1987
1986
Sales
51,728,000
52,411,000
Net loss
5,787,000
b2,882,000
Share earns
-
.32
Yr sales
206,328,000
209,030,000
Net inc
2,005,000
12,156,000
Share earns
.24
1.37


K MARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*K MARK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 28
1987
1986
Revenue
6,041,700,000
5,649,300,000
Net inc
110,100,000
b87,300,000
Share earns
.54
.43
9mo rev
18,073,700,000
16,777,200,000
Net inc
371,000,000
b297,300,000
Share earns
1.82
1.49


IRT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IRT CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Revenue
9,284,000
9,456,000
Net loss
1,686,000
b66,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
17,030,000
20,903,000
Net loss
3,776,000
b454,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income and after extraordinary gains of $30,000 for the quarter and $206,000 for the 6 months.


ZENITH LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZENITH LABORATORIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,496,000
6,832,000
Net loss
b1,976,000
3,451,000
9mo sales
33,563,000
38,947,000
Net loss
5,155,000
1,044,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $554,000.


FIRST AMERICAN HEALTH CONCEPTS reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMERICAN HEALTH CONCEPTS
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
335,000
119,537
Net inc
56,000
b219,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. Why doesn't the stomach digest itself?
A.
Cells lining the stomach and duodenum produce a mucous-like substance that separates the stomach wall from digestive enzymes and acids, according to Dr.
Averil Ma, a gastroenterology fellow at the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.


Business and Health; Kaiser Fears AIDS Influx
LEAD: FOR years Kaiser Permanente has proudly proclaimed that it could supply good medical care at a reasonable rate.
Its promotions have been wildly successful, and Kaiser has become by far the nation's largest prepaid-health-care organization, with more than five million members.


Kenya Shuts Campus After Battles With Students
LEAD: The Kenyan Government today closed the University of Nairobi, the country's main university campus, after two days of battles between security forces and students demonstrating over the arrest of their leaders.


Tokyo Journal; Like It or Not, Japan Has 20,000 Fugitive Guests
LEAD: Behind an unvarnished message that Japan is for Japanese, the Government is trying hard to shut the door on unskilled laborers who have flocked here from other Asian countries to find work.


Niwata and Tahmisian, Violinist and Pianist
LEAD: The violinist-pianist duo of Kaoru Niwata and Emma Tahmisian made a debut in Weill Recital Hall Sunday afternoon with a program of works by Debussy, Franck, Prokofiev and Toshiro Saruya.
Ms.
Niwata's string tone was big and pleasing, and her energetic phrasing was invariably correct; Ms.
Tahmisian presented a more restrained approach at the piano that was no less reasonable.


VMS SHORT TERM INCOME TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VMS SHORT TERM INCOME TRUST
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,590,084
1,632,680
Per share
.38
.24
9mo net inc
7,730,805
5,529,482
Per share
1.12
.80


LVI GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LVI GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
125,570,000
76,461,000
Net inc
b1,328,000
c737,000
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
19,853,929
19,765,000
9mo rev
376,078,000
201,933,000
Net inc
b3,848,000
c2,068,000
Share earns
.16
.11


By Design
LEAD:  Pouf Proof: Wearing one of the new party dresses, poufed and frothy, is a heady experience.
Coping with it between wearings is another story, however.
If the souffle of the skirt falls, much of its allure is lost.


MAXXAM GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAXXAM GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
52,636,000
39,363,000
Net inc
b73,584,000
c2,428,000
Share earns
5.39
-
9mo rev
152,938,000
103,770,000
Net inc
b97,188,000
c5,276,000
Share earns
7.12
-


Meese's Record of Failure
LEAD: Edwin Meese 3d should never have been named Attorney General in the first place.
Now, with a record in that office of monumentally poor judgment and of ethical insensitivity, the most dignified contribution Mr.
Meese could make to prop up this faltering Presidency would be to resign.


Swedish Train Crash Kills 9
LEAD: Nine people were killed and more than 100 were injured today when two trains crashed head-on in western Sweden and burst into flames, rescue workers said.
The crash occurred near the town of Lerum, about 12 miles east of Goteborg, when an express from Stockholm to Goteborg ran into a passenger train traveling on the same track in the opposite direction.


VMS MORTGAGE INVESTORS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VMS MORTGAGE INVESTORS LP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
2,384,783
2,321,731
Per share
.31
.30
9mo net inc
6,886,593
6,025,205
Per share
.89
.78
The share earnings are in units.


MONARCH MACHINE TOOL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONARCH MACHINE TOOL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,910,027
14,621,493
Net loss
205,309
b183,705
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
51,382,486
46,202,223
Net loss
464,024
b499,275
Share earns
-
.13


ASSOCIATED COMMUNICATIONS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASSOCIATED COMMUNICATIONS CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,857,864
827,511
Net inc
b29,942,004
c978,615
Share earns
3.65
-
9mo rev
5,414,259
2,382,619
Net inc
b30,742,730
c1,401,648
Share earns
3.76
-


Brodsky to Read in Queens
LEAD: Joseph Brodsky, winner of this year's Nobel Prize in Literature, is to read from his work on Nov. 30 at 7 P.M. at the Student Union of Queens College, Kissena Boulevard and the Long Island Expressway.
Mr.
Brodsky gave his first reading at the college shortly after his arrival from the Soviet Union in 1972.


For Ukrainian Church, A Political Fate
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.06
6.80
6.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.85
5.92
5.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.41
6.42
5.46
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.64
8.68
7.05
30-YR.


Advertising; Skepticism On Saatchi Rumors
LEAD: A REPORT that Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. of Britain might take steps to return to privately held status was greeted with skepticism yesterday by knowledgeable members of the Wall Street and agency communities.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A brief report yesterday about a performance by the violinist Joseph Fuchs at Carnegie Hall gave an incorrect date.
It will be at 8 P.M. on Dec. 2, not tomorrow.


Political Memo; JACKSON AND ROBERTSON: 'BOOKENDS' OF '88 RACE
LEAD: A remarkable piece of political symmetry has emerged between the otherwise very different contests for the Republican and Democratic Presidential nominations.


Rare Turtles Are Beached
LEAD: The most endangered of all sea turtles, Kemp's Ridley turtles, are washing up on Cape Cod beaches because the unaccustomed cold water prevents the animals from functioning, marine experts say.


Dow Up 14.09 in Moderate Trading
LEAD: Stock prices rose in moderate trading yesterday, as investors here and abroad awaited the outcome of budget-cutting talks in Washington.


Presidential Candidates Find No Cure For 'Absentee Legislator Syndrome'
LEAD: In May, the House of Representatives voted on an amendment to establish a bipartisan commission empowered to close unneeded military bases.


S.E.C. Files Payout Plan On Levine
LEAD: Dennis B. Levine's insider-trading activities in 54 companies over a five-year period have led a myriad of investors, corporate acquirers and creditors to assert they have been injured by his illegal use of confidential information.


Lansing Warren, 93, Ex-Reporter
LEAD: Lansing Warren, a former correspondent for The New York Times in Paris, died of a heart ailment Saturday in Pasadena, Calif.
He was 93 years old and had lived in Pasadena since 1980.


THERMO ELECTRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THERMO ELECTRON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
96,092,000
85,192,000
Net inc
5,085,000
3,695,000
Share earns
.28
.21
9mo sales
284,801,000
243,133,000
Net inc
13,084,000
9,879,000
Share earns
.72
.58


PETROMINERALS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PETROMINERALS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,007,000
2,015,000
Net inc
b74,000
c31,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
5,895,000
8,194,000
Net loss
b251,000
d5,012,000
b-Includes a gain of $274,000 on the sale of assets.


CANDELA LASER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANDELA LASER
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,800,000
842,944
Net inc
158,122
b208,124
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
3,262,609
2,924,724
b-Net loss


Harry Greenwald; Coin Meter Inventor, 75
LEAD: Harry Greenwald, who invented the coin meters on coin-laundry washing machines and dryers, died of a stroke Friday at Flushing Hospital in Queens.
He was 75 years old and lived in Whitestone, Queens.


Elayne H. Varian, Art Curator And Show Organizer, Dies at 74
LEAD: Elayne Hanley Varian, an art curator and exhibition organizer, died of cardiopulmonary arrest on Nov. 4 at her home in Orlando, Fla.
She was 74 years old.


ORGANOGENESIS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORGANOGENESIS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,564,097
5,555
Net inc
381,817
b228,781
Share earns
.06
-
9mo rev
2,326,336
5,555
Net loss
357,910
338,150
b-Net loss


MYLAN LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MYLAN LABORATORIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
25,120,000
25,028,000
Net inc
6,774,000
6,345,000
Share earns
.19
.18
6mo sales
46,606,000
47,194,000
Net inc
12,281,000
11,800,000
Share earns
.34
.33


Loss at MCO And Maxxam
LEAD: Two companies controlled by the Houston investor Charles E. Hurwitz said today that the stock market's steep decline since the beginning of October had resulted in $33.8 million in losses, which would adversely affect both concerns' fourth-quarter results.


Jackson, Citing Klan Threat, Renews a Call for Protection
LEAD: Citing a death threat from the Ku Klux Klan, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's Democratic Presidential campaign today renewed a call for early Secret Service protection.


CCA INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CCA INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,249,174
2,016,777
Net loss
368,794
b218,221
Share earns
-
.04
9mo sales
7,080,907
4,416,436
Net loss
99,575
b546,333
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


A CBS Correspondent To Be Morning Co-Host
LEAD: Harry Smith, a CBS correspondent, has been named co-host with Kathleen Sullivan of the network's new morning news program, it was announced yesterday.


Bank Drops Eurobonds
LEAD: Toronto Dominion International, a unit of the Toronto Dominion Bank of Canada, has withdrawn from the Eurobond market, it said today.
Eurobonds are bonds that pay interest in a currency outside the country of issue.
Several banks have reduced Eurobond activity as unprofitable.


The New Mystery of the Female Heart
LEAD: MEN and women are different at heart, literally.


COMTREX SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMTREX SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
869,737
637,710
Net loss
b155,473
75,230
6mo sales
1,470,533
1,868,146
Net loss
b374,996
c43,994
Share earns
-
.02
b-After tax credits of $91,309 and $220,236 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Why Fulton Achieved Steamboat Success
LEAD: To the Editor:


In a Tiny Town, News of Crash Hits Everyone Special to The New York Times
LEAD: Just before 3 P.M. today, the American flag in front of the tiny Town Hall here was lowered to half staff.


FURNISHINGS 2000 reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FURNISHINGS 2000
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
23,308,000
21,507,000
Net loss
892,000
1,976,000


Two Agencies Grow Abroad
LEAD: News with a foreign flavor comes from Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications and Grey Advertising.


Bridge: Covering Honor With Honor Can Be a Fiendish Problem
LEAD: The beginner learns some guidelines that tell him when to cover an honor with an honor, and thinks he understands the subject.


MYCOGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MYCOGEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,065,202
50,256
Net loss
1,047,580
1,197,643
Yr rev
2,270,954
171,445
Net loss
4,935,499
4,102,440


Spanish Trawler Carrying 34 Missing Near Newfoundland
LEAD: A Spanish fishing trawler with a crew of 34 was reported missing and believed sunk off Newfoundland today, coast guard officials said.


The Speaker of State
LEAD: Diplomacy abhors a vacuum, which is just what the Reagan Administration has left concerning Central America - and just why there's such a hollow ring to its complaints about freelance diplomacy by Speaker of the House Jim Wright.
Diplomatic involvement by members of Congress raises truly troubling questions.


Jim Brewer, Ex-Dodger Reliever
LEAD: Jim Brewer, a former star relief pitcher for the Los Angeles Dodgers, died of injuries suffered in an automobile accident here today, the National League club said.


Bass to Raise Stake In Bell &amp; Howell
LEAD: An investor group led by Robert M. Bass of Fort Worth said it intends to raise to 25 percent its large stake in the Bell &amp; Howell Company, the information services and publishing concern that is attracting much takeover interest.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the group, which already holds 1.5 million shares, or 16.2 percent, repeated earlier statements that it plans to discuss its investment with company management.


Food Shortage Cited in 15 African Countries
LEAD: The World Food Program warned today that 15 countries in sub-Saharan Africa - a region suffering from widespread drought, crop failure and civil strife -need large shipments of food immediately.


Moscow Was Caught Between Cuba and U.S.
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''Some people in the Administration are scared to death that peace will break out.''  - Jim Wright, Speaker of the House,after White House meeting on Nicaragua.  [ A1:3. ]


Hunt Hearing Kept Open
LEAD: A Federal judge today rejected a request by Nelson Bunker Hunt and William Herbert Hunt to close to the public a hearing on charges they manipulated silver prices in 1979 and 1980.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: HOLY TERROR.
Inside the World of Islamic Terrorism.
By Amir Taheri. 332 pages.
Adler &amp; Adler. $19.95.


Sports People; Doug Williams to Start
LEAD: Doug Williams, the Washington Redskins' quarterback, has been granted his wish to start for a contender, and it did not take a trade to do it.
For months, Williams has expressed a desire to be traded so he could start for a winning team.
Coach Joe Gibbs repeatedly denied the request.


KIRSCHNER MEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KIRSCHNER MEDICAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,820,000
1,584,000
Net inc
b203,000
21,000
Share earns
.12
.02
9mo rev
11,937,000
4,730,000
Net inc
b538,000
c50,000
Share earns
.37
-
b-After an extraordinary charge of $130,000 in connection with debt prepayment for the quarter and 9 months.


FIRST ESSEX BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST ESSEX BANCORP
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,202,000
2,226,000
6mo net inc
2,486,000
b3,219,000
b-After a special dividend of $1,948,000 from the State Mutual Savings Central Fund.
The bank converted to stock form in August.


IRT PROPERTY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IRT PROPERTY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,222,608
4,236,655
Net inc
b1,964,859
1,594,486
Share earns
.28
.20
Shares outst
9,144,965
7,977,931
9mo rev
17,959,280
12,017,084
Net inc
5,120,913
c5,811,839
Share earns
.69
.73
Shares outst
8,524,692
7,958,436


CASH AMERICAN INVESTMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CASH AMERICAN INVESTMENTS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,188,000
3,598,000
Net inc
1,042,000
b280,000
Share earns
.15
.09
Shares outst
6,826,153
3,109,896
9mo rev
23,437,000
9,410,000
Net inc
1,647,000
b451,000
Share earns
.30
.16
Shares outst
5,563,429
2,741,743


SPROUSE-REITZ STORES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPROUSE-REITZ STORES
Qtr to Oct 27
1987
1986
Sales
51,486,073
48,155,329
Net inc
514,309
465,391
Share earns
.35
.32
9mo sales
148,726,953
141,836,508
Net inc
1,626,008
1,581,093
Share earns
1.13
1.10


Recital: Anthony Newman Inaugurates a Church Organ
LEAD: THE Church of the Holy Trinity on East 88th Street inaugurated a new organ Sunday afternoon.
It is a 33-stop tracker instrument by Rieger Orgelbau of Austria, designed for a particular kind of versatility: registrations historically appropriate for French and North German Baroque music are accommodated, while string work for the French Romantics is available on the third manual.


Computer Bazaars
LEAD: THE silver-haired woman standing in line behind me turned to the man with her and said, ''You know, if I get that new card I'll be able to do a lot more with graphics.'' He agreed, a bit glumly, it seemed.
His wife was on a shopping trip.


A Sincere Form of Flattery
LEAD: Until recently I.B.M. and Apple, the big two of personal computers, have turned out models that were as different as a utilitarian Volvo and a sporty Porsche.
Now, they risk becoming as alike as a Pontiac and a Chevy.


Handouts of Cheese, Milk and Rice Face 50% Cut Next Year
LEAD: Government policies to reduce surpluses of cheese, milk and rice have succeeded so well that the Reagan Administration plans to cut distribution of these commodities in half in the coming year, Federal officials said today.


The Sexy Look: Why Now?
LEAD: Necklines plunge or open out in sweetheart effects not seen since the 1950's.
Shoulders are bared, waistlines snugly fitted, and skirts are rounded in an egg shape, tightly draped, or flared and poufed with myriad petticoats.
Some tops are translucent if not transparent, and some dresses look like lingerie, with slip tops and lacy edges.


Japanese Deny Tube Dumping
LEAD: Five Japanese television manufacturers denied today that they were exporting color picture tubes to the United States at unfairly low prices.


PRODUCTION ROSE 0.6% IN OCTOBER
LEAD: The nation's factories, mines and utilities raised their output by six-tenths of 1 percent in October, the strongest gain since July, the Federal Reserve reported today.


Not All Viewers Are Back From Strike
LEAD: SOMETIMES your dreams come true. And sometimes your nightmares do.


FAIRFIELD COMMUNITIES LAND CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAIRFIELD COMMUNITIES LAND CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
90,103,000
-
Net inc
1,276,000
-
Share earns
.12
-
9mo rev
240,849,000
-
Net inc
1,863,000
-
Share earns
.17
-
Comparable results are not available; the company changed to a calendar year from a year ending Feb.


10th St. Privy Yields Artifacts
LEAD: For a few hours yesterday afternoon, daylight fell on a 19th-century ''time capsule'' of life in Greenwich Village, reaching empty bottles of Tweddle's Celebrated Soda (or Mineral Waters), Dr.
Hooker's Cough &amp; Croup Syrup and Batchelor's Hair Dye No. 2.


Sports of The Times; Ewing in the Crunch
LEAD: ''ROBERT PARISH said you're a new Patrick Ewing,'' a Boston reporter, who had just returned from the Celtics' locker room, informed the once and future and present Patrick Ewing. ''He said you're playing hard, more aggressive.''


CERAMICS PROCESS SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CERAMICS PROCESS SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,200,000
800,000
Net loss
1,100,000
1,000,000
9mo rev
2,500,000
1,700,000
Net loss
4,300,000
3,200,000


After a Brief Retirement, Classic Winner Tries Again
LEAD: There are 28 broodmares roaming the pastures of California this week who would, if they could, be rooting for Skywalker to defend his title in the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic here Saturday.
It would give them something to brag about when they deliver his first sons and daughters next spring.


New Attitude of Arabs a Challenge, Eban Says
LEAD: Abba Eban, the former Foreign Minister, says Israel is failing to understand, or take advantage of, a revolutionary change in the Arab world.


HUDSON GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUDSON GENERAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,948,000
21,425,000
Net loss
b351,000
c98,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-After equity in loss earnings of a joint venture of $83,000 and a loss from minority interest of $231,000.


LONG ISLAND LIGHTING CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LONG ISLAND LIGHTING CO (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,041,751,000
1,992,430,000
Net inc
214,367,000
438,705,000
Share earns
1.22
3.21
The latest 12 months' net includes a $16 million provision related to the company's investment in the Jamesport Nuclear Project.


LASER INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LASER INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,595,000
7,730,000
Net inc
982,000
b1,133,000
Share earns
.21
.25
6mo sales
18,501,000
14,895,000
Net inc
2,019,000
b2,067,000
Share earns
.44
.47


SOLIDARITY ASSAILS INCREASE IN PRICES
LEAD: Solidarity leaders today denounced the drastic price increases announced by the Government over the weekend, saying the proposals ''could well push broad circles of society into poverty and a feeling of hopelessness.''


EVERT, DRAINED AND TIRED, LOSES TO HANIKA, 6-4,6-4
LEAD: At 9:03 last night, Sylvia Hanika of West Germany punched a forehand volley winner past Chris Evert into the open court and took one small step toward a victory that had eluded her for 10 years.


M-I SCHOTTENSTEIN HOMES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*M-I SCHOTTENSTEIN HOMES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
44,162,636
32,845,046
Net inc
2,113,112
1,591,096
Share earns
.35
.34
Shares outst
6,056,304
4,700,000
9mo rev
104,043,397
69,280,615
Net inc
3,744,870
2,482,657
Share earns
.62
.53
Shares outst
5,995,769
4,700,000


EXPERTS VOICE HOPE IN ALZHEIMER'S FIGHT
LEAD: ALZHEIMER'S disease, the brain disorder that robs millions of people of their memories and minds, is beginning to yield secrets at a pace that scientists call dramatic and exciting.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Chun Sees Threat to Vote


Treasury Bonds on Upside
LEAD: Despite unanswered questions about the outcome of negotiations to reduce Federal budget deficits, Treasury bond prices ended the day with gains of about 3/8 point and yields still in the 8 7/8 percent to 9 percent range that has prevailed for more than a week.


'HOOVER VS. THE KENNEDYS,' MINI-SERIES ON CHANNEL 11
LEAD: IT'S not the bad taste; it's the frivolity. ''Hoover vs. the Kennedys: The Second Civil War'' seems to be a face-off between two yuppies and old Scrooge.
President John F. Kennedy dallies, while Robert F. Kennedy pouts and J. Edgar Hoover has snits.
The two-part, four-hour mini-series, which begins on Channel 11 at 9 o'clock tonight, is a kind of gumshoe's view of the White House.


M/A-COM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*M/A-COM INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Sales
99,237,000
118,870,000
Net loss
b48,265,000
c56,080,000
Share earns
-
1.29
Yr sales
436,107,000
447,722,000
Net loss
b35,360,000
c8,800,000
Share earns
-
.20


Ireene Wicker Hammer Dies, 86; Storyteller to Millions of Children
LEAD: Ireene Wicker Hammer, who as ''The Singing Lady'' told fairy tales over radio and television to millions of American children, died yesterday in a nursing home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
She was 86 years old.


A Golf Ball That Avoids the Woods?
LEAD: Most golfers, from weekend duffers to low-handicap regulars, play with balls covered with a substance called Surlyn.
Surlyn is durable and can be whacked a long way, but it doesn't provide the exquisite control that the touring professionals crave.


Pilots in Crash Had Little DC-9 Time
LEAD: The pilots of the Continental Airlines DC-9 jet that crashed in a snowstorm Sunday in Denver had relatively little experience flying that type of plane, particularly in snow, according to data given investigators yesterday.


NEXT WEEK
LEAD:  If you have neither the time nor the willpower to prepare ahead for Thanksgiving, there is no need to despair.
Next week The Living Section will offer a last-minute strategy.
Thanksgiving meal-in-a-day.
For best results, however, or-der a turkey now (10 to 12 pounds to serve 8) and have 12 ounces of fresh cranberries on hand.


Climbers Plan to Place Devices Atop Everest
LEAD: Mountain climbers, including sons of the first two men to reach the summit of Mount Everest, plan to scale the Himalayan peak next spring in the first attempt to plant equipment there for making precise measurements of its elevation, expedition organizers announced last week.


Not So Elementary
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: Advances; Rebuilding Planes to Cut Airport Noise
LEAD: A DRIVE by the Federal Aviation Administration to impose more stringent noise abatement rules at airports is causing the airlines concern about the future usefulness of 70 percent of the nation's air fleet.


LIVINGWELL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIVINGWELL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
33,005,000
46,768,000
Net loss
29,932,000
b864,000
Share earns
-
.04
9mo rev
148,314,000
145,278,000
Net loss
24,548,000
b4,524,000
Share earns
-
.22


Jim Brewer, Ex-Dodger Reliever
LEAD: Jim Brewer, a former star relief pitcher for the Los Angeles Dodgers, died of injuries suffered in an automobile accident here today, the National League club said.


For Hungarian, Yeltsin's Fall Is a Reminder of Things Past
LEAD: A founding father of Hungary's first wave of economic innovation says the downfall of Boris N. Yeltsin in Moscow is a ''shocking'' reminder of the limits to possible change in the Soviet Union and the rest of Eastern Europe.


CONGRESS REACHES ARMS COMPROMISE WITH WHITE HOUSE
LEAD: Congressional leaders announced today that they had reached a compromise with the White House on arms-control issues that removes a major obstacle to the passage of a new military spending bill.


TOWLE MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOWLE MANUFACTURING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,960,000
26,944,000
Net loss
575,000
b5,371,000
9mo sales
45,912,000
91,480,000
Net loss
9,092,000
b4,773,000
b-Includes a gain of $200,000 and $12,108,000 on the disposal of discontinued operations for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


LOW DOLLAR LIFTS U.S. SALES
LEAD: At long last, the falling dollar is helping American companies to regain their international competitiveness.


A New IUD on the Way as Suits Linger
LEAD: Although intrauterine devices became one of the most widely used types of birth control during the 1970's, their inventors were unclear about how such devices interacted with the body.


System Energy Yield Is 14% on 7-Year Bonds
LEAD: System Energy Resources, a financing subsidiary of the System Energy Corporation, a utility holding company, is offering a 14 percent yield on a new issue of seven-year bonds, through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Letters; Overburdened Painters
LEAD: To the Living Section:


The Last Place to Cut the Budget
LEAD: White House and Congressional negotiators are still struggling to reduce the budget deficit in fiscal 1989 and 1990 by Friday, when the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law requires automatic cuts.
They search for the courage to touch politically untouchable programs like Social Security.


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


Sports of The Times; Too Much in Love?
LEAD: ''SHE looks like she's lost weight,'' said the woman in the blue jacket, ''and a little tired.''


P.S.A.L. Forfeits Upheld
LEAD: Susan Wagner High School, the only undefeated football team in the Public School Athletic League, will forfeit eight of its nine victories this season because it used an ineligible player, the league's director ruled yesterday.


Breeders' Cup Notebook; Eclipse Award at Stake for Lukas and Whittingham
LEAD: Two trainers, D. Wayne Lukas and Charlie Whittingham, have dominated the nation's Grade I races all year long and may continue in the seven Breeders' Cup races at Hollywood Park Saturday.


Rates Up a Bit At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates rose slightly yesterday at Citicorp's regular weekly commercial paper auctions.


Gdansk Journal; Mood Over Dockyards Is New Mirror for Poland
LEAD: Down along Dock Street, Poland's powder keg, there is an air of uncertainty.


INTERNATIONAL AMERICAN HOMES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL AMERICAN HOMES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
43,567,000
43,286,000
Net inc
779,000
927,000
Share earns
.09
.16
Shares outst
8,511,000
6,087,000
6mo rev
80,285,000
71,942,000
Net inc
1,285,000
1,217,000
Share earns
.15
.21
Shares outst
8,749,000
6,087,000


House Approves Bill to Lift Curbs On Federal Employees in Politics
LEAD: The House voted today, 305 to 112, to allow the Government's three million civilian employees for the first time in 48 years to run for office, manage election campaigns and solicit political contributions on their own time.


CARDINAL'S VIEWS ASSAILED BY JEWS
LEAD: A new strain in relations between Catholics and Jews has arisen in recent days because of published remarks by the Vatican's monitor of theological orthodoxy about the dialogue between the faiths.


EDUCATION: COLLEGES OPEN NEW MINORITY DRIVES
LEAD: Concerned over new evidence of a persistent and sharp decline in black and Hispanic high school graduates' going on to college, universities around the country have turned to junior high schools in their efforts to recruit minority students.


MISCHER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MISCHER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,804,000
15,534,000
Net loss
2,517,000
1,357,000
9mo rev
31,312,000
43,218,000
Net loss
6,073,000
4,466,000


HONEYBEE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HONEYBEE INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,167,000
6,264,000
Net inc
b1,089,000
389,000
Share earns
.41
.17
9mo sales
25,391,000
18,932,000
Net inc
2,020,000
c824,000
Share earns
.75
.35


Jet in Emergency Landing
LEAD: A Northwest Airlines Boeing 727 jetliner made an emergency landing at Bismark Municipal Airport today after the pilot radioed that the plane's rear stairway might have lowered in flight, an airport official said.
None of the 44 passengers and 6 crew members were hurt, said John Van Middlesworth, the airport manager.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Parting Shot
LEAD: Passengers on the New York-Washington shuttle were delayed 30 to 60 minutes yesterday morning by what was announced as ''military traffic.'' The traffic turned out to be Air Force fighter planes flying over the Pentagon as part of the ceremonies saluting Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger on his last day in office.


MEDICAL ACTION INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDICAL ACTION INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,342,783
4,448,142
Net inc
318,557
240,441
Share earns
.06
.05
6mo sales
10,301,902
7,925,320
Net inc
467,029
256,773
Share earns
.09
.05


FOREST OIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOREST OIL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
34,097,000
21,368,000
Net inc
b5,032,000
c1,782,000
Share earns
.50
-
9mo rev
85,938,000
67,929,000
Net inc
b7,266,000
c3,154,000
Share earns
.42
-


IT'S NOT SO EASY FOR NAVRATILOVA
LEAD: All the computer points have been counted, thus assuring Steffi Graf of finishing the year as the No. 1 player.
But last night, Martina Navratilova began her quest for the popular vote at Madison Square Garden, hoping that winning the Virginia Slims championships would strengthen her claim that she is still the best player in the world.


Earnings Rise at 3 Retailers
LEAD: Three leading retailing chains yesterday reported improved earnings for the third quarter.


BEAR STEARNS COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEAR STEARNS COMPANIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 30
1987
1986
Revenue
441,923,000
454,098,000
Net inc
413,000
b49,896,000
Share earns
-
.59
6mo rev
924,611,000
788,191,000
Net inc
48,334,000
b68,800,000
Share earns
.51
.81


Trump Urged To Head Gala Of Democrats
LEAD: Donald J. Trump, the New York real estate magnate and a registered Republican, has been asked by Jim Wright, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, to be the host at the 25th annual Democratic Congressional dinner in Washington in March, Congressional officials said yesterday.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The GTE Corporation is offering $200 million of 10.3 percent debentures, due in 2017, at a price of 100, through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.


Ralph Rice Boyer; Former Nuclear Official, 83
LEAD: Ralph Rice Boyer, retired chief of contracts finance for the Atomic Energy Commission, died of a heart attack Thursday at his home in Sandy Spring, Md.
He was 83 years old.


NATIONAL MEDIA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL MEDIA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,561,000
8,797,000
Net inc
1,160,000
82,000
Share earns
.12
.02
6mo rev
32,485,000
17,143,000
Net inc
2,107,000
b44,000
Share earns
.24
-
b-Net loss


Bruce's Ouster Is Questioned
LEAD: The president of Ohio State University declined yesterday to be specific about his reasons for dismissing Earle Bruce as the school's football coach, saying only that the decision was a ''personnel issue'' that had nothing to do with the team's record.


Kean Proposes A Cleanup Plan For Jersey Shore
LEAD: Governor Kean proposed today a 14-point, $200 million program to clean up the ocean off the Jersey Shore, but said local communities and Congress must also act if the effort is to succeed.


CP NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CP NATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
240,544,000
245,822,000
Net inc
22,002,000
21,699,000
Share earns
2.90
2.92
Shares outst
7,567,000
7,161,000


Letters; In Praise of Pageants
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Bridge: Longtime League Counsel Poses a Question of Law
LEAD: Lawyers are accustomed to thinking about new legal angles.
Consider for example the diagramed deal which occurred in a social game.


Bookmaker Sets Odds On Cuomo Bid in '88
LEAD: A London bookmaking firm, William Hill, says it has succumbed to popular demand and included Governor Cuomo of New York on the list of favorites to win the White House next year.


ENCOR ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENCOR ENERGY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
51,100,000
29,800,000
Net inc
6,400,000
b335,500,000
Share earns
.06
-
9mo rev
136,600,000
106,600,000
Net inc
16,600,000
b333,500,000
Share earns
.16
-


Texaco Creditors Offer To Help Settle Dispute
LEAD: In a move that deepens the backstage maneuvering in the dispute between Texaco Inc. and the Pennzoil Company, a committee of Texaco creditors said yesterday that it would ask for a court-appointed examiner to help settle the dispute.


Amoco Raises Its Dome Offer
LEAD: The Amoco Corporation said its Canadian unit had raised its takeover offer for Dome Petroleum Ltd. to $5.5 billion Canadian, or about $4.2 billion in United States currency.
The previous bid was $5.1 billion Canadian, or about $3.9 billion.


Arthur E. B. Tanner; Legislator, 78
LEAD: Arthur E. B. Tanner, former speaker of the Connecticut House of Representatives and past president of the Waterbury Foundry Company, died Sunday at his home here.
He was 78 years old.


Anita Brielke Stafford; Executive, 61
LEAD: Anita Brielke Stafford, senior vice president of Hermes of Paris Inc., the North American subsidiary of the Paris-based fashion boutique, was killed Friday in a car accident near Newtown, Conn.
She was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan and in Bethlehem, Conn.


Shamir Has No Regrets on Israel's Iran Arms Role
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said today that he had no regrets about Israel's involvement in American covert arms sales to Iran.


US FACILITIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*US FACILITIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,009,000
2,639,000
Net loss
b787,000
c71,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
20,688,000
8,755,000
Net loss
b333,000
c670,000
Share earns
-
.52
b-Includes net gains on securities of $83,000 and $183,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Legislators Seek Bistate Council On the Economy
LEAD: Three legislators from New York and New Jersey, calling for a ''cease-fire'' in the states' battle for business development, said yesterday that they would propose a new bistate economic cooperation council.


Reagan Confidant Urged Pardons in Iran Case
LEAD: William P. Clark, the former national security adviser, said today that he wrote President Reagan at the end of the Iran-contra hearings in August asking him to grant pardons to Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter and Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.


Let Reagan Lead
LEAD: To the Editor:


Greek Police Break Up An Anti-U.S. Protest
LEAD: The police fired tear gas and water cannon to disperse leftist demonstrators after an annual march on the United States Embassy here tonight to protest purported collusion between Washington and the colonels who ruled Greece from 1967 to 1974.


Koch Backs Unit to Fight Corruption
LEAD: Mayor Koch urged yesterday that broad prosecutorial powers be granted to a proposed state agency that would oversee the construction industry in New York City.


Ex-Head of Lotus Forms a Company
LEAD: A year after he left his post as chairman of the Lotus Development Corporation, where he helped to revolutionize the software industry, Mitchell D. Kapor says he is still nagged by the unnecessary complexity of current computers.


New York's New Culture Chief
LEAD: Dr.
Mary Schmidt Campbell, the first to admit she was ''brazen'' in seeking the job as New York City's Commissioner of Cultural Affairs, has now spent seven weeks in office, and she does not seem a bit daunted by the task. ''I am a political animal,'' she says, adding that she feels comfortable with the political system and intends to use it to help the arts, starting from the grass roots on up.


Donald Moss; Dance Manager, 38
LEAD: Donald Moss, the booking manager for the Feld Ballet and stage manager for a number of modern dance companies, including Alvin Ailey Dance Theater, died of heart failure on Sunday at his Manhattan home.
He was 38 years old.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-15


Washington Talk: Briefing; Organotins: Read This
LEAD: How do you add spice to the discussion of anadromous fish and the debate over organotins and antifoulants?


INSIDE
LEAD:  New on Wednesdays: The Education Page  The decline of the college interview.
And a new column, Lessons, looks at old-fashioned teaching in a modern-day classroom.
Page B6.
Also today: Eating Well, a column about food safety, health and nutri tion.
The Living Section, page C10.


Eating Well
LEAD: ADULTS who as children balked at downing their weekly ration of fish oil can't get enough of the stuff today: not cod-liver oil, mind you, but its modern-day successor - concentrates high in substances called omega-3 fatty acids.


NUCLEAR METALS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUCLEAR METALS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,220,000
12,813,000
Net inc
43,000
1,092,000
Share earns
.02
.40
Yr sales
42,395,000
41,771,000
Net loss
1,567,000
b2,782,000
Share earns
-
1.03


Eating Out With Martina Navratilova; Pasta and Fruit: A Lunch of Champions
LEAD: AFTER winning the United States Open tennis championship this year in New York, Martina Navratilova declined numerous invitations to celebrate at the city's swanky restaurants.
Instead, she returned to her hotel room where a friend catered a private dinner party. ''It was all Czech food,'' she said.


Advertising; Agencies Greet New Business
LEAD: THREE good-sized advertisers announced new agency alliances yesterday.
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company is returning to Young &amp; Rubicam, the agency that served it from 1945 to 1975.
DDB Needham, Chicago, is getting the Discover credit card from Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.
And Grey Advertising and its subsidiary, Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver, are getting big pieces of work from


Sports People; Griffin Relents
LEAD: Alfredo Griffin, the Oakland Athletics' shortstop who is being pursued by a number of teams, including the Yankees, has rescinded his demand for a trade.
So now there is a greater chance than ever he will be traded.
The explanation?
Last week, Griffin exercised a clause in his contract demanding a trade, presumably in an attempt to gain a lengthy contract extension but also making difficult any attempts by the Athletics to trade him by saying he would veto deals with the Yankees, Los Angeles, Mont-real, Philadelphia, Houston and Bos-ton.


Joseph C. Brennan, 77, Retired Bank Official
LEAD: Joseph Cantwell Brennan, a retired chairman and trustee of the Emigrant Savings Bank in New York and a prominent Roman Catholic layman, died Thursday after a heart attack at his home in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old.


Economic Scene; Stocks Fall, Business Rises
LEAD: HOW hard a blow has the stock market's collapse last month dealt to the real economy?


Bundesbank's Optimistic Chief
LEAD: When economic crises arise, Karl Otto Pohl can usually be found between the nearly irresistable Washington and the almost immovable Bonn - and looking for all the world as if he enjoys it.


Paul Derringer; Former Reds Pitcher, 81
LEAD: Paul Derringer, who won 161 games during 10 years with the Cincinnati Reds, died today in Sarasota, Fla., the team announced.
He was 81 years old.


Washington Talk: Briefing; With Kemp, Bork?
LEAD: Judge Robert H. Bork's hope of serving on the Supreme Court may not have ended with the rejection of his nomination by the Senate.


Homesteading Projects' Potential for Housing Rehabilitation
LEAD: To the Editor:


FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,666,649,000
2,514,153,000
Net inc
55,850,000
b34,480,000
Share earns
.60
.35
Shares outst
93,095,000
97,748,000
9mo sales
7,566,670,000
7,072,424,000
Net inc
136,012,000
b116,348,000
Share earns
1.46
1.19
Shares outst
93,355,000
97,813,000


Islanders Win, 4-3, With 4 in 3d Period
LEAD: Denis Potvin has played 1,005 games in the National Hockey League and nearly that number of third periods.


Greenville Journal; It's Harvest Time for Christmas Tree Farmers
LEAD: Gary Riessen stood on a hill near this small town in western Michigan and smiled as he listened to the sounds of Christmas: the whine and sputter of chain saws, carrying on the brittle November air.


Mehl Reactivated by Jets
LEAD: Lance Mehl, the linebacker who has been out for a year after undergoing reconstructive knee surgery, was reactivated by the Jets today.
In another move, Jerry Holmes, the cornerback, was placed on injured reserve with a cracked rib.
Holmes was hurt last Sunday in the team's 16-9 victory over Kansas


EDUCATION: INCREASINGLY, COLLEGE INTERVIEW IS OUT
LEAD: Like the white gloves, small talk and parental presence that once characterized it, the campus interview has become irrelevant to most students' chances of finding a place in next year's college freshman class.


Poetry and Music In Evening at Y
LEAD: An evening of poetry and music, with Galway Kinnell and the Canterbury Trio, is planned at 8 P.M. on Dec. 14 at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.


HOWELL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOWELL INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
13,382,854
12,192,160
Net inc
1,203,250
945,417
Share earns
1.14
.67
Shares outst
1,054,550
1,408,950


PENNEY, JC CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNEY, JC CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,756,000,000
3,485,000,000
Net inc
171,000,000
116,000,000
Share earns
1.14
.77
9mo sales
10,389,000,000
9,751,000,000
Net inc
328,000,000
b225,000,000
Share earns
2.18
1.49


Wimbledon Profit At $12.5 Million
LEAD: This year's Wimbledon championships, the only Grand Slam tennis event played on grass, made a profit of more than $12.5 million.
The All England Club announced today that the profit was $12,592,782, which will go to the British Lawn Tennis Association for the benefit of the game in Britain.
The figure is up about 15 percent over last year's profit of $10,913,492.


Yields 5.20%-7.75% On Missouri Bonds
LEAD: A $120 million issue of Missouri general obligation bonds was offered yesterday through underwriters led by Chase Manhattan Capital Markets Corporation, with yields ranging from 5.20 percent for bonds due in 1988 to 6.60 percent in 1997, 7.55 percent in 2007 and 7.75 percent in 2010 through 2012.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Baxter Travenol Laboratories, Deerfield, Ill., a developer of health care products, systems and services, named as a director Martha R. Ingram, director of public affairs and director at Ingram Industries.


JAMESWAY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JAMESWAY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
170,995,000
150,388,000
Net inc
3,666,000
4,145,000
Share earns
.26
.29
9mo sales
472,637,000
409,943,000
Net inc
7,797,000
7,600,000
Share earns
.54
.54


No Stock Dealings For Rooney, Pace
LEAD: Rooney, Pace Inc. has agreed to leave the securities industry after the Securities and Exchange Commission found numerous violations in three of its public stock offerings.
The concern was once a leading underwriter of initial public offerings.
The S.E.C. also suspended Randolph Pace, chairman of the firm, from the securities business for nine months.


Clear Guilt, Unclear Law
LEAD: The Supreme Court's ruling in the case of R. Foster Winans was unclear concerning securities law and inconsistent concerning fraud law, yet it produced a roughly just result.
Now it's up to Congress to clarify both areas of the law.


Western Union Again Delays Vote
LEAD: The Western Union Corporation again put off a shareholder vote on its restructuring plan.
A shareholder meeting that had been set for Nov. 11 and then adjourned until today was adjourned again until Dec. 10, the company said.
Shareholders were to vote on merging the corporation with its principal subsidiary, the Western Union Telegraph Company.


Bid to Dismiss Silver Suit Fails
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday rejected a motion to throw out a lawsuit brought in 1981 by a Peruvian commodities trading company against the Hunt brothers of Texas and leading brokerage firms.
The ruling means that the suit will be heard in Federal court beginning Feb. 3, 1988.


Insurance Consultant Gets Posts at USLife
LEAD: The USLife Corporation, a life insurance holding company, said yesterday that it had named James F. Betts president and chief operating officer, as well as a member of its board.


Jo Jo White Makes a Return at 41 With a Helping Hand as His Goal
LEAD: By WILLIAM C. RHODEN


Iran Says Iraqis Raided a Nuclear Plant
LEAD: Iranian news outlets reported that Iraqi warplanes raided an unfinished Iranian nuclear power plant today, and that an Iranian nuclear official said the attack could lead to a release of radiation across international borders.


Letters; The Best Bread
LEAD: To The Living Section:


SOVIET HINTS MOVE ON AFGHAN ACCORD
LEAD: A recent flurry of diplomatic activity has raised new speculation that the Soviet Union may be ready to compromise on a timetable for the withdrawal of the 115,000 troops it has stationed in Afghanistan.


Soviet Confirms That Yeltsin Is Ill and in Hospital
LEAD: The Government confirmed today that Boris N. Yeltsin, the high-ranking official who was purged from office last week, had been hospitalized but said his health was not a cause for concern.


HOUSING MEASURE BLOCKED IN SENATE
LEAD: Senate Republicans today delivered a surprising and potentially fatal blow to major housing legislation that was expected to be passed and sent to the President.


No Singer Bid From Allied-Signal
LEAD: Allied-Signal Inc. said it would not expand its military-contracting businesses, an announcement that analysts interpreted to mean that the company was no longer a potential suitor for the Singer Company.
Allied-Signal, of Morristown, N.J., had been rumored to be a possible bidder for Singer, the Stamford, Conn., military contractor that is the subject of a hostile takeover bid by the Florida investor Paul A.


Troubled Bronx School's Fate Now Rests With Students
LEAD: In what has become a fight to save Junior High School 123 in the Bronx from closing, parents led the opening charge.
But if the battle is to be won, it will be up to their children to finish the task.


The Genetic Factor in Coronary Disease
LEAD: To the Editor:


About Real Estate; At Last, a 5th Ave. Hotel Gets Ready for Reopening
LEAD: After years of on-again, off-again plans and renovations that have cost almost $200 million, yet another group of investors has announced the reopening of the Gotham Hotel - this time under the name Hotel Maxim's de Paris.


LEE ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEE ENTERPRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
59,914,000
54,307,000
Net inc
13,438,000
11,217,000
Share earns
.53
.43
9mo rev
237,555,000
220,924,000
Net inc
b44,573,000
32,597,000
Share earns
1.74
1.25


Music: Chamber Works By the Da Capo Players
LEAD: THE music of George Crumb is always threatening to break out of the concert hall and into the theater.
The orchestra is asked to take part in mysterious processionals in ''Echoes of Time and the River.'' In ''Ancient Voices of Children,'' the boy soprano is offstage until the last page of the score, when he joins the mezzo-soprano for a poignant vocalise.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: CONVERSATION overheard by Hinda Gonchor going downtown on an M104 bus.


3 Hunters Killed and 3 Wounded at Start of New York Deer Season
LEAD: Three hunters were killed Monday and three others were treated for gunshot wounds in the first day of the deer hunting season in most of New York State.


PENN ENGINEERING &amp; MANUFACTURING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENN ENGINEERING &amp; MANUFACTURING CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,773,000
31,998,000
Net loss
b330,000
c15,425,000
9mo sales
54,512,000
96,664,000
Net loss
b20,977,000
c31,684,000
b-Includes a gain of $16,624,000 on the retirement of senior notes for both periods, and for the 9 months includes a gain from pension plan termination of $160,000.


Slaying Inquiry Builds Against L.I. Nurse
LEAD: Investigators focused their attention today on building what could become a multiple-murder case against Richard Angelo, the registered nurse accused of injecting fatal amounts of a muscle-paralyzing drug into one of his patients at Good Samaritan Hospital here.


At the Nation's Table; Boston
LEAD: THE Zagat Boston Restaurant Survey is almost ready for publication.
Like its counterparts in New York, Los Angeles and elsewhere, the survey is based on responses from committed diners-out.
More than 700 people in the Boston area offered opinions on some 325 restaurants.


Town's Outdoor Holiday Feast Draws 150 From Far and Near
LEAD: NESTLED in the northeast corner of Connecticut, about five miles from the Massachusetts border, Woodstock is so remote and so quiet that when the writer Theodore H. White flew over it in 1967, he said it was the only place between Washington and Boston where there were no lights at night.


Quake Hurts 3 in Nicaragua; Thousands Flee Their Homes
LEAD: A strong earthquake rocked Nicaragua, injuring at least three people and driving thousands from their homes, officials said today.


A Wealth of Worries About Federal Deficits
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESTAURANT ASSOCIATES INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RESTAURANT ASSOCIATES INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
64,098,000
53,568,000
Net inc
778,000
1,515,000
Share earns
.15
.27
9mo rev
182,673,000
143,037,000
Net inc
b3,922,000
3,303,000
Share earns
.72
.64


Nussbaum Is Taken To Another Hospital
LEAD: Hedda Nussbaum, who is accused of murder in the death of 6-year-old Lisa Steinberg, was transferred yesterday to the Presbyterian Hospital.


Wright, His Latin Role Contested, Signs a 'Peace' Pact With Shultz
LEAD: After four days of bitterness over the role of Jim Wright, the House Speaker, as a mediator in the Central American peace negotiations, Mr.
Wright and Secretary of State George P. Shultz signed a six-point agreement today pledging to work together and not to ''create unnecessary problems.''


Washington Talk: Briefing; Ortega Snowed In
LEAD: Last week's snowstorm here may have killed an audacious notion of the Nicaraguan President, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, to visit the Vietnam War memorial on Veterans Day last week.


Market Place; Street Weighs N.A.S.D. Plan
LEAD: AFTER an unsettled stock market closed on Oct. 22, managers of some of the top over-the-counter stock trading desks met at a private room above one of Wall Street's best-known watering holes, Harry's Bar, to air their grievances about widely perceived problems in their trading system.


MCGRATH RENTCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCGRATH RENTCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,497,000
4,604,000
Net inc
1,559,000
1,073,000
Share earns
.36
.25
9mo rev
23,622,000
12,408,000
Net inc
4,311,000
2,779,000
Share earns
.99
.69


The Dance: Showcase Of 11 Works
LEAD: THE ''Choreographer's Showcase'' that Evolving Arts Inc. presented Sunday night at Dance Space Inc. (622 Broadway, between Bleecker and Houston Streets) contained 11 dances by 12 choreographers.
The apparent discrepancy between the number of creators and the number of works created is explained by the fact that one of those dances had two choreographers.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the New Jersey Guide column of the New Jersey Weekly on Sunday about a ''Teach-In on Homelessness'' sponsored by the Student Volunteers Council in Princeton misstated the dates.
The two-day program starts today, not tomorrow.


Knicks Change Course
LEAD: The original plan was to wait and see.
After joining the Knicks during the off season, Al Bianchi, the new general manager, and Rick Pitino, the rookie head coach, said changes would be made but only after every player had an opportunity to prove whether he could handle the new challenges and responsibilities.


Park Is Searched After Report About a Young Girl
LEAD: More than 50 police officers, including a scuba team and helicopter pilots, fanned out across a park on the Brooklyn-Queens border yesterday after three young children said they had seen a young girl carried into the park by a man who left her there.


Red Wings Win, 1-0
LEAD: Glen Hanlon made 32 saves for his eighth career shutout, and Steve Yzerman scored 33 seconds into the game tonight as the Detroit Red Wings defeated the Washington Capitals, 1-0.


Plan Blocked for Tower Atop Landmark
LEAD: The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission yesterday rejected a proposal to build an apartment tower atop the Metropolitan Club on Fifth Avenue.


A Wealth of Worries About Federal Deficits
LEAD: To the Editor:


OPTO MECHANIK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OPTO MECHANIK INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,415,063
5,482,160
Net inc
189,469
141,562
Share earns
.09
.07


E.P.A. SEEKS DELAY IN USING SANCTIONS OF POLLUTION LAW
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency today proposed delaying economic sanctions against areas that will not meet a statutory Dec. 31 deadline for reducing smog and carbon monoxide levels.
It would be the third major delay since 1977.


3 Pillow Makers Cited For Trade Infractions
LEAD: Three pillow companies have been charged with violating the state's Unfair Trade Practices Act, Consumer Protection Commissioner Mary M. Heslin said today.


UNITED BANCORP ALASKA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED BANCORP ALASKA INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
5,500,000
5,900,000
9mo net loss
89,300,000
9,500,000


Carbide Settlement On Bhopal Is Seen
LEAD: Lawyers for the Indian Government and the Union Carbide Corporation were scheduled to appear at a court hearing in India today, amid wide speculation that they were close to an agreement on compensation to be paid the victims of the Bhopal disaster.


U.S. Arrests 14 as Members of Cocaine Ring
LEAD: A ring that sold 220 pounds a week of cocaine was broken up today with the arrests of 14 people in New York and New Jersey, the authorities said.


DAYTON HUDSON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAYTON HUDSON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,538,900,000
2,215,200,000
Net inc
33,600,000
b32,300,000
Share earns
.34
.34
9mo rev
6,998,200,000
6,143,600,000
Net inc
94,700,000
b107,600,000
Share earns
.97
1.11


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Toyota's Imports
LEAD: The Commerce Department said it had recommended that the Toyota Motor Company be granted a free trade zone in Louisville, Ky., enabling the Japanese concern to import parts for its Georgetown plant without paying a duty.


Helen Hallet Kennedy; Civic Leader, 80
LEAD: Helen Hallet Kennedy, a civic leader in Bedford, N.Y., died Sunday at her daughter's home in Bedford after a brief illness.
She was 80 years old.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 18, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


Nebraska Suffers Scouting Setback
LEAD: A seemingly insignificant agreement between members of the football coaching staffs at Nebraska and Oklahoma has apparently prevented the Cornhusker coaches from seeing film of Charles Thompson, the new Sooner quarterback, in his first game as a starter last week.


COLONIAL LIFE &amp; ACCIDENT INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLONIAL LIFE &amp; ACCIDENT INSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b6,104,226
c7,403,739
Share earns
.78
.94
9mo net inc
b17,815,212
c21,289,763
Share earns
2.26
2.71
b-Includes capital gains of $591,876 for the quarter and $694,299 for the 9 months.


Walter F. Thomas, 77, Retired Bank Executive
LEAD: Walter F. Thomas, a retired vice chairman of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, died of cardiac arrest Nov. 7 in a nursing home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 77 years old and lived in Boca Raton.


Dirk Bell Kuzmier; Lawyer, 61
LEAD: Dirk Bell Kuzmier, a New York trial lawyer, died Saturday in the crash of a private plane near Dorset, Vt.
Mr.
Kuzmier was the pilot; his passenger, Duffi Tomkeil of the Bronx, also was killed, the police said.


BIG B INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIG B INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 24
1987
1986
Sales
57,624,000
46,967,000
Net inc
639,000
b65,000
Share earns
.08
-
9mo sales
178,383,000
147,200,000
Net inc
3,907,000
2,727,000
Share earns
.50
.38
b-Net loss


Sports People; Tests for Larouche
LEAD: Pierre Larouche, who has been out of the Ranger lineup since Oct. 28 with a lower back strain that has been traced to a damaged disk, will undergo further tests today.
The tests will be done by Dr.
Gerald Smallberg, the neurologist who last week ordered the CAT scan that confirmed suspicions of nerve damage.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.73
7.06
6.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.05
5.85
5.34
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.57
6.41
5.41
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.67
8.64
7.07
30-YR.


FILM: HOLOCAUST'S BIRTH, 'WANNSEE CONFERENCE'
LEAD: HISTORIANS of the Holocaust appear to fall into one of two schools of thought these days.
The more traditional ''intentionalists'' see a direct connection between Hitler's ideology, expressed in his anti-Semitic speeches of the 1920's as well as in ''Mein Kampf,'' and the eventual implementation of the ''final solution'' during World War


Kasparov Puzzle: Why So Passive?
LEAD: What meaning did the 14th game of the world championship chess match in Seville, Spain, have for the titleholder, 24-year-old Gary Kasparov?
Why, with the slight advantage of the white pieces, should he not have made some attempt to avoid a toothless draw on Monday?


Gypsies Not Welcome! Romans Say
LEAD: In the suburbs where this city becomes an impoverished and ramshackle metropolis, old women blocked railroad tracks this week and young men set tires aflame at a highway toll station, all because they had heard a rumor that the government was going to build a settlement camp for gypsies in their neighborhood, or maybe just in a neighborhood nearby.


Sports People; Patriots to Be Sold


Ortega vs. Contra Aid: Sandinistas Near a Victory?
LEAD: As he returned to Managua Monday night from a trip to the United States, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra believed he was closer than ever to a goal he did not think was possible even a few months ago: a Congressional vote to cut off aid to the contras.


Foraging in the Refrigerator
LEAD: OUR refrigerator used to develop a nervous tic at Thanskgiving and Christmas.
Not because it was stuffed with food - which it was -but because my children were home from school for vacation and opened it every time they passed it.


Strong Quake in Alaska
LEAD: A major earthquake followed by dozens of aftershocks jarred portions of Alaska today and forced hundreds of coastal residents to flee their homes.
No serious injuries or damage were reported in the quakes, which began with a temblor measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale.
The quake was centered in the Gulf of Alaska, about 270 miles east-southeast of Anchorage and 90 miles southwest of Cape Yakataga, between Yakutat and Cordova.


From Just One Man, A Dynasty of Cellarers
LEAD: THE last thing Kevin Zraly had in mind in the old days was creating a dynasty.
But there they all were, kissing, hugging, ribbing their old mentor (well, he's 36), acting like any other alumni group whose members had not seen one another for a few years.


Life in the 30's
LEAD: SOME years ago my editors decided that I should write a story about the atmosphere on Wall Street.
This was fine except that all I knew for sure about Wall Street was how to get there on the subway.
So I sought out a writer who made it his business to know everything on the subject and asked him if he could spend an hour educating me.


Breakfast of Wimps
LEAD: Do Americans really eat breakfast cereal?
Grown-up, adult, mature, yuppie-age Americans, eating breakfast cereal?
And even old, worn-out, graybeard Americans born too late to be investment bankers, eating breakfast cereal?


Sports People; Lineman Has Surgery
LEAD: Ted Gregory, the Syracuse University nose guard who early in the season was considered a candidate for the Outland and Lombardi Trophies for outstanding linemen, has undergone arthroscopic surgery to remove torn outer cartilage from his left knee.
Dr.
Bruce Baker, the Syracuse team physician who performed the surgery on Monday, said he ''couldn't make a categorical statement'' about Gregory's availability if the Orangemen play in the Sugar Bowl at New Orleans on Jan.


A Magazine On Addictions
LEAD: By his own admission James V. Trotta of the Throgs Neck section of the Bronx was a compulsive gambler until 10 years ago.
He has also spent some 24 of his 44 years in the magazine business, most of it on the circulation and distribution side.


COMFORTS OF A SOUTHERN THANKSGIVING
LEAD: IT was a case of holiday serendipity, and it started over a couple of glasses of chilled Chardonnay shared with Lee Bailey, the cookbook author, host and entrepreneur of good things for table and kitchen.


About New York; Ah, Such Tastes: A Chef's Spirit Is Triumphant
LEAD: Elizabeth Terry telephoned from the late James Beard's kitchen the other day.
Mr.
Beard, the chef and cookbook writer, once said that if he were forced to practice cannibalism, ''I might manage if there were enough tarragon around.'' Mrs.
Terry, a fine Savannah chef, said it was ''definitely intimidating'' cooking at Mr.


Soviet Gets Glimpses of U.S. on Canvas
LEAD: A 70-year sampling of American painting was unveiled for the Soviet public here Monday with a splash of Luminism, a blush of Tonalism and a dash of glasnost.


Dollar Down Sharply Amid Budget Doubts
LEAD: The dollar fell sharply yesterday in selling that began on Asian and European foreign-exchange markets and carried over into New York.
Business was relatively quiet in all markets, currency dealers said, but sales of dollars were persistent enough to erase the gains made by the dollar on Monday.


READING &amp; BATES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*READING &amp; BATES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
54,173,000
43,560,000
Net loss
24,135,000
c21,107,000
9mo rev
144,351,000
150,304,000
Net loss
b85,655,000
c60,986,000
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $7,368,000.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Care for the Children


Ivy League Eases Standards To Bolster Columbia Football
LEAD: Columbia University, whose varsity football team has not had a winning season since 1971, has been allowed for the last two years to admit players who do not meet the Ivy League's minimum academic requirements, school and league officials said last night.


St. Louis Fete Marks Reopening of Museum Wing
LEAD: Like a reunion of old friends, Missourians were reunited with their treasured artworks Monday night as the St.
Louis Art Museum reopened its west wing after years of renovation and unveiled works that had not been seen in years.


AL LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AL LABORATORIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
34,018,000
30,822,000
Net inc
1,467,000
1,462,000
Share earns
.16
.16
9mo rev
105,862,000
85,964,000
Net inc
4,641,000
4,616,000
Share earns
.51
.51


Sandinistas and Contras Accused of Rights Abuses
LEAD: ''Ongoing and serious human rights violations'' have resulted from the Nicaraguan Government's continued use of tribunals outside the regular court system to try people accused of national security offenses, a New York-based human rights organization has charged in a report.


Budget Negotiators Report They're Close To Accord Cutting Deficit by $30 Billion
LEAD: Budget negotiators, facing a Friday deadline, said tonight that they were very close to agreement on a plan that would reduce the Federal deficit by about $30 billion in the current fiscal year.


Jones Intercable To Buy 4 Systems
LEAD: Jones Intercable Inc. said it had agreed to acquire four cable television systems with 97,000 subscribers for $170 million, or about $1,752 per subscriber.


TJX COS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TJX COS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
443,420,000
372,821,000
Net inc
25,259,000
19,284,000
Share earns
.47
-
9mo sales
1,179,628,000
963,841,000
Net inc
46,359,000
35,600,000
Share earns
.96
-


PRINCE AND PRINCESS VISIT BOMB SURVIVORS
LEAD: The Prince and Prin-cess of Wales made an unexpected visit to Enniskillen today to comfort survivors of an I.R.A. bomb blast that killed 11 people and wounded 63 dur-ing a memorial to British war dead.


A.T.&amp;T. Proposes 3.6% Rate Cut For Long Distance, to Start Jan. 1
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company today proposed a 3.6 percent reduction in long-distance rates.
It said the plan was contingent on the Government's reducing the access charges it must pay to local telephone companies by that amount.


Industrial Capacity Is Up to 81.3%
LEAD: The nation's factories, mines and utilities operated at 81.3 percent of capacity in October, the highest operating rate in more than three years, the Government reported today.


CAROLCO PICTURES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAROLCO PICTURES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
60,966,000
5,806,000
Net inc
b526,000
c2,144,000
Share earns
.02
.08
Shares outst
30,159,000
26,525,000
9mo rev
113,246,000
28,015,000
Net inc
b2,950,000
c13,986,000
Share earns
.10
.53
Shares outst
30,182,000
26,525,000


Tokyo Market Memberships
LEAD: The Tokyo Stock Exchange has received applications from 40 securities companies, including 20 foreign firms, for the 22 new exchange memberships to be created by next May, the president of the exchange said today.


Concert: Marlboro Group
LEAD: THE Music From Marlboro concert at Alice Tully Hall Monday evening began oddly, with a seventh chord so poised and well blended that it took an instant to realize it should have been a C major triad instead.
The foreign B flat was contributed, I think, by Philipp Naegele, the fine violist who proceeded, once the group had begun afresh, to give a handsome account of his melodies in Boccherini's Quintet (Op.


For Emigrants to Soviet, Best and Worst of Times
LEAD: If expatriation is mainly a state of mind, then Dr.
Arnold Lockshin - until a year ago a medical researcher from Houston - is alive and well and sane, he emphasizes, as he settles his family into their new life in the Soviet Union.


More German Growth Urged
LEAD: A majority of the members of the Economic Policy Committee of the 24-nation Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development today called on West Germany to do more to stimulate its economy.


ASHTON-TATE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASHTON-TATE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
68,034,000
57,741,000
Net inc
11,087,000
7,935,000
Share earns
.44
.32
9mo net inc
30,321,000
19,530,000
Share earns
1.20
.82
Share earnings are restated to reflect a 100 percent stock dividend paid in January.


Washington Talk: National Women's Political Caucus; Carrying Word of a Women's Agenda
LEAD: Irene Natividad says she sometimes feels ''America is just one big podium.''


COAST SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COAST SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
15,475,000
11,701,000
Share earns
1.17
.89
9mo net inc
41,371,000
37,599,000
Share earns
3.14
2.86


MUELLER, PAUL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MUELLER, PAUL CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,871,000
12,019,000
Net loss
b4,828,000
c303,000
9mo sales
36,779,000
33,398,000
Net loss
b6,117,000
cd220,000
Share earns
-
.18
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $4,979,000 for the quarter and $5,410,000 for the 9 months.


Bern Police Fight Squatters
LEAD: Riot policemen firing tear gas, water hoses and rubber bullets stormed barricades of burning tires and furniture today to break up an illegal squatter camp in the center of the Swiss capital.
Earlier, officers ringed the so-called Zaffaraya Free State with barbed wire after settlers ignored repeated orders to close it for breaching building regulations.


Charleston, W.Va., Mayor Admits Cocaine Guilt
LEAD: Mayor James E. (Mike) Roark, on the morning his drug trial was to begin, pleaded guilty today to six misdemeanor counts of cocaine possession and agreed to resign.


Runaway Train Chief Left to Get Candy Bar
LEAD: Six unmanned locomotives that went out of control for 30 miles until they were deliberately crashed into a row of boxcars slipped away from their engineer when he left to buy a candy bar, a police officer said today.


N.A.S.D. Fills Top Board Job
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday that it had named Stephen L. Hammerman, a Merrill Lynch executive, to be chairman of its 31-member board of governors for 1988.


A Home-Style Thanksgiving That Avoids All the Fuss
LEAD: A THANKSGIVING to go is ideal for those who are short of time or have no inclination to prepare a dinner from scratch.
Traditional menus as well as vegetarian, French, Italian, delicatessen and low-calorie are available.
You can choose complete dinners or just the fixings to accompany the turkey.


HEALTHSOUTH REHABILITATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTHSOUTH REHABILITATION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,598,000
5,458,000
Net inc
b1,223,415
c441,669
Share earns
.12
.08
9mo rev
36,557,000
12,264,000
Net inc
b3,194,847
c311,245
Share earns
.34
.05


NATIONAL PATENT DEVELOPENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL PATENT DEVELOPENT CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
60,607,000
29,566,000
Net loss
2,952,000
2,820,000
9mo rev
173,407,000
90,345,000
Net loss
10,784,000
4,651,000


Image and Reality Of Contras' Character
LEAD: To the Editor:


GW UTILITIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GW UTILITIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
215,000,000
-
Net inc
b1,000,000
-
Share earns
.03
-
b-After an extraordinary gain of $18 million.
The company said this is the first quarter of operations for the company following the reorganization of Gulf Canada Corp.


Letters; Menu Alternatives
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Cuomo Says Kirk Told Him His 'No' Was Plain Enough
LEAD: Governor Cuomo, who has been urged by some Democratic figures to end speculation about his Presidential intentions by ruling out the possibility of a draft, said today that he had been assured by the head of the national Democratic Party that such a declaration was unnecessary.


VORNADO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VORNADO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,602,000
21,068,000
Net inc
2,761,000
4,009,000
Share earns
1.04
1.24
Shares outst
2,667,232
3,220,635
9mo rev
52,960,000
54,462,000
Net inc
8,584,000
b11,383,000
Share earns
3.19
3.46
Shares outst
2,695,004
3,284,977


Painter Dies in Fall From Jersey Bridge
LEAD: A painter was killed yesterday when he fell 135 feet into the Raritan River from a Garden State Parkway bridge where he was part of a work crew that included his teen-age son, the state police said.


PANAMA FOES GIRD FOR LONG STRUGGLE
LEAD: After five months of street demonstrations and general strikes, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's military regime and its civilian political opposition appear to be hardening their positions and preparing for what both sides expect to be a long and bitter struggle.


House Approves Plan To Elevate V.A. Status
LEAD: The House overwhelmingly approved legislation today that would turn the Veterans Administration into a Federal department with Cabinet-level status.


U.S. TV BROADCASTS BANNED BBC DATA
LEAD: Portions of a television documentary barred in Britain on security grounds have been shown to American audiences on two occasions in recent days.


Actmedia Growing
LEAD: Actmedia Inc. of Westhampton Beach, L.I., has become a giant among companies that arrange for promotions within supermarkets -the last mile of consumer purchase decision-making.
Always seeking to grow even more, it has now reached an agreement to acquire Shelfvision Inc., a concern whose actual promotion melieu is the market shelves themselves.


Court View Seen as Bar To Leaks
LEAD: The Supreme Court decision in the Winans inside trading case is likely to discourage leaks of an array of corporate information, from product designs to financial projections, legal experts said yesterday.


MAXCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAXCO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
22,135,00
15,263,000
Net loss
204,000
b206,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo sales
45,259,000
33,185,000
Net loss
90,000
b648,000
Share earns
-
.13
b-Net income


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: WHEN I was an apprentice chef in France many years ago, one of the first dishes I learned to create was sauteed chicken with tarragon.
When I came to America to work at the restaurant of the French pavillion at the World's Fair in New York more than 45 years ago, the same dish was considered to be one of the most sophisticated on any menu.


COACHMEN INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COACHMEN INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
94,918,664
83,912,876
Net loss
669,609
b530,641
Share earns
-
.06
9mo sales
289,097,608
276,617,766
Net inc
1,494,218
4,486,510
Share earns
.19
.55


Corrections
LEAD: The headline of an obituary in some editions yesterday about a retired chairman and trustee of the Emigrant Savings Bank in New York misidentified him.
He was Joseph C. Brennan.


Weinberger Leaves Reagan Administration After 7 Years
LEAD: Caspar W. Weinberger with President Reagan at a Pentagon ceremony at which he stepped down as Secretary of Defense.
Mr.
Weinberger wore medals awarded to him by the Army, Navy and Air Force.
Page B5. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


G.M. Layoffs
LEAD: General Motors of Canada Ltd. said it would indefinitely lay off 200 employees at its Windsor transmission plant in January because of declining car sales.
The unit also said there would be weeklong layoffs of 3,000 transmission plant workers in December and January.


Kenya Charges a Plot by the Klan
LEAD: Seven United States missionaries have been deported from Kenya amid local news reports that they were involved in a plot supported by the Ku Klux Klan to overthrow the Government of President Daniel arap Moi.


TOTAL RESEARCH reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOTAL RESEARCH
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,493,209
1,025,336
Net inc
72,637
b53,183
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Trivializing the Iran-Contra Affair
LEAD: Eight Republican members of the Iran-contra committees say of President Reagan's role in the affair that he made ''mistakes in judgment, and nothing more.'' They appear, in a minority report, to be more vexed at their committee colleagues for reaching harsher conclusions than at Mr.
Reagan, Lieutenant Colonel


Gillis Purcell; Canadian Journalist, 82
LEAD: Gillis Purcell, a Canadian journalist who spent 41 years with The Canadian Press, 24 of them as general manager, died Monday in Toronto.
He was 82 years old and had a stroke last summer.


Weinberger Departs To the Cannon's Roar
LEAD: Amid the roll of drums, the boom of cannon and with banners fluttering in a cool breeze, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger marched out of office today after nearly seven years as steward of the nation's largest military buildup in peacetime.


Bell Is Named American League M.V.P.
LEAD: George Bell, the moody but gifted Toronto Blue Jays outfielder who regularly spurned reporters during his finest season in the major leagues, was voted the American League's most valuable player yesterday by the Baseball Writers Association of America in a close decision over Alan Trammell of Detroit.


Film Retrospective At French Institute
LEAD: The French Institute-Alliance Francaise is presenting the second New York French-American Film Workshop, through Saturday at the institute, 22 East 60th Street.
Nine films by Samuel Fuller, an American director considered by many French film makers and critics as a seminal cinematic influence, will be shown, and he will be present at a discussion tomorrow at 6 P


O-Day Minus 300
LEAD: The name of the game here is ''polympics,'' where the struggle for South Korean political power merges with the chance to use the 1988 summer Olympics to gain international prestige.


TV Reviews; 'BUSTER KEATON: HARD ACT TO FOLLOW'
LEAD: KEVIN BROWNLOW and David Gill have probably done more than anybody else in the world for the restoration and preservation of silent movies.
As a film historian, Mr.
Brownlow has written ''The Parade's Gone By . . .'' and ''The War, the West and the Wilderness.'' Together, Mr.
Brownlow and Mr.
Gill created and produced for Britain's Thames Television the 13-episode series ''Hollywood'' and the three-part ''Unknown Chaplin.


ISLES RALLY FOR 4-3 VICTORY OVER KINGS
LEAD: Thomas Jonsson of the Islanders skating away from the King's Bernie Nicholls as Pat LaFontaine looked on at Nassau Coliseum.
Page A33.


QUANTECH ELECTRONICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUANTECH ELECTRONICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,588,913
3,459,537
Net inc
30,414
b299,842
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
3,192,237
6,995,574
Net inc
51,855
b543,444
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Guidelines for Healthful Meals
LEAD: BY modifying eating habits during the holidays and beyond, you can savor many Thanksgivings to come.
The following guidelines were suggested by Susan Kinzler, assistant director of patient services in the department of food and nutrition services, Sentara-Norfolk General Hospital in Norfolk, Va., and other hospital dietitians.


Letter: On Foreign Aid; Trickle-Up Is No Drop in the Bucket
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gift Cheque Campaign For American Express
LEAD: American Express began a $4 million advertising campaign this week to introduce a new product, the American Express Gift Cheque, with advertising by Ogilvy &amp; Mather.


Panel Denounces Cost of Antimissile Research
LEAD: After a three-year study, a panel of analysts said yesterday that the program for a defense against missile attack should be vastly scaled back to a low-level research program, much as it was before President Reagan called for an all-out effort in 1983.


REPUBLIC AMERICAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REPUBLIC AMERICAN (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,108,000
c8,014,000
Per share
.36
.35
9mo net inc
b21,345,000
c37,873,000
Per share
1.03
1.81
b-Includes realized losses of $4,000 for the quarter, and for the 9 months includes realized gains of $64,000.


Spear, Leeds Seeks More of Allegheny
LEAD: Spear, Leeds &amp; Kellogg said it had asked the Federal Trade Commission and the Justice Department for permission to increase its stake in Allegheny International Inc. to more than 15 percent, from about 5.2 percent.


NETS FINALLY WIN
LEAD: Through a year of pain from nerve damage in his left leg and tendinits in his left knee, Otis Birdsong dreamed of a night when he might again be in the position to win a game.
It finally came tonight.
With 49 seconds remaining and the Rockets ahead, 110-109, Birdsong sank a 14-foot jumper over Allen Leavell that put the Nets ahead to stay en route to a 114-111 victory over Houston at Byrne Meadowlands


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Nov. 13
Nov. 6
Nov. 14
1987
1987
1986
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
6.5
6.7
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.8
2.9
Gasoline stocks
218.3
218.6
244.9
Distillate stocks
127.3
121.8
154.3
Crude imports, daily
4.7
6.0
5.0
Product imports, daily
1.6
2.1
1.9
Crude stocks
355.8
354.2
342.7
Crude production, daily
8.3
8.2
8.4
Refinery utilization (%)
82.6
81.0
81.9


Washington Talk: Justice Department; Conservative Ranks No Longer in Step on Meese
LEAD: The smile on the face of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d had never looked so genuine.


Address by Gorbachev To Congress Is Weighed
LEAD: The Reagan Administration wants Mikhail S. Gorbachev to be allowed to speak to a joint meeting of Congress during the summit meeting next month only if Moscow permits President Reagan to address the Soviet people, a senior Administration official said today.


6 Victims From Connecticut Identified in Wisconsin Crash
LEAD: The eight people killed when a light plane broke up and crashed were identified today as six officials of a Connecticut company and executives of companies in Wisconsin and Illinois, company spokesmen said.


Sports People; Hearns-Hagler Near
LEAD: A contract for Thomas Hearns to defend his World Boxing Council middleweight title against Marvelous Marvin Hagler, the former undisputed champion, could be completed by the end of next week, according to the Hearns camp.
Emanuel Steward, Hearns's manager, said that negotiations with Hagler got under way last weekend and that there was a 95 percent chance for a fight this spring.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Additive-Free Turkeys


Gov. O'Neill Better; Will Undergo Tests
LEAD: Gov.
William A. O'Neill, described as feeling much better after being hospitalized Sunday with a temperature of 103 degrees, will undergo more tests today and tomorrow to try to find the cause of the fever, hospital officials said yesterday.


Bird Injured in Loss
LEAD: The Cleveland Cavaliers, exploiting the absence of the injured Larry Bird, outscored the visiting Celtics, 26-15, in the third quarter last night to send Boston to its first loss of the season.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Withdraws Its Bid
LEAD: The Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation yesterday withdrew its offer for Information Resources Inc., a market research company, after the Federal Trade Commission said it opposed a merger.


TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETORK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETORK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,522,000
3,592,000
Net inc
42,000
350,000
Share earns
.02
.14
6mo rev
9,063,000
6,964,000
Net inc
247,000
510,000
Share earns
.10
.20


Court of Appeals Backs Police Officers' Ouster
LEAD: New York State's highest court ruled today that the word of an admitted ''rogue cop'' was sufficient to prove that two other police officers should be dismissed from the New York City force for illegal behavior.


MAI BASIC FOUR reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAI BASIC FOUR (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
74,604,000
60,895,000
Net inc
7,010,000
cd2,273,000
Share earns
.47
-
Yr sales
258,466,000
230,218,000
Net inc
b23,838,000
d9,106,000
Share earns
1.59
.53


Verity Warns Japan on Gap
LEAD: Commerce Secretary C. William Verity Jr. said today, before leaving for an official visit to Tokyo, that if Japan did not raise export prices to reflect the lower value of the dollar it could face new trade retaliation from the United States.


Film: 'La Vie Est Belle'
LEAD: ''LA VIE EST BELLE'' is a genial musical comedy film from Zaire, and there are two striking things about it: how very African it is, and how very African it is not.


Convicted Drug Dealer, Freed in Error in '78, Held in Queens
LEAD: A convicted narcotics dealer who was mistakenly freed in 1978 from the state prison in Ossining, N.Y., was arrested yesterday in Flushing, Queens, Federal law-enforcement officials said.


MCO HOLDINGS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCO HOLDINGS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,055,000
22,325,000
Net inc
b12,520,000
c3,912,000
Share earns
1.93
-
9mo rev
69,084,000
76,656,000
Net inc
b3,441,000
c16,366,000
Share earns
.53
-


Sanitizing a Novel for the Screen
LEAD: In the novel ''Less Than Zero,'' passionless Los Angeles rich kids, spaced out on drugs and affluence, drift from Ferraris to glitzy clubs, from cocaine to bisexuality.
In the movie made from Bret Easton Ellis's book, most of the sex is missing, and the earnest message is a warning that drugs can kill.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Micheal Ray Richardson, the guard formerly with the Knicks and Nets, has signed a contract to play for the Albany Patroons of the Continental Basketball Association.
He was banned from the National Basketball Association in 1986 for repeated drug use. . . .
The Philadelphia Flyers have signed Ron Hextall, the goaltender, to a new multiyear contract.


Directly From Italy to Broadway
LEAD: IF the expense makes you think twice about using an excellent extra-virgin olive oil with abandon, look for the Dal Raccolto brand.
The Fairway market at 2127 Broadway (74th Street) has begun importing olive oil and other Dal Raccolto items directly from Italy.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: HEY JACK! By Barry Hannah. 133 pages.


RUSSIAN PREDICTS ARMS ACCORD SOON
LEAD: The chief Soviet arms-control negotiator predicted today that a treaty banning medium- and shorter-range missiles would be completed within six days.
But important verification issues reportedly remained unresolved after two days of high-level talks here.


At the Nation's Table; Chicago
LEAD: MANY Chicagoans who appreciate fine food served in relaxing settings are starting to believe that they are victims of a conspiracy engineered in New York, Los Angeles and other culinary centers.


Harte-Hanks Sets Sale of Businesses
LEAD: Harte-Hanks Communications Inc. said it would sell six direct marketing units, along with a shopper publication in Florida.
Charles H. Everill, senior vice president of Harte-Hanks and chief executive of the Direct Marketing Sector, and Cal Ingram, a consultant to Harte-Hanks, plan to buy the direct marketing operations.


The Genetic Factor in Coronary Disease
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Warrants Needed To Give Urine Tests
LEAD: An appeals court ruled yesterday that police officers who believe suspects are under the influence of drugs can demand urine samples from the suspects without search warrants.


Terrence Des Pres, 47, A Writer and Professor
LEAD: Terrence Des Pres, a writer and college professor, died at his home in Hamilton, N.Y., on Monday.
He was 47 years old.
The cause of death is undetermined, pending completion of an autopsy, but Neal Rose, the Madison County District Attorney and Coroner, said the death appeared to have been accidental.


'FEARSOME AND INTIMIDATING' TEXTS
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a report called ''American History Textbooks: An Assessment of Quality,'' released recently by the Educational Excellence Network.
The report, based on reviews of 11 5th-, 8th- and 11th-grade texts by a panel of 12 historians, authors, editors and journalists, was written by Gilbert T.


Greeks Show Basketball Skill
LEAD: Panos Fassoulas, Fanis Christodoulou, and Agamemnon Ioannou are not exactly household names - at least not in American households.
They are, however, heroes in Greece, where they form the nucleus of the national basketball team.
The aggressive and well-coached team, which beat the Soviet Union to win the European Cup this year, is in the midst of a one-week, six-game exhibition tour against


A Cult Champagne in Europe Comes to America at $100
LEAD: A PRESTIGE Champagne that sells for $100 a bottle is arriving at carriage-trade stores across the nation.
It is the 1979 A. Salon Le Mesnil blanc de blancs, a white wine from white grapes.
Its finesse rivals its price.


Boeing Pension Fund Shifting Out of Stocks
LEAD: The Boeing Company is selling a good deal of the stock held by its multibillion-dollar pension fund, and market sources say Rockwell International is doing the same.
The moves explain some of the selling pressure on the stock market in recent days.


To Cut the Deficit, Keep '87 Tax Rates
LEAD: If President Reagan is serious about everything being on the table, there are $50 billion in deficit reductions that the budget negotiators have left untouched and, indeed, undiscussed.
This $50 billion is not money that would be extracted from taxpayers but money that will be lost unless something is done.


Crude Oil Prices Fall To 7-Month Lows
LEAD: American crude oil prices shed between 4 cents and 25 cents a barrel yesterday, falling to their lowest levels in seven months on pressures from excess supplies and expectations that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries would not raise prices at its meeting on Dec. 9.


Japan Cuts Overseas Investment
LEAD: The flow of money from Japan, a stream that has helped to finance the United States budget deficit and to influence stock prices on Wall Street, is slowing dramatically as investors here wait to see what steps the United States will take to cut its budget and trade deficits.


U.S. Appeals Court Backs Schools in Drug Tests Without Suspicion
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled today that the public schools in the nation's capital may legally test certain employees for evidence of illicit drug use even if the school authorities had no reason to suspect the particular employees.


Citibank's Plan For Branches
LEAD: Citibank said it is reorganizing its branch organization in the New York metropolitan area, a move that might eliminate as many as 1,000 jobs.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''We cannot simply snap our fingers and hope that the gar-bage will disappear from our beaches or dead patches of sea will be brought back to life.''  -Governor Kean  of New Jersey.  [ A1:2 ]


PIANO: CHERKASSKY
LEAD: SHURA CHERKASSKY, the Russian-born pianist who's lived long enough to be called ''legendary'' in advertising copy, is known as one of the last of the Romantics, and also as a somewhat erratic performer, given to incandescence one night (or in one piece) and eccentricity in the next.
His recital Monday night at Carnegie Hall showed us both sides, but made one wonder if to be


2 White Racists Convicted in Killing of Radio Host
LEAD: A jury in Federal District Court here today found two white supremacists guilty and acquitted two others in the 1984 assassination of the host of a Denver radio talk show.


At the Nation's Table; San Francisco
LEAD: Madeleine Kamman, a chef and cooking instructor, said she came to California because ''there is a much younger spirit, a sparkle out there.'' And the state was just right, she said, for her newest project: a ''finishing school'' for chefs.


NEOAX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEOAX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
56,538,000
40,397,000
Net inc
b1,251,000
1,018,000
9mo sales
166,897,000
126,107,000
Net inc
b9,960,000
2,919,000
Share earns
.41
.14
b-Includes non-recurring gains from the disposition of businesses of $900,000 and $5.8 million for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, and the 9 months also include a charge of $1 million for accretion.


ANGELICA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANGELICA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
79,372,000
75,226,000
Net inc
4,945,000
4,570,000
Share earns
.53
.49
9mo rev
229,992,000
215,069,000
Net inc
13,808,000
12,302,000
Share earns
1.48
1.32


China-Australia Project
LEAD: Australia and China signed a joint-venture agreement today to mine iron ore in Western Australia.
The project at Mount Channar, worth $250 million (Australian), or about $170 million (United States), is China's biggest overseas investment, Prime Minister Bob Hawke said after the signing ceremony here.


CARSON PIRIE SCOTT &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARSON PIRIE SCOTT &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
240,827,000
216,223,000
Net inc
5,303,000
d8,732,000
Share earns
.50
.85
9mo sales
603,142,000
524,582,000
Net loss
b39,955,000
cd5,127,000
Share earns
-
.50


SILVER KING MINES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILVER KING MINES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,122,000
1,461,000
Net inc
1,613,339
b239,165
Share earns
.12
-
6mo rev
6,158,000
2,834,000
Net inc
3,274,562
b559,438
Share earns
.24
-
b


KMS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KMS INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,098,000
4,878,000
Net inc
b153,000
c186,000
Share earns
.08
.10
9mo rev
14,635,000
14,919,000
Net inc
b635,000
c711,000
Share earns
.33
.36


Personal Health
LEAD: The Personal Health column, by Jane E. Brody, will now appear on the new Health page:


Bear Stearns Manages To Post a Tiny Profit
LEAD: Despite a net loss of $8.6 million in October, the Bear Stearns Companies said yesterday that it eked out a $413,000 profit for its latest quarter, ended Oct. 30, a 99.2 percent decline from the year earlier.


Interest Rates Turn Mixed
LEAD: Interest rates were mixed yesterday, with short-term rates falling and long-term bond yields rising slightly.


MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,203,000
18,008,000
Net inc
741,000
674,000
Share earns
.20
.19
9mo sales
68,697,000
66,257,000
Net inc
3,125,000
2,614,000
Share earns
.86
.74


HOME DEPOT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME DEPOT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 1
1987
1986
Sales
364,245,000
251,537,000
Net inc
9,737,000
3,921,000
Share earns
.19
.10
Shares outst
50,743,000
39,150,000
9mo sales
1,079,657,000
737,589,000
Net inc
38,123,000
16,189,000
Share earns
.81
.42
Shares outst
47,212,000
38,736,000


EDUCATION: LESSONS
LEAD: The father was suspicious.
The son had been sent to the public schools, soaking up six years of ''enrichment'' programs, ''Creative I'' classes, ''skill processing'' sessions - the pot-au-feu of argot that passes for an elementary curriculum.


Corrections
LEAD: A book review on Monday about ''Spangle,'' by Gary Jennings, misidentified his 1984 novel.
It was ''The Journeyer.''


PSE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PSE INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
44,955,000
28,938,000
Net inc
297,000
b366,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
89,063,000
69,829,000
Net inc
1,096,000
b1,568,00
Share earns
.12
-
b-Net loss


PRICE COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRICE COMMUNICATIONS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,077,000
21,547,000
Net inc
7,821,000
b8,137,000
Share earns
.88
-
9mo rev
72,970,000
60,703,000
Net inc
2,626,000
b20,764,000
Share earns
.22
-


Howard Beach Witness Holds to Story of Attack
LEAD: Under intense cross-examination by defense lawyers yesterday, a 37-year-old black man vigorously stood by his story that he was attacked and severely beaten by a gang of whites who confronted him and two other black men in Howard Beach, Queens.


Yugoslav Devaluation
LEAD: Yugoslavia devalued the dinar by almost 25 percent today in an effort to expand exports.
The currency action followed recent price rises of 30 to 70 percent on fuel, food, transport and some raw materials, with a freeze at the new levels.
Prime Minister Branko Mikulic's Government also imposed limited wage controls.


Abused Boy's Mother Said to Want Custody
LEAD: The biological mother of Mitchell Steinberg, the 16-month-old boy found in the same Greenwich Village apartment where the police say Lisa Steinberg was beaten to death, is expected to seek custody of the boy today, according to a lawyer in the case.


Simon, Now a Credible Candidate, Still Faces an Issue of Electability
LEAD: Almost giddy from his poll numbers and his crowds as he campaigns across Iowa, Senator Paul Simon of Illinois has clearly crossed a major threshold of political credibility in the race for the Democratic nomination for President.


New York Quits Using An Ocean Dump Site
LEAD: New York City used an ocean dumping site 12 miles offshore for the last time yesterday.
It plans to use a site 106 miles out for dumping sewage treatment waste from now on.


GERBER SCIENTIFIC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GERBER SCIENTIFIC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
64,428,000
56,314,000
Net inc
7,471,000
4,789,000
Share earns
.28
.18
6mo sales
126,214,000
110,719,000
Net inc
13,935,000
9,478,000
Share earns
.53
.36


PROFFITT'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROFFITT'S INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,715,869
9,987,817
Net inc
267,315
249,205
Share earns
.07
.09
Shares outst
3,856,804
2,747,400
9mo rev
29,939,670
28,775,698
Net inc
919,502
630,862
Share earns
.27
.23
Shares outst
3,346,523
2,747,400


Raymond Rohauer, Archivist of Classics From Silent Film Era
LEAD: Raymond Rohauer, a film archivist, distributor and producer, died of complications from a heart attack at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan on Nov. 10.
He was 63 years old.


HATHAWAY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HATHAWAY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,689,000
9,249,000
Net loss
424,000
140,000


Handicapping the Breeders' Cup
LEAD: Following are the fields for the seven Breeders' Cup races Saturday at Hollywood Park in Inglewood, Calif.
The entrants are not listed in post-position order but instead are ranked in order of preference by Steven Crist of The New York Times, who wrote the comments and calculated the speed figures for each horse's last three races.


CITIZENS UTILITIES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS UTILITIES CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
71,472,000
68,203,000
Net inc
18,275,000
15,907,000
Share earns
.42
.36
9mo rev
207,828,000
202,338,000
Net inc
46,698,000
40,690,000
Share earns
1.08
.93


NORTHVIEW CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHVIEW CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,706,000
11,211,000
Net loss
2,154,000
1,845,000
9mo rev
31,544,000
31,259,000
Net loss
5,557,000
b2,635,000
Share earns
-
.97
b-Net income


HOGAN SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOGAN SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,366,000
10,761,000
Net loss
2,807,000
b1,960,000
Share earns
-
.13
6mo rev
21,771,000
22,893,000
Net loss
889,000
b3,077,000
Share earns
-
.21


Worst Is Past For President: Damage to Reputation Was Done Long Ago
LEAD: Even with its arresting descriptions of ''pervasive dishonesty'' and ''disarray at the highest levels of Government,'' the Congressional report on the Iran-contra affair is not likely to do significant new harm to the Reagan Presidency because the damage is already done.


MAJOR VIDEO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAJOR VIDEO (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,743,660
2,292,656
Net inc
385,824
11,501
Share earns
.08
-
6mo rev
6,971,733
3,947,131
Net inc
650,885
187,394
Share earns
.17
.06


Leslie Fay to Buy Albert Nipon Inc.
LEAD: The Leslie Fay Companies, a leading manufacturer of women's dresses and sportswear, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Albert Nipon Inc., the internationally known women's fashion house.


MICRO HEALTHSYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICRO HEALTHSYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,109,987
681,978
Net inc
28,762
b138,865
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
2,199,107
1,444,128
Net inc
78,876
b253,903
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Japan Air Lines Offering
LEAD: Japan Air Lines is being privatized after 34 years of Government control.
Shareholders met Tuesday and approved a sale of 48.1 million Government-held shares - 34.5 percent of the total outstanding - to the public next month.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  United States Takes Early Lead: Ben Crenshaw and Payne Stewart shot 70's yesterday to give the United States a one-stroke lead in the opening round of the 33d World Cup.
The combined 140 total, four under par on the Bay course at the Kapalua, Hawaii, resort, led the Irish team of Ronan Rafferty and Eamonn Darcy.


SCAT HOVERCRAFT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCAT HOVERCRAFT
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
827,000
1,006,000
Net loss
690,000
224,000
9mo sales
4,144,000
2,268,000
Net loss
766,000
404,000


NORTH AMERICAN NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH AMERICAN NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b632,606
c384,332
Per share
.24
.14
6mo net inc
b884,081
c1,227,139
Per share
.33
.46
b-Includes capital gains of $263,969 and $397,833 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


'Baby,' Musical, at St. Bart's
LEAD: The musical ''Baby'' will be presented through Sunday at St.
Bart's Playhouse, Park Avenue and 50th Street.
The show, which ran on Broadway in 1983, has a book by Sybille Pearson, music by David Shire and lyrics by Richard Maltby Jr.
Information: 751-1616.


The Young Also Burden a Working Population
LEAD: To the Editor:


City Ballet: The Season Opens
LEAD: A SOMEWHAT different New York City Ballet opened a new season with a benefit performance Tuesday night at the New York State Theater.


France's Deficit In Trade Grows
LEAD: The Trade Ministry of France reported today that the nation's trade deficit doubled last month to 4.9 billion francs, or $860 million, from September.


Crude Oil, Off Sharply, Rallies to Close Higher
LEAD: Crude oil futures took a roller-coaster ride today on the New York Mercantile Exchange, posting sharp losses early, then recovering to close higher in a late rally, traders said.


William M. Swartz; Retired Businessman, 75
LEAD: William M. Swartz, a retired Chicago businessman, died of a stroke Nov. 11 at his home in Highland Park, Ill.
He was 75 years old.


Congress Hears About Munitions Train Protest
LEAD: S. Brian Willson, an antiwar protester who was struck by a Navy train in Northern California on Sept. 1, waiting to testify yesterday at a Congressional hearing.
Mr.
Willson lost both of his legs as he sat in protest on the tracks at a highway crossing.
Capt.
Stanley J. Pryzby of the Navy, who investigated the incident, said that the train was traveling 12 to 16 miles an hour when it struck Mr.


SPENDING THE MONEY
LEAD: Where did the money in the Iran-contra operations go?
Here is what the committees found.


Metro Matters; A Suburb Tries To Anticipate The Year 2000
LEAD: Peering ahead to the year 2000, the litany of urban nightmares already looks familiar: intolerable traffic jams, jobs driven away by the dearth of affordable housing and widening disparities between the rich and the poor.


CIRCLE EXPRESS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CIRCLE EXPRESS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
46,574,000
36,211,000
Net inc
473,000
b598,000
Share earns
.10
.13
9mo rev
137,575,000
110,591,000
Net inc
2,208,000
b2,281,000
Share earns
.47
.54
Shares outst
4,748,150
4,231,389


NORTH EAST INSURANCE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH EAST INSURANCE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
428,245
204,513
Per share
.14
.11
9mo net inc
1,081,711
1,416,917
Per share
.36
.73
Share earnings include 15 cents and 19 cents from tax credits for the latest and year-ago 9 months, respectively.


U.N. Toning Down an Anti-Israeli Resolution
LEAD: A resolution criticizing Israel's links with South Africa has been presented in a form sharply toned down from versions approved in previous years.


Duncan Findlay, 87, Ex-Insurance Executive
LEAD: Duncan M. Findlay, a former insurance and real-estate executive, died of lung cancer Monday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 87 years old and lived in Harrison, N.Y.


NATIONAL LAMPOON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL LAMPOON INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,136,600
1,404,300
Net inc
742,700
c341,100
Share earns
.48
-
9mo rev
4,040,100
4,962,800
Net loss
b77,000
544,400
b-Includes merger expenses of $300,000.


Park in Queens to Get $80 Million Restoration
LEAD: A 10-year restoration of Flushing Meadows Corona Park, at a cost to New York City of $80 million, is to be announced today by Mayor Koch.


PAN ATLANTIC RE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAN ATLANTIC RE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,752,056
7,986,508
Net inc
b1,149,784
c660,973
Share earns
.26
.28
Shares outst
4,450,667
2,430,000
9mo rev
45,743,183
23,226,826
Net inc
b3,638,425
c3,558,873
Share earns
.89
1.47
Shares outst
4,100,167
2,430,000


3CI INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*3CI INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
640,077
625,904
Net inc
13,776
122,284
Share earns
.01
.09
6mo rev
1,058,052
1,211,248
Net loss
177,202
b359,440
Share earns
-
.17
b-Net income


Two Geochemists Win Prizes in Earth Science
LEAD: Two geochemists who did pioneering work on the chemical relationships of the oceans and the atmosphere and the land have been awarded the 1987 Vetlesen Prize in the earth sciences.


CANANDAIGUA WINE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANANDAIGUA WINE CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
40,062,530
55,761,028
Net loss
10,482,281
b4,608,808
Share earns
-
.96
Yr sales
171,319,202
173,475,262
Net loss
9,739,736
b10,609,522
Share earns
-
2.21


Injured Jet Defense Is Bracing for Bills
LEAD: The click of Joe Klecko's knee brace brought sweet music to the Jets' locker room today.
It is a sound the tattered defense will need to hear to keep the club's resurgence going.


DOC OPTICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOC OPTICS CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,046,000
10,235,000
Net inc
112,000
434,000
Share earns
.04
.18
9mo sales
33,739,000
32,553,000
Net inc
742,000
1,835,000
Share earns
.30
.74


LUCKY STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LUCKY STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 1
1987
1986
Sales
1,765,131,000
1,567,341,000
Net inc
25,010,000
c11,240,000
Share earns
.65
.21
Shares outst
38,606,000
51,840,000
9mo sales
5,272,371,000
4,677,727,000
Net inc
b107,471,000
c47,976,000
Share earns
2.79
.91
Shares outst
38,569,000
51,425,000


The 1970's Industrial Look: What Became of High Tech?
LEAD: High tech, the revolutionary design movement that brought the industrial style into thousands of American homes and apartments, seems to have vanished without a trace after a life span of less than 15 years.
The look that celebrated innovation and resourcefulness, it was expressed in the beauty of exposed pipes, the plainness of restaurant ware and the practicality of hospital equipment.


ALTRON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALTRON INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,022,000
6,743,000
Net loss
379,000
528,000
9mo sales
23,123,000
18,682,000
Net loss
1,200,000
1,918,000


Treasury Issues Move Slowly
LEAD: The Treasury securities market endured another extraordinarily slow day with minor price changes as traders and investors waited for more information about the budget deficit, the economy and policies of central banks around the world.


ENSCOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENSCOR INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
14,240,000
17,412,000
Net inc
962,000
606,000
Share earns
.09
.06
9mo rev
38,819,000
30,351,000
Net inc
1,926,000
840,000
Share earns
.18
.08
Year-ago results are on a pro forma basis to reflect the Sept.


Death Sentence in Moscow
LEAD: A former Soviet police officer has been sentenced to death for his part in an armed raid on a Moscow department store, the newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda said Wednesday.
A court was told that Valery Fineyev, 28 years old, led a gang that shot a policewoman, a driver and a cashier after seizing more than $470,000 from the store last November.


ALEXANDER ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALEXANDER ENERGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
984,000
1,059,000
Net loss
205,000
287,000
6mo rev
2,020,000
2,217,000
Net loss
517,000
549,000


Sears, Disney In Venture
LEAD: In a 10-year alliance between two of the nation's best-known companies, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company today agreed to market products based on Walt Disney characters.
Sears obtained the exclusive


First City Group Acts to Halt Bailout
LEAD: A small group of stockholders of the First City Bancorporation of Texas has made an 11th-hour threat to block the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's plan to bail out the troubled bank holding company.
Banking analysts, however, said today that the effort might not succeed.


IT'S CLUBBY, IT'S THRIFTY AND IT CAN COVER THE BILLS
LEAD: It is lunchtime in Seoul, and all over the city women are meeting for conversation and profit.


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: Health Service Co., a subsidiary of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Michigan, to Ross Roy, Detroit, for its new Blue Care Network.


Crash Inquiry Focusing on Taxiing Mix-Up
LEAD: Investigators looking into the fatal crash of a Continental Airlines jetliner in Denver sought an explanation yesterday for a taxiing mix-up that might have caused the plane to be exposed to snowfall longer than necessary after ice was removed from the wings.


Bipartisan Qualms Create New Doubts About Plan on Deficit
LEAD: Democrats and Republicans in the House and Senate expressed unhappiness today with the outline of the emerging plan to reduce the budget deficit by $30 billion.


VOTRAX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VOTRAX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,534,000
2,017,000
Net inc
201,000
133,000
Share earns
.06
.04
Share earnings reflect a 1-for-4 reverse stock split effective Nov. 5.
The company said results include the opertions of Vynet Corp., which was merged into Votrax on June 30 in a transaction accounted for as a pooling of interests.


Taylor 50-50 to Play for Giants
LEAD: Lawrence Taylor worked out on his own today.
But whether the Giants' All-Pro linebacker can overcome an injured right hamstring and play against the Saints Sunday in New Orleans may not be known until at least Saturday.


AMERICAN LOCKER GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN LOCKER GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,135,404
6,580,995
Net inc
233,475
393,795
Share earns
.18
.27
9mo sales
19,564,068
19,763,485
Net inc
981,342
1,262,561
Share earns
.74
.87


Truce and Consequences in Washington
LEAD: Under pressure from abroad and through intermediaries at home, the White House and the Democratic majority in Congress seem to have declared a truce - one that suggests how the Government may work for the next year or so.


Bridge: Head of U.S. League Faced Counterpart From Britain
LEAD: The custom of the American Contract Bridge League, and its forerunner, the American Bridge League, has been to elect a new president each year.


PAUL HARRIS STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAUL HARRIS STORES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
48,522,000
39,106,000
Net inc
1,252,000
932,000
Share earns
.14
.10
9mo sales
130,920,000
107,165,000
Net inc
4,343,000
3,334,000
Share earns
.47
.37


Gephardt's Southern Strategy Starts With a Good Showing in the North
LEAD: Representative Richard A. Gephardt predicted today that he would defeat Senator Albert Gore Jr. in the multiple Southern Demcoratic Presidential primary contests next March because Mr.
Gore would be unable to recover from successive defeats in Ohio and New Hampshire the month before.


WESSEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESSEX CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,469,000
11,580,000
Net loss
1,094,000
b129,000
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
20,023,000
22,656,000
Net loss
2,028,000
b259,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Bankers Trust Offsets Loss
LEAD: The Bankers Trust New York Corporation said yesterday that gains from currency and securities trading would significantly offset a previously projected annual loss.


House Approves Compromise on Military Spending
LEAD: The House today approved a bipartisan compromise measure on military programs costing up to $296 billion while imposing some arms restrictions on the White House.
The vote was 264 to 158.


REPORT WAS A GROUP EFFORT
LEAD: The report of the House and Senate committees investigating the Iran-contra affair is that rarest of species: a well written, readable Government report.


ARMADA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMADA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,692,000
19,260,000
Net loss
5,000
b142,000
Share earns
-
.14
9mo sales
60,808,000
55,818,000
Net loss
762,000
b183,000
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


Strong Quake in Alaska
LEAD: A major earthquake followed by dozens of aftershocks jarred portions of Alaska Tuesday and forced hundreds of coastal residents to flee their homes.
No serious injuries or damage were reported in the quakes, which began with a temblor measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale.
The quake was centered in the Gulf of Alaska, about 270 miles east-southeast of Anchorage and 90 miles southwest of Cape Yakataga, between Yakutat and Cordova.


ELSINORE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELSINORE CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,923,000
26,900,000
Net loss
11,577,000
852,000
9mo rev
77,494,000
73,375,000
Net loss
8,053,000
b1,002,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Billy Owen, a 6-foot-8-inch center at Carlisle (Pa.) High School who has led his team to three straight Pennsylvania state championships, has announced he will enroll at Syracuse next fall, following his brother, Michael, who is a tailback on the unbeaten Orange football team.
Owen, averaged 29.7 points and 12 rebounds as a junior last season.


BRUCE, ROBERT INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRUCE, ROBERT INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
24,533,000
17,307,000
Net loss
1,410,000
b299,000
Share earns
-
.16
9mo sales
62,170,000
39,761,000
Net loss
4,063,000
3,866,000
b-Net income


BAKER HUGHES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAKER HUGHES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
537,291,000
494,216,000
Net loss
41,957,000
b46,818,000
Yr rev
1,923,598,000
2,312,678,000
Net loss
254,822,000
b804,597,000
b-Includes an extraordinary loss of $1,392,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary gain of $88,608,000 for the year.


Stage: 'Blood Sports,' From England
LEAD: IN such provocative dramas as ''Destiny'' - before he adapted ''Nicholas Nickleby'' for the Royal Shakespeare Company - David Edgar revealed his intense social commitment.
In ''Blood Sports'' (first produced in England in 1975), the playwright expressed some of his political concerns, but in such a murky fashion as to make them almost undecipherable.


Army Past Shadows Seoul Candidate
LEAD: Like a specter that cannot be exorcised, Roh Tae Woo's military background shadows his campaign to become South Korea's next leader.


Schools Panel Ends Role in Hirings
LEAD: In an effort to attract strong candidates for the job of schools chancellor, the New York City Board of Education agreed yesterday that it would no longer interfere in senior appointments in the school system.


NESTOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NESTOR INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
74,832
-
Net loss
528,084
454,482
The company had no revenue in the year-ago first quarter.
The company also said the latest quarter revenue represents initial sales of the company's Nestorwriter product, including license fees for Nestorwriter software, and fees paid to the company in connection with the first phase of its decision learning system.


Health; Personal Health
LEAD: A familiar-looking woman greets you with a hug and kiss as you comb your brain in vain to recall who she is.
You're chatting with your mother at a party when an old friend you have not seen in years approaches.
You have no trouble with his name, but when you try to introduce him to your mother, you can't remember hers.


Amos Comay; Jewish Cultural Leader, 72
LEAD: Amos Comay, a Pittsburgh businessman who was a member of several Jewish cultural and educational associations, died Nov. 12 in an automobile accident.
He was 72 years old.
He was president of the National Foundation for Jewish Culture from 1978 to 1982, and was a board member of the Council of Jewish Federations, the Jewish Education Services of North America and the American Jewish Joint Distribution


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD:


EASTEX ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTEX ENERGY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
19,900,000
13,900,000
Net inc
56,000
171,000
9mo rev
79,600,000
47,800,000
Net inc
1,345,000
865,000
The company had its initial public offering in the 1987 third quarter.


QUEST MEDICAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUEST MEDICAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,710,845
3,609,692
Net inc
b2,438,011
c72,257
Share earns
.33
.01
9mo sales
9,821,763
10,290,740
Net inc
b2,456,182
c140,259
Share earns
.33
.02


Publishing: 'Paco' Author Plans a Nonfiction Work
LEAD: Larry Heinemann, whose ''Paco's Story'' won the National Book Award for fiction last week, is working on a nonfiction book and has plans for another novel.
The nonfiction book will be about post-traumatic stress disorder among Vietnam veterans, a subject of great concern to the author, himself a Vietnam veteran.


LEECO DIAGNOSTIC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEECO DIAGNOSTIC INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,453,065
1,110,604
Net inc
48,006
b116,207
b-Net loss


Common Sense and Safety in Jetliner-Small Aircraft Encounters
LEAD: To the Editor:


CONVENIENT FOOD MART INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONVENIENT FOOD MART INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
19,004,061
3,834,438
Net inc
1,496,738
557,287
Share earns
.49
.19
Shares outst
3,067,823
2,941,718
9mo rev
46,708,431
8,409,957
Net inc
3,183,313
1,268,817
Share earns
1.04
.43


Regional Exchanges Grumble
LEAD: Top officials at some regional stock exchanges, disappointed by the national market system's performance during last month's collapse, are calling for fundamental changes in the electronic network that links the exchanges.


UNIVERSITY GIVEN ORDER ON RESEARCH
LEAD: A Superior Court judge today ordered the University of California to establish a process to assure that Federal tax money it receives under a 100-year-old law is spent on agricultural research that primarily benefits small family farms.


MEMTEK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEMTEK CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,174,998
1,674,403
Net loss
499,568
132,977
6mo sales
2,583,247
2,852,373
Net loss
819,500
294,947


CONCORD FABRICS reports earnings for Year to Aug 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONCORD FABRICS (AMEX)
Year to Aug 30
1987
1986
Sales
138,047,382
112,629,609
Net inc
b2,163,909
b462,727
Share earns
1.21
.26
b-Includes a gain of $432,000 and a loss of $1,415,000 for the latest year and the year-earlier period, respectively, both from the disposal of discontinued operations and the year- earlier period also includes a loss of $332,558 from discontinued operations.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A MacNeil-Lehrer Town
LEAD: Dan Rather, Tom Brokaw and Peter Jennings had better stay on their toes.
The National Journal, a weekly Washington magazine about government and politics, polled its readers to see what television news shows they regularly view.
A total of 34 percent said they watch CBS, 33 percent said they tune in NBC and 26 percent said ABC.


INSIDE
LEAD:  New on Thursdays: The Health Page  A new life-saving role for parents of premature babies.
And the Personal Health column reports on keeping the memory sharp.
Page B12.
Also today: Parent &amp; Child, a column starting this week in The Home Section, discusses neatness.
Page C8.
Turmoil in


GREAT AMERICAN COMMUNICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT AMERICAN COMMUNICAIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
29,076,000
30,713,000
Net inc
b5,410,000
7,562,000
Share earns
.22
.29
9mo rev
91,388,000
95,592,000
Net inc
b22,350,000
c76,943,000
Share earns
.89
2.70


The U.N. Today: Nov. 19, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


MACNEAL-SCHWENDLER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACNEAL-SCHWENDLER CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,579,000
6,980,000
Net inc
2,390,000
1,823,000
Share earns
.20
.15
9mo rev
24,873,000
19,713,000
Net inc
6,580,000
5,117,000
Share earns
.54
.42


Stressing Safety When Choosing Toys
LEAD: A toy train with 300 times the legal amount of dangerous lead in its paint will not be on the shelves this holiday season.


Health; Some Tricks To Aid Memory
LEAD: Memory enhancing tricks, called mnemonics, have been popular since ancient times.
One of the most effective, committing information to rhyme, was used to transmit culture in ancient Greece.
Homer's Iliad, an epic poem, was originally only recited.
To this day, most people use ''Thirty days hath September .


MANHATTAN NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANHATTAN NATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b233,000
c710,000
Share earns
-
.14
9mo net loss
b5,249,000
c1,274,000
Share earns
-
.25
b-After capital gains of $49,000 for the quarter and capital losses of $564,000 for the 9 months.


The Girl in the Well Outpolls the Men in the Race
LEAD: Far more people followed news accounts of a Texas girl rescued from a well than are paying close attention to the 1988 Presidential race, according to a public opinion poll released today.


GENERAL REFRACTORIES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL REFRACTORIES CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
35,943,000
76,973,000
Net inc
b1,519,000
c2,449,000
Share earns
.39
.59
9mo sales
170,830,000
236,773,000
Net inc
b41,427,000
c6,743,000
Share earns
10.22
1.59


MOTT'S SUPER MARKETS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOTT'S SUPER MARKETS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,500,705
67,604,576
Net inc
b3,264,858
c544,834
Share earns
1.17
-
9mo sales
34,735,207
203,142,508
Net inc
b2,326,395
c2,331,717
Share earns
.83
-


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 1987
LEAD:  International


CORTRONIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORTRONIC CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
624,000
256,000
9mo net loss
1,672,000
b563,000
b-After a charge of $126,000 of capitalized software development costs.
The company is a development stage company.


MCFARLAND ENERGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCFARLAND ENERGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,576,000
2,316,000
Net inc
744,000
238,000
Share earns
.17
.05
9mo rev
9,468,000
8,544,000
Net inc
2,094,000
b14,280,000
Share earns
.47
-


FLUOROCARBON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLUOROCARBON CO (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
123,559,000
74,541,000
Net inc
4,113,000
2,902,000
Share earns
.94
.67
9mo sales
52,178,000
24,871,000
Net inc
1,487,000
1,208,000
Share earns
.34
.28


15% of People With AIDS Survive 5 Years
LEAD: Researchers studying AIDS patients in New York City found that about 15 percent of them survived at least five years after diagnosis with the disease, indicating a less dire outlook for some patients than is commonly assumed.


Waning Japan Labor Groups Will Join in a 'Super Union'
LEAD: Japan's labor movement, bedeviled by shrinking membership and dwindling influence, is about to take a bold, last-gasp step to end years of steady decline.


Much Too Quick
LEAD: The fast hands of Steve Largent, the Seattle Seahawk wide receiver known for his speed afoot, worked so quickly in the game against the Jets Nov. 9 that what had been scored as a 12-yard pass reception for Largent had to be erased.
On the play in the game's closing minutes, Largent leaped to catch a ball thrown by Dave Krieg, the Seattle quarterback.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.33
6.72
7.13
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.94
6.05
5.31
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.54
6.57
5.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.65
8.67
6.97
30-YR.


Commodities Fine Is Paid by Hutton
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission said that E. F. Hutton &amp; Company and four current or former employees had paid civil penalties totaling $145,000 involving 14 purported violations of commodities law.


F.T.C. Opposes Merger by Owens and Brockway
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission said yesterday that it would block the proposed merger of two glass-container manufacturers, Owens-Illinois Inc. and Brockway Inc., because the deal would threaten competition.


ESSEX COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESSEX COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,128,437
3,651,829
Net loss
352,629
298,559
9mo rev
12,118,833
10,897,973
Net loss
1,045,251
1,060,496


Drug Dealer's Ferrari Sold for $1.6 Million
LEAD: Federal marshals sold a confiscated Ferrari 250 GTO racing car today for $1.6 million to a Providence, R.I., partnership that outlasted bidders from here and abroad.


VERDIX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERDIX CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,227,278
1,323,778
Net loss
260,262
147,018
6mo rev
2,638,297
2,493,653
Net loss
819,922
733,804


Advertising; Serious Hunting By Ogilvy
LEAD: IF earlier this year you had asked J. Brendan Ryan, recently appointed managing director of Ogilvy &amp; Mather, New York, how many vacant product categories the agency had, he probably - off the top of his head -would have said beer, soft drinks and airlines.


Pickens Withdraws Bid for Newmont
LEAD: T. Boone Pickens said he would withdraw his $6.3 billion offer for the Newmont Mining Corporation after the Delaware Supreme Court upheld a lower court ruling that Consolidated Gold Fields P.L.C. could keep its 49.7 percent stake in Newmont.


PACIFIC SILVER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFIC SILVER
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,093,000
539,000
Net inc
1,010,234
b896,392
Share earns
.06
-
6mo rev
6,235,000
1,083,000
Net inc
2,022,581
b1,799,756
Share earns
.13
-
b-Net loss


WHAT 'THE ENTERPRISE' WAS
LEAD: Borrowing a term from Richard V. Secord, a retired Air Force major general, the Iran-contra report repeatedly refers to ''the Enterprise,'' the organization of men, equipment, corporations and bank accounts created to conduct the business of selling arms to Iran and distributing the profits, some of them to the contras.


ROYALE AIRLINES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROYALE AIRLINES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,624,709
7,660,053
Net loss
10,300,980
b87,634
Share earns
-
.05
Yr rev
25,395,448
31,457,228
Net loss
111,131,560
1,376,933
b-Net income


TIERCO GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIERCO GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,938,526
2,707,137
Net loss
949,076
774,175
9mo rev
5,925,100
7,270,309
Net loss
2,752,761
618,815


Dawson Named M.V.P.
LEAD: Andre Dawson, who had neither a contract nor a team to play for last spring before he finally signed with the Chicago Cubs, was voted the National League's most valuable player yesterday, becoming the first member of a last-place team to win the award.


A Taxing Rule Sends Youths to Social Security
LEAD: Social Security Commissioner Dorcas R. Hardy looked out at the roomful of teen-agers and summed up in seven words why each youth must have a Social Security number: ''Every one of you is a deduction.''


PRINTS SET PRICE RECORDS IN 2 AUCTIONS
LEAD: Japanese and European bidding continued to help propel art prices to record levels at the auctions of Old Master, modern and contemporary prints held last weekend and this week at Sotheby's and Christie's.
When the gavels fell on the final lots, however, Americans had purchased the majority of prints at both houses.


ALDUS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALDUS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,730,000
3,119,000
Net inc
2,065,000
739,000
Share earns
.16
.07
Shares outst
13,015,492
11,280,769
9mo sales
27,264,000
7,489,000
Net inc
5,634,000
1,943,000
Share earns
.47
.17


IN LOS ANGELES, AN ART NOUVEAU FANTASY
LEAD: LOS ANGELES is a city seen largely through the windshield, and the speedometer is one of the best gauges of its interesting buildings.


Timeout for Kasparov In Chess Title Match
LEAD: The world chess champion, Gary Kasparov, took a timeout today, postponing until Friday the 15th game of his championship match with Anatoly Karpov.


Advertising; Four New Campaigns Are Starting for Coors
LEAD: Four new advertising campaigns from the Adolph Coors Company are breaking this week and although the brewer will not release a spending figure, it will say this is the biggest year ever.


Disparities Cited at Howard Beach Trial
LEAD: A defense lawyer at the Howard Beach murder trial, questioning a black man yesterday who said he had been beaten by white teen-agers, stressed contradictions between the man's trial testimony and what he reportedly had told the police and others shortly after the incident.


CAMBRIDGE ANALYTICAL ASOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAMBRIDGE ANALYTICAL ASOCIATES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,462,963
1,087,483
Net loss
189,742
42,329
9mo rev
4,212,963
2,804,967
Net loss
327,559
299,157


MICROBILT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROBILT CORP
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,557,000
3,848,000
Net inc
763,000
374,000
Share earns
.18
.09
9mo rev
12,927,000
10,820,000
Net inc
1,968,000
1,154,000
Share earns
.47
.31
Shares outst
4,206,000
3,688,000


DAMSON ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAMSON ENERGY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,752,000
21,064,000
Net loss
b1,190,000
20,532,000
9mo rev
66,012,000
81,327,000
Net loss
b13,222,000
c127,255,000
b-After gains from early extinguishment of debentures of $227,000 and $368,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


INVENTION, DESIGN, ENGINEERNG ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INVENTION, DESIGN, ENGINEERNG ASSOCIATES
Year to July 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,820,000
2,914,000
Net inc
272,000
b716,000
Share earns
.17
-
b-Net loss


Ansel E. McL. Talbert; Aviation Writer
LEAD: Ansel Edward McLaurine Talbert, an aviation writer and editor for 50 years, died Oct. 7 at his home in Bridgeport, Conn.
He was 75 years old.


LEE ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEE ENTERPRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
59,914,000
54,307,000
Net inc
13,438,000
11,217,000
Share earns
.53
.43
Yr rev
237,555,000
220,924,000
Net inc
b44,573,000
32,597,000
Share earns
1.74
1.25


SMALL BUDGET CUT MAY HURT MARKETS
LEAD: The financial markets are bracing for a decline should Congress and the Administration cut the budget deficit by only $20 billion to $23 billion, as many analysts and economists now think is likely.


'Steering To Failure'
LEAD: The report summarized some of the effects of the Iran-contra affair.


Antoine Magnin, 86, French Chef Noted for Wood-Fire Cuisine, Dies
LEAD: Antoine Magnin, a French chef whose wood-fired cuisine at his bistro, L'Ami Louis, attracted generations of avid followers, died of a heart attack Friday at a medical clinic in Versailles.
He was 86 years old.


SHELLY ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHELLY ASSOCIATES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,101,658
563,774
Net inc
10,925
b45,570
b-Net loss


PUNTA GORDA ISLES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUNTA GORDA ISLES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,236,000
3,757,000
Net loss
810,000
1,244,000
9mo rev
16,745,000
23,930,000
Net loss
1,716,000
b3,979,000
Share earns
-
1.37
b-Net income and includes a $7.4 million gain on real estate dispositions.


INTERCONTINENTAL LIFE INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERCONTINENTAL LIFE INSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,664,000
7,365,000
Net inc
b925,000
731,000
Share earns
.62
.49
9mo rev
52,744,000
23,387,000
Net inc
b2,284,000
c2,377,000
Share earns
1.54
1.60


San Marino Journal; East Meets West In Upscale Suburb
LEAD: The real estate brokers, that crafty breed, were the first to adapt to the influx of Chinese newcomers into this staid, wealthy suburb of Los Angeles.
If it seemed odd that Asian homebuyers would not touch a house facing East or West, or brought in spiritual advisers to pass on the dwelling's suitability, these were, well, cultural peccadillos that could be overlooked for clients who brought crisp cash to the closing and often offered more than the asking price.


CERADYNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CERADYNE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,570,000
5,098,000
Net loss
2,768,000
b526,000
Share earns
-
.11
9mo sales
19,606,000
13,694,000
Net loss
2,546,000
b1,086,000
Share earns
-
.22
b


NMR OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NMR OF AMERICA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,544,446
2,007,500
Net loss
118,647
138,115
6mo rev
6,471,317
3,664,920
Net loss
89,258
b616,551
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $304,952.


Cabaret: Sylvia Syms Sings
LEAD: AFTER four decades of singing, Sylvia Syms has developed a classic supper-club repertory, a style built on a foundation of Billie Holiday, Mildred Bailey and Frank Sinatra, and a theater-trained ability to pace her singing with pertinent commentary.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Health; Parents of Premature Infants Thrust Into a Life-Saving Role
LEAD: The house is peaceful as the college student, a mother's helper, feeds a premature baby her bottle of formula.
The only hint of anything unusual is a small electronic monitor that rhythmically flashes two green lights, indicating that the baby's heart rate and breathing rate are normal.


Let Banks Enter Securities Field, Greenspan Says
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board called today for repeal of legislation enacted during the Depression that places a barrier between the banking and securities industries.


INDEPTH DATA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDEPTH DATA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
472,103
198,915
6mo net loss
804,160
373,773
Indepth is a development stage company.


The Peace Scare
LEAD: Speaker Jim Wright's active role in encouraging the peace process in Nicaragua has predictably nettled the Reagan Administration.
Foreign policy must be left to the President, its spokesmen complain.
The commentators write about historic tests of constitutional power.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


GRAF STRUTS HER NO. 1 STUFF IN 47 MINUTES
LEAD: The toughest part was the waiting, Steffi Graf said.
Chris Evert was already on the way home, Hana Mandlikova was forced to retire because of an injury and Martina Navratilova -No. 2 and not enjoying it one bit - had reaped the benefit of a competitive opening-round match.
Graf, meanwhile, was limited to practice sessions that were probably doing her more harm than good.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


PENTRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENTRON CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,037,700
9,048,600
Net inc
b100,100
c1,090,400
Share earns
.01
.08
Shares outst
19,222,500
14,258,600
b-Includes a tax benefit of $85,000.
c-Includes a loss of $16,800 from discontinued operations, a tax credit of $425,500 and a credit of $377,700 from the cumulative effect of a change in inventory accounting.


Biological Mother Is Granted Custody of Boy in Abuse Case
LEAD: The biological mother of a 17-month-old boy raised by a Manhattan couple who have been charged in the death of another child won temporary custody of the boy yesterday.


After the Fall, Yeltsin Gets a Top Industry Post
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin, removed last week as head of the Moscow Communist Party organization, was given a senior position in the construction industry, Tass reported today.


SOONER DEFENSE OF FLA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOONER DEFENSE OF FLA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,474,000
5,467,000
Net inc
b385,000
375,000
Share earns
.07
.08
Shares outst
5,364,470
4,911,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $41,000.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Exhibit A: New York
LEAD: Could it be that New York has a thing or two to teach the United States?
The New York State Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, thinks so.


MICROS SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROS SYSTEMS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,941,300
4,031,500
Net inc
b77,900
c239,400
Share earns
.01
-
b-Includes a pre-tax gain of $382,700 on sales of offices.
c-Net loss and includes a pre-tax gain of $171,600 on sales of offices.


SUNWORLD AIRLINES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNWORLD AIRLINES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,849,000
14,656,000
Net inc
b173,000
b250,000
Share earns
.05
.08
9mo rev
39,204,000
38,141,000
Net loss
4,615,000
2,189,000
b-Includes $1.5 million from the sale and lease-back of aircraft for the latest period and includes $843,000 from aircraft subleases for the year-ago period.


Dow Rises by 16.91 In Erratic Session
LEAD: Stock prices closed moderately higher yesterday, buffeted by rumors on the progress of the budget deficit talks in Washington and the performance of the dollar.
Traders also said that futures-related buy programs lifted prices across a broad front late in the session.


ARMS FOR CONTRAS: 38% PROFIT VS. NO PROFIT
LEAD: An influential contra leader was denied cash to purchase arms after he bought a weapons shipment from a European dealer rather than through Richard V. Secord, who ran the Iran-contra operation under the aegis of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.
General Secord was making a 38 percent profit on the arms deals, the report says, while the man who arranged the deal with the European dealer was taking no profit.


WILSON BROTHERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILSON BROTHERS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,445,000
822,000
Net loss
65,000
c7,000
9mo sales
4,398,000
3,495,000
Net inc
b8,514,000
c1,510,000
Share earns
.89
.19
b-Includes a gain from discontinued operations of $5,272,000 and a tax credit of $3,831,000.


METALBANC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*METALBANC CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
52,820,919
25,943,680
Net inc
115,945
109,140
Share earns
.01
.02
Shares outst
8,013,700
7,181,618
6mo rev
83,688,860
51,672,302
Net inc
141,363
165,185
Share earns
.01
.02
Shares outst
7,585,127
6,964,942


POLYMER RESEARCH CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POLYMER RESEARCH CORP OF AMERICA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
730,000
603,000
Net inc
92,000
2,000
Share earns
.13
-
9mo sales
1,719,000
1,626,000
Net inc
60,000
64,000
Share earns
.09
.09
Share earnings are less than one cent for year-ago quarter.


GENERAL PHYSICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL PHYSICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
29,985,000
22,756,000
Net inc
1,339,000
1,254,000
Share earns
.39
.34
9mo rev
80,754,000
64,891,000
Net inc
3,924,000
3,774,000
Share earns
1.14
1.01


Tobacco Group Ad Spurs Rift With Cancer Society
LEAD: A tobacco trade group has offered to test air quality at the American Cancer Society's offices, saying it would show pollutants other than cigarettes foul the indoors.
But the society called the offer a ''public relations ploy.''


Manager Is Leaving Retirement Fund
LEAD: As investment manager of the $40 billion California Public Employees Retirement System, Greta E. Marshall, 50 years old, guides the investment policy of one of the largest pools of assets in the country.
But after two and a half years on the job, she has decided that the administrative responsibilities take too much time away from what she really likes best, investing.


SONY CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SONY CORP OF AMERICA (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,277,390,000
2,065,363,000
Net inc
29,301,000
23,822,000
Share earns
.12
.10
6mo sales
4,410,075,000
4,235,685,000
Net inc
52,473,000
80,651,000
Share earns
.22
.35


HAPPY BIRTHDAY, ART FURNITURE
LEAD: RICK KAUFMANN says he never wants to hear another power saw or drill again in his life.
Last summer the director of Art et Industrie, a SoHo gallery specializing in art furniture, supervised the construction of the gallery's new spaces at 106 Spring Street, at the corner of Spring and Mercer.
It was nails, saws and cacophony for more months than Mr.


Signs for Avenue of the Americas Are Refurbished
LEAD: Ross Sandler, right, the Transportation Commissioner, and Consul General Joaquin Bernal of Mexico with a refurbished sign ready for installation above the Avenue of the Americas.
The 220 porcelain enamel emblems, representing the 36 member nations of the Organization of American States, have been polished and rustproofed at a cost of over $100 each.


GRAPHIC SCANNING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAPHIC SCANNING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,464,000
30,796,000
Net inc
b52,285,000
c3,740,000
Share earns
1.26
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $11,819,000.
c-Net loss  The company said in the latest quarter it realized a pre-tax gain of $70,100,000 from the sale of its celluar partnership interest.


Health: Psychology; When Do a Therapist's Actions Cross Over the Line?
LEAD: When psychotherapists have sexual relations with their patients, it is such a blatantly outrageous transgression that the whole profession expresses indignation.


Yields' Fall Is Slowing
LEAD: The decline in yields on savings that followed the stock market's plunge on Oct. 19 slowed in the week ended yesterday.


TV Reviews; 'Laguna Heat,' On HBO
LEAD: DESPITE a long list of promising names among the production credits, T. Jefferson Parker's novel ''Laguna Heat'' still reads better than it plays.
The latest HBO Pictures presentation had its premiere on the Home Box Office pay-cable service last weekend.
Its next showing will be Saturday at 11:30 P


Dried-Flower Designs For Year-Round Color
LEAD: ''THIS is a very hard city to live in because everywhere you look, especially in winter, all you see is concrete,'' said Madi Heller, co-owner of Galerie Felix Flower.
She and her husband, Felix Blume, combat the grayness by surrounding themselves with dried flowers, long-lasting remnants of the natural world.


Neatness: Children Would Rather Live Without It; Teaching Habits That Help
LEAD: THREE times a day, five days a week, Susanne Agnello Sylvester, the prekindergarten teacher at St.
Luke's School in Manhattan, persuades her class of 18 boys and girls, ages 3 to 5, to tidy up an entire room in a scant 10 minutes.


Murdoch's London Sunday Times Hardly Toes the Thatcher Line
LEAD: To the Editor:


STRATAMER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STRATAMER
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,522,000
5,260,000
Net inc
b210,000
c9,261,000
Share earns
.09
.38
6mo rev
10,928,000
10,469,000
Net inc
b410,000
c9,087,000
Share earns
.18
.34
b-Includes a tax credit of $71,000 and $169,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


STARTS IN HOUSING FALL 8% IN MONTH TO HIT 4-YEAR LOW
LEAD: Home building plunged in October to its lowest level in more than four years, the Government reported today.


Colorado's Troubled Banks Special to The New York Times
LEAD: A multimillion-dollar deficiency in Colorado's private deposit insurance fund has put thousands of savings accounts in jeopardy and forced state regulators to seize 13 of the 89 industrial banks in the state.


Court Allows Suffolk to Exhume Bodies
LEAD: Suffolk County authorities received court approval today to exhume the bodies of seven people feared to have been victims of a nurse at Good Samaritan Hospital who has admitted injecting powerful muscle-paralyzing drugs into patients.


Big Investors Defend Programmed Trading
LEAD: Several of the world's largest institutional investors defended computerized program trading today at a meeting in Washington.


Yes to Tibbetts Gardens
LEAD: The Board of Estimate votes today on Tibbetts Gardens, a 1,000-unit condominium to be built on vacant land in the Kingsbridge section of the west Bronx.
This expansion of middle-income housing deserves approval.


Designer Whispers, Fashion Listens
LEAD: GIVE Marc Audibet an inch and he'll make a dress.
Five years ago the Parisian designer began traveling to Italy, where he became a leader in the development of new stretch fabrics.
He took Lycra, which was first used in bathing suits in the 1950's and ski clothes in the 1960's, and blended it into fabrics with yarns like wool, cotton, cashmere or linen.


Police Still Searching Park for a Young Girl
LEAD: More than 30 police officers are to search a park on the Brooklyn-Queens border for a fourth day today in response to a report from three children that they had seen a young girl carried there and left by a man.


UNIFIRST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIFIRST CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 29
1987
1986
Revenue
44,845,000
29,484,000
Net inc
956,000
2,264,000
Share earns
.19
.45
Yr rev
159,900,000
114,235,000
Net inc
7,815,000
8,320,000
Share earns
1.55
1.65


Tips for Those Trying to Quit
LEAD: For people who want to quit smoking, there are steps to take that may ease the craving for nicotine, according to June Walzer of the American Cancer Society's New York City division.
She offered these suggestions:


BOHEMIA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOHEMIA INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
70,876,000
52,592,000
Net inc
3,446,000
2,758,000
Share earns
.75
.60
6mo sales
132,847,000
109,190,000
Net inc
5,281,000
b4,826,000
Share earns
1.15
1.05


HOUSE POSTPONES VOTE ON WELFARE
LEAD: The House of Representatives, responsive to sentiment against passing a major spending bill while negotiators are struggling to reduce the Federal budget deficit, today delayed action on a sweeping measure that would overhaul the nation's welfare system.


PATLEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PATLEX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,897,700
1,157,700
Net loss
815,400
628,800
9mo rev
9,216,000
3,566,600
Net loss
1,979,200
1,672,900


RADA ELECTRONIC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RADA ELECTRONIC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,322,000
1,900,000
Net inc
130,000
114,000
Share earns
.02
.02
6mo rev
4,822,000
3,000,000
Net inc
290,000
204,000
Share earns
.05
.03


QUANTRONIX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUANTRONIX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,313,903
5,237,772
Net loss
b1,073,882
c421,080
Share earns
-
.13
6mo sales
8,862,369
11,003,493
Net loss
779,232
c930,520
Share earns
-
.28
b-Includes a one-time charge of $1.2 million as part of an agreement to settle patent litigation with Patlex Corp.


LANE TELECOMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANE TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,412,000
5,405,000
Net loss
1,242,000
c16,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
13,084,000
16,576,000
Net loss
b3,006,000
c331,000
Share earns
-
.10


From Abrams to Weinberger: The Cast of the Iran-Contra Drama
LEAD:  Elliott Abrams


FIRST AMERICAN FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMERICAN FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
5,597,000
b9,426,000
Share earns
1.28
1.74
9mo net inc
28,548,000
b16,765,000
Share earns
5.43
3.14
b-After an extraordinary charge of $2,295,000 for both the quarter and 9 months.


DEMOCRATS PRAISE EFFORT ON TRUMP
LEAD: Democratic Party fund-raisers today praised the efforts of House Speaker Jim Wright, to enlist Donald J. Trump, the New York real estate magnate, to be the host of a major fund-raising dinner next year.


Court Orders Reinstating Teacher With AIDS
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today ordered the reinstatement of a teacher with AIDS, ruling for the first time that discrimination against victims of the disease is barred under civil rights laws protecting the handicapped.


PVC CONTAINER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PVC CONTAINER CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,171,000
7,227,000
Net inc
38,344
292,313
Share earns
.01
.05


Advertising; Earle Palmer Brown Acquires Spiro Agency
LEAD: The Earle Palmer Brown Companies, which lays claim to the title of largest independent agency in the Middle Atlantic region, is now even bigger, having acquired Spiro &amp; Associates of Philadelphia.


House Approves Plan To Raise V.A. Status
LEAD: The House overwhelmingly approved legislation Tuesday that would turn the Veterans Administration into a Federal department with Cabinet-level status.


NEW JOB BIAS LAW URGED FOR ULSTER
LEAD: While violence and political conflictseem to run in cycles here, job discrimination has remained a constant and intractable reality.


Lift the McCarran-Walter Lid
LEAD: For 35 years the McCarran-Walter Immigration Act has allowed Washington to exclude foreign visitors based on public statements they might make in the United States.
Sensibly, the Senate would change this practice, but some House members balk over technical issues.
Their fear of losing some jurisdictional authority pales beside the need to reform this destructive law.


AMERICAN CABLESYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CABLESYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,046,000
12,605,000
Net loss
2,041,000
1,344,000


Jazz: New York Strings
LEAD: THE New York Strings, a jazz string quartet with bass and guitar, specializes in playing popular songs of the 1930's and 40's in a style that animates the creamy Impressionism of a classical string quartet with a buoyant jazz pulse.


WESTVACO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTVACO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
520,084,000
496,707,000
Net inc
b59,235,000
43,248,000
Share earns
.91
.67
Yr sales
1,903,606,000
1,811,937,000
Net inc
146,191,000
108,096,000
Share earns
2.25
1.67


'CABAL OF ZEALOTS'
LEAD: The Congressional committees on the Iran-contra affair blamed President Reagan in their final report today for failing to live up to his constitutional mandate to ''take care that the laws be faithfully executed'' and said he bore ''the ultimate responsibility'' for wrongdoing by his aides.


Michael Lekakis, Sculptor of Abstract Works
LEAD: Michael Lekakis, an artist whose wood sculptures combined fluid and geometric forms and whose work in recent years had begun to attract increasing critical recognition, died yesterday at the Amsterdam Nursing Home in Manhattan, of complications following a series of recent strokes.
He was 80 years old.


CONSUMERS FINANCIAL CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSUMERS FINANCIAL CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,580,000
17,702,000
Net inc
1,095,000
665,000
Share earns
.29
.20
9mo rev
52,802,000
49,313,000
Net inc
1,794,000
974,000
Share earns
.53
.29


MEDAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDAR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,059,138
6,543,878
Net loss
828,207
b281,202
Share earns
-
.05
9mo sales
17,767,574
14,357,061
Net loss
1,732,933
499,201
b-Net income


Arms, Hostages and Contras: How a Secret Foreign Policy Unraveled
LEAD:  1984  March 16: William Buckley, C.I.A. station chief in Beirut, is kidnapped and held by Islamic Holy War, pro-Iranian extremists, in Lebanon.
May: Duane Clarridge, a C.I.A. officer who has contacts with the Nicaraguan rebels, introduces Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, a National Security Council aide, to contra leaders in Honduras.


WIENER ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WIENER ENTERPRISES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
20,098,000
21,822,000
Net inc
179,000
425,000
Share earns
.08
.18
9mo sales
63,125,000
52,557,000
Net inc
1,325,000
1,376,000
Share earns
.57
.59


AMERICAN MIDLAND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MIDLAND CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,429,000
9,734,000
Net loss
490,000
b452,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
40,996,000
37,641,000
Net loss
358,000
b2,384,000
Share earns
-
.04


Bonn Expected to Take New Steps to Aid Growth
LEAD: Amid signs in recent days that West German officials are responding ever so slightly to international pressures to make their sluggish economy grow faster, the Bundesbank meets Thursday.


NATIONAL-STANDARD CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL-STANDARD CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
65,299,000
62,283,000
Net loss
634,000
b17,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
3,929,380
3,920,193
9mo sales
267,125,000
247,232,000
Net loss
11,132,000
b1,864,000
Share earns
-
.48
Shares outst
3,927,001
3,919,987


CALIFORNIA REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALIFORNIA REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,109,000
1,414,000
Net loss
2,204,000
b763,000
Share earns
-
.16
9mo rev
3,478,000
3,999,000
Net loss
1,571,000
b2,212,000
Share earns
-
.46


CARDINAL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARDINAL INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,367,000
7,809,000
Net inc
5,000
94,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
27,042,000
22,727,000
Net inc
287,000
235,000
Share earns
.10
.09


DOME PETROLEUM LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOME PETROLEUM LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
361,000,000
371,000,000
Net inc
6,000,000
b693,000,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
1,097,000,000
1,179,000,000
Net inc
37,000,000
b875,000,000
Share earns
.08
-


SECURITY FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SECURITY FINANCIAL GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
368,000
151,000
Per share
.47
-
Yr net inc
1,290,000
992,000
Per share
1.65
-
Year-ago share earnings are not applicable; the company went public in June.


INTERNATIONAL MOBILE MAHINES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL MOBILE MAHINES CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
395,414
532,851
Net loss
1,976,029
3,741,362
9mo rev
1,021,682
1,234,924
Net loss
5,983,530
7,893,824


Citicorp Drops Financial Corp.
LEAD: Citicorp is no longer interested in making a bid for any part of the troubled Financial Corporation of America, parent of the nation's largest thrift institution, the American Savings and Loan Assocation, a spokesman for the Federal Home Loan Bank Board said today.


Frederick R. Kearns; Ex-Canadair Executive, 63
LEAD: Frederick R. Kearns, a former president and chief executive of Canadair Ltd., died Saturday in London, Ontario, of complications from a liver transplant that he had in September.
He was 63 years old and lived in Montreal.


USR INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USR INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
106,056
116,815
Net loss
133,037
289,967
9mo rev
363,886
378,406
Net loss
366,714
865,108


UAS AUTOMATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UAS AUTOMATION
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
668,392
292,888
Net loss
216,889
537,843
6mo rev
1,107,176
673,606
Net loss
503,208
1,166,223


Critic's Notebook; RAKED STAGES AND SCORELESS DANCE
LEAD: RECENTLY, while discussing Vaslav Nijinsky's choreography for ''Le Sacre du Printemps,'' Robert Joffrey remarked, ''I suspect it was done with a raked stage in mind.'' Now that I've seen this famous work of 1913, as reconstructed by Millicent Hodson and Kenneth Archer for the Joffrey Ballet, I know what he means.


A Lush Musical by Villa-Lobos
LEAD: ''Magdalena,'' the only Broadway musical with a score by the Brazilian musical giant Heitor Villa-Lobos, occupies a singular niche in the annals of music-theater history.
When the lavish folk operetta opened at the Ziegfeld Theater on Broadway on Sept. 20, 1948, after wildly successful engagements in Los Angeles and San Francisco, it was the most expensive show to have been produced on Broadway.


Effects of Marine Licenses
LEAD: AS of Jan. 1, New York State will require licenses for those who sell, trade or barter food fish they have taken from marine waters.


GAMING &amp; TECHNOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GAMING &amp; TECHNOLOGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,437,000
9,134,000
Net inc
1,183,000
1,151,000
Share earns
.15
.16


Amfac Considers A Restructuring
LEAD: Amfac Inc., the largest private employer in Hawaii, said its directors would consider a corporate restructuring on Friday.
Some analysts said the plan could lead to a breakup of the diversified company.


Rock: The Saqqara Dogs
LEAD: IF rock had been invented in Morocco, nurtured in England and set loose on the Lower East Side, the mainstream might sound like the Saqqara Dogs, the New York trio that performed Monday and Tuesday at Dance Theater Workshop's New Song series.


'President Has Cooperated,' Fitzwater Says
LEAD: Following is a transcript of a statement, as recorded by The Associated Press, that was delivered today by Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, in reaction to the report of the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair:


THE YOUNG ALSO BURDEN A WORKING POPULATION
LEAD: To the Editor:


Makarova Narrates 'Ballerina'
LEAD: ''BALLERINA,'' to be shown on the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network tonight at 9 P.M. and 1 A.M.and on Sunday afternoon, is a feast.
Part of a four-hour series written and narrated by Natalia Makarova and produced for the BBC and A&amp;E, this homage to the ballerina begins a little slowly with looks at Marcia Haydee and Miss Makarova performing in ballets by Maurice Bejart and Roland Petit.


FAIR, ISAAC &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAIR, ISAAC &amp; CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,608,000
3,996,000
Net inc
526,000
403,000
Share earns
.09
.09
Shares outst
5,571,000
4,461,000
Yr rev
18,109,000
14,832,000
Net inc
2,071,000
1,597,000
Share earns
.42
.36
Shares outst
4,959,000
4,470,000


UNIVERSAL HOLDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSAL HOLDING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,065,000
4,279,000
Net loss
69,000
b100,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
11,640,000
12,787,000
Net inc
405,000
c427,000
Share earns
.17
-


Knicks Waste 28-Point Lead
LEAD: For one incredible evening in November, it was like pro basketball in June inside steamy Boston Garden, a game ending in the kind of draining emotion more typical of playoff time.


'FAITH IN ARMS MERCHANTS'
LEAD: A passage in the report dealt with the issue of who can and cannot be trusted with sensitive information.


THE LAW AND THE DEVIL
LEAD: The safeguard of law is stressed, in both judicial and literary reference, at key points in the Iran-contra report.


All in the Game
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place; Merck-Squibb Rivalry's Effect
LEAD: DESPITE the October market plunge, drug stocks have been big winners so far this year, thanks to promising new products, rising earnings and a falling dollar that enhances their income from overseas.
But what helps one company in this high-stakes business often works to the detriment of a competitor.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. We recently moved into a home that had carpet in the bathroom.
This carpet was held down with double-faced tape that has left a gummy residue on the floor.
I tried scrubbing this off with denatured alcohol, but it didn't work.
Do you have any suggestions?
A.
This residue can almost always be removed by rubbing with a rag moistened with rubber-cement thinner (sold in art-supply and stationery stores), then with a dry cloth.


The Dance: Greenberg's 'MacGuffin'
LEAD: NEIL GREENBERG likes to confront audiences - not, fortunately, with violence, but with deliberately inscrutable or paradoxical choreography.


Recall Verification in Arizona
LEAD: Arizona's Secretary of State began delivering today some 33,500 petitions seeking the recall of Gov.
Evan Mecham to the county recorders responsible for verifying the nearly 390,000 signatures.


MEDICINE SHOPPE INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDICINE SHOPPE INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,212,462
4,684,933
Net inc
1,317,254
1,029,825
Share earns
.25
.19
Yr rev
19,824,600
16,981,282
Net inc
4,407,079
3,565,191
Share earns
.83
.67


Bay Talks to Michigan
LEAD: Two days after resigning as athletic director at Ohio State University, Rick Bay said he had been in touch with the University of Michigan about the athletic director's job there. ''They contacted me,'' Bay said. ''I don't know if I'd classify myself as a candidate because I'm not sure I'm going to stay in intercollegiate athletics.


MPSI SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MPSI SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,831,000
7,203,000
Net inc
1,000
1,248,000
Share earns
-
.15
Yr rev
25,464,000
23,421,000
Net inc
223,000
2,606,000
Share earns
.03
.31


Law's 'Stradivarius'; Inside Trader Ruling Saves Mail Law As Key Tool for Federal Prosecutors
LEAD: ''To Federal prosecutors of white-collar crime, the mail fraud statute is our Stradivarius, our Colt .45, our Louisville Slugger, our Cuisinart - and our true love,'' Jed S. Rakoff wrote in a 1980 law review article.
Prosecutors may flirt with other laws, he said, but they always come home to mail fraud, ''with its simplicity, adaptability, and comfortable familiarity.


Ex-Italy Chief Revives His Former Coalition
LEAD: Giovanni Goria, who resigned as Italy's Prime Minister on Saturday, told the President tonight that he had succeeded in reviving the same five-party coalition, a presidential spokesman said.


ISLANDERS HUMBLED IN DEFEAT
LEAD: The Islanders yielded a pair of power-play goals and failed to convert six of their own power-play opportunities in losing, 5-2, tonight to the Montreal Canadiens at the Forum.


32 Are Killed in Fire At London Subway; 80 Reported Injured
LEAD: At least 32 people were killed and about 80 injured Wednesday night when a fire broke out in a subway station in central London.


HEART FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEART FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,957,000
2,181,000
Share earns
.45
.50
9mo net inc
5,605,000
6,068,000
Share earns
1.28
1.40
Share earnings reflect a 2-for-1 stock split paid in April.


THE COUNTRIES HAVE NUMBERS
LEAD: Congressional investigators used numbers to identify countries that might be embarrassed by public disclosure of their secret dealings with the United States.
According to officials familiar with the report, these are the countries in question:


REX-NORECO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REX-NORECO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,211,585
1,627,555
Net inc
469,997
133,658
Share earns
.24
.07


Cuomo's Son-in-Law Rethinks Political Spoofs
LEAD: Kenneth Cole, the innovative shoe designer who likes to promote his products with politically irreverent advertisements, is rethinking his strategy.


FIRST EXECUTIVE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST EXECUTIVE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b46,855,000
c37,985,000
Share earns
.47
.42
Shares outst
84,127,000
74,133,000
9mo net inc
b136,868,000
c115,902,000
Share earns
1.38
1.33
Shares outst
84,026,000
70,389,000


The Stage: 'Fun,' 2 One-Act Plays
LEAD: HOWARD KORDER creates significant characters, pithy dialogue and taut scenes, then has trouble putting his talents together.
That, at any rate, is the feeling left by ''Fun,'' the two related one-acters that opened this week at the Judith Anderson theater.
The first, ''Fun,'' was previously staged at the Actors Theater of Louisville; the second, ''Nobody,'' received a reading at the Eugene O'Neill Theater


CBS to Sell Record Unit To Sony
LEAD: CBS Inc. agreed late yesterday to sell its records division to the Sony Corporation for about $2 billion in cash, completing CBS's return to its roots as a company whose sole business is broadcasting.


Thomson McKinnon Sells Partnership Units
LEAD: While investors are still reeling from the steep drop in stock prices during October, the business of providing investment advice remains one of the most lucrative on Wall Street.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Dunham as Reader


VOICES OF THE COUNTERCULTURE
LEAD: THE topic was the domestic trinity of toys, parents and tidiness.
The panelists, experts in all three, were second graders at Public School 21, also known as the Edward Hart Elementary School, in the Flushing section of Queens.


Farm Banks Improve
LEAD: The profitability of Middle West farm banks rose sharply in the third quarter of this year from a year ago, according to preliminary figures released today by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. ''There was a significant increase, once again, in the profitability of farm banks in the Midwest,'' said George Gregorash, a Fed researcher.


INTERNATIONAL ANTIQUES CENTER OPENS ITS DOORS WITH A GALA
LEAD: THE red carpet taped to the sidewalk outside 125 East 57th Street withstood heavy and decoratively dressed traffic after 6 P.M. last night, when more than 1,200 guests gathered to celebrate the opening of the Place des Antiquaires, New York's newest antiques center.


Breeders' Draws 85 Starters
LEAD: A record 85 horses, and 6 additional alternates, were entered today to run in the fourth annual Breeders' Cup Saturday at Hollywood Park.


GEMCRAFT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEMCRAFT INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
78,792,000
108,639,000
Net loss
1,837,000
c4,012,000
Share earns
-
.73
9mo sales
236,410,000
265,050,000
Net loss
b7,671,000
c5,819,000
Share earns
-
1.06


New Hotel Planned For Atlantic City
LEAD: Broadway Holdings Inc., a unit of a New Jersey developer, said it would develop a 800-room hotel and casino in the Marina area of Atlantic City.
The hotel will be developed and managed with a partnership formed by Carnival Cruise Lines Inc., the world's largest operator of cruise ships, and the Continental Companies, a hotel-management concern.


Three Tons of Cocaine Seized By U.S. in Florida Warehouse
LEAD: Federal agents today confiscated more than three tons of cocaine hidden in hollowed-out lumber at a suburban warehouse, according to Government officials who called it the biggest single seizure of the drug in the United States.
No arrests were made immediately.
Paul A. Teresi, agent in charge of the Drug Enforcement Administration in Fort


Washington Talk: Briefing; Wright's New Caution
LEAD: House Speaker Jim Wright arrived at a luncheon at the Hyatt Regency Hotel yesterday to present the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs' third annual W. Averell Harriman Democracy Award to the Argentine President, Raul Alfonsin.


Dollar Ends Day Mixed; Gold Prices Edge Down
LEAD: The dollar closed narrowly mixed in New York yesterday after a day of erratic mood changes among traders in the global foreign exchange market.


C3 INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*C3 INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
24,310,000
25,231,000
Net inc
2,519,000
4,000
Share earns
.25
-
6mo rev
48,773,000
39,985,000
Net inc
4,781,000
522,000
Share earns
.48
.05
The company said year-ago quarter revenue included a non-recurring gain on the sale of assets amounting to $3,811,000.


EUROPEAN STEEL QUOTAS
LEAD: The European Community may end its seven-year system of steel production quotas, exposing the industry to free competition as soon as next year, a commission executive said today.
Karl-Heinz Narjes, the community's industry commissioner, told a news conference that there was ''no legal basis'' for a quota system after this year.


ENERGY VENTURES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENERGY VENTURES INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,959,000
1,181,000
Net inc
b428,000
114,000
Share earns
.19
.04
9mo rev
9,220,000
3,868,000
Net inc
b501,000
361,000
Share earns
.22
.13
b-Includes tax credits of $191,000 and $212,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


AMERICAN PACIFIC MINT reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN PACIFIC MINT
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,963,000
352,000
Net loss
222,000
113,000
9mo rev
3,848,000
1,397,000
Net loss
b309,000
110,000
b-After a gain of $48,000 from forgiveness of debt.


ENERGYNORTH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENERGYNORTH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
64,527,000
60,123,000
Net inc
b2,513,000
1,739,000
Share earns
1.72
1.49
Shares outst
1,458,000
1,169,000
b-Includes a gain of $293,000 from a change in accounting method for revenue.


Dome Approves Amoco's New Bid
LEAD: Dome Petroleum Ltd. said its board accepted a sweetened $5.5 billion (Canadian), or about $4.19 billion (United States), takeover bid by the Amoco Corporation.
The acquisition by Amoco's subsidiary, the Amoco Canada Petroleum Company, had been deadlocked for seven months as creditors withheld approval of the initial offer of $5.1 billion (Canadian), or about $3.8 billion (United


Devils Win on Verbeek's Goal
LEAD: The Flyers drew the Devils into the grabbing, pushing and shoving game that suits their style tonight, not allowing the Devils to get into a rhythm.


Indians Rehire Edwards
LEAD: Doc Edwards, the bullpen coach who took over as manager of the Cleveland Indians after Pat Corrales was let go July 16, was rehired yesterday for the 1988 season by Hank Peters, the newly appointed president of the team who was putting in his first official day of work.
Edwards, 51 years old, who signed a one-year contract, turned in a 30-45 won-lost record as the Indians, considered a pennant contender by some preseason forecasters, turned in the worst record in baseball, 61 victories and 101 defeats.


WALKER ENERGY PARTNERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WALKER ENERGY PARTNERS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,162,000
3,584,000
Net loss
955,000
865,000
9mo rev
7,157,000
13,096,000
Net loss
2,904,000
16,488,000


Metro Datelines; Hasidic Group Wins Suit on Rabbi's Bookks
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has ruled in favor of a Brooklyn-based Hasidic Jewish group in a bitter two-year court battle over ownership of its former rabbi's huge collection of books.


Football Alive and Well at Villanova
LEAD: Ted Aceto, the athletic director at Villanova, knew that a football team would not lack support when he surveyed the crowd at a scrimmage at Villanova Stadium on Nov. 3, 1984.


A Lag Cited In Finishing High School
LEAD: More than half the students who entered New York City public high schools in 1982 failed to graduate on schedule in 1986, according to a revamped dropout report released yesterday by the Board of Education.


Yigal Shiloh, Israeli Archeologist
LEAD: Yigal Shiloh, an Israeli archeologist who led the excavation of the City of David, died of cancer Saturday in Jerusalem, where he lived and worked as a professor at the Hebrew University Institute of Archeology.
He was 50 years old.


SPECTRAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPECTRAN CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
582,455
1,125,298
Net loss
1,154,165
3,389,562
9mo sales
2,080,884
2,495,895
Net loss
3,392,425
6,706,687


Gifts for Gardeners: Fanciful and Useful
LEAD: IT doesn't matter if the gardener on your holiday list fancies house plants on a city sill or alpines in a country retreat.
For the horticulturally inclined, ideas can range from practicalities like a sturdy trowel or a sleek watering can to the fanciful - a leaded-glass terrarium or a fine botanical print.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Tuesday about the photographer for the Metropolitan Opera House misidentified him.
He was James F. Heffernan.


CERBERONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CERBERONICS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,800,000
3,100,000
Net loss
348,150
b56,217
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


TORO COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TORO COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 30
1987
1986
Sales
128,223,000
97,733,000
Net inc
4,255,000
3,501,000
Share earns
.38
.30


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: HE was given three rules to live by when he was 4 years old.
Pick up your toys.
Clean up your room.
Don't talk with your mouth full.
Apparently he felt that one out of three was good enough.
His speech was clear, but his room was a mess and his toys followed the law of entropy and were scattered all over the house.


ROWLEY-SCHER REPROGRAPHCS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROWLEY-SCHER REPROGRAPHCS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,196,548
5,224,660
Net inc
73,168
51,196
Share earns
.04
.03
6mo sales
11,605,431
9,457,798
Net inc
363,030
110,445
Share earns
.20
.06


CRAFT WORLD INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRAFT WORLD INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,005,972
10,044,294
Net inc
b249,941
c712,736
Share earns
.13
.53
9mo sales
35,126,213
26,038,508
Net inc
b566,593
c1,742,232
Share earns
.31
1.34


SAVOY INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAVOY INDUSTRIES INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
24,533,000
17,307,000
Net loss
1,409,000
923,000
9mo sales
62,170,000
39,761,000
Net loss
b4,366,000
c1,880,000
b-Includes a gain of $1,611,000 on security conversion.


Washington Talk: Deficit Reduction; Automatic Cuts: What They'll Affect
LEAD: If White House and Congressional negotiators fail to reach a budget compromise by the Friday deadline, a series of spending cuts are scheduled to take effect that will indiscriminately affect almost everything from AIDS research and the anti-missile program to the number of weather forecasters in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric


FRANKLIN TELECOMMUNICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRANKLIN TELECOMMUNICAIONS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,939,000
4,390,000
Net inc
76,000
b118,000
b-Net loss


DESIGN TO HONOR SPACE PIONEERS
LEAD: IN 1980, the National Capital Commission in Washington staged a competition for the design of a Vietnam War monument.
Maya Lin, then a student at Yale University, won with a simple V-shaped form with the names of American casualties inscribed on its marble walls.
It was a controversial design, but today, as thousands visit the monument every week, few doubt its success.


LATVIAN PROTEST REPORTED CURBED
LEAD: A planned Latvian nationalist demonstration in Riga, the capital of the Baltic republic, never got started as hundreds of policemen and civilian militiamen, standing shoulder to shoulder, cordoned off the central square today, according to reports from Riga.


MICRO DISPLAY SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICRO DISPLAY SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,608,426
1,072,267
Net loss
27,129
b150,870
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
6,712,253
5,395,148
b-Net income


WESTWOOD GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTWOOD GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,979,000
7,074,000
Net inc
252,000
190,000
Share earns
.17
.17
9mo rev
39,300,000
18,447,000
Net inc
1,774,000
1,552,000
Share earns
1.16
1.42
Shares outst
1,525,000
1,094,000


WENDT-BRISTOL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WENDT-BRISTOL CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,471,243
5,976,712
Net inc
193,339
112,893
Share earns
.17
.16
Shares outst
1,112,004
705,142
6mo rev
12,183,688
11,772,306
Net inc
320,480
244,768
Share earns
.29
.35
Shares outst
1,111,078
705,142


'No' to Verity From Japan
LEAD: The Government has decided to bar foreign construction companies from participating in Japanese public works projects, according to reports published today.


Umpire Is Killed In Auto Mishap
LEAD: Dick Stello, a National League umpire since 1968, was crushed to death today when the two cars he was standing between were hit by another car, the Florida Highway Patrol said.


REVISIONIST LOOK AT PRAIRIE ARCHITECT
LEAD: MUCH of what is known about Frank Lloyd Wright comes from the architect himself.
But the master, who wrote his autobiography in 1932 and revised it in 1943, was a source of misinformation.


PINNACLE PETE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PINNACLE PETE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
260,727
204,893
Net loss
160,153
444,483
9mo rev
749,488
842,102
Net loss
548,127
1,192,803


U.S. and Israel at Odds on Arab's Ouster
LEAD: Despite United States objections, Israel is expelling a Palestinian-American who has advocated nonviolent resistance to the Israeli occupation of the West Bank.


Garden Is to Be Replanted To '15 Plan
LEAD: AFTER almost a year of deliberation the city's Art Commission has approved a planting plan for the reconstruction of the rose garden at the New York Botanical Garden.


HEI INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEI INC (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,731,300
1,384,201
Net inc
b180,710
c1,935,357
Share earns
.13
-
Yr sales
6,430,643
7,174,524
Net inc
b25,321
c2,922,420
Share earns
.02
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $8,000 for both the quarter and year.


Warfare in Queens G.O.P. Reported Crippling Its Leadership
LEAD: The Queens Republican organization, once a bellwether in statewide elections, is so torn by dissension that its leadership has been unable to function, politicians say.


Rock Star Cleared of Assault
LEAD: A grand jury today cleared the rock star David Bowie of sexual assault charges brought by a woman who said he attacked her in a hotel room after a concert in Dallas.
The 30-year-old woman, from surburban University Park, told the police that Mr.
Bowie assaulted her at The Mansion Hotel Oct. 9 after a concert at Reunion Arena.


UNIVERSITY GENETICS reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSITY GENETICS
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
451,956
621,622
Net loss
2,150,736
531,417
Yr rev
4,355,312
1,890,720
Net loss
3,124,278
1,829,620


Brazil Plans A Debt Swap
LEAD: Brazil has disclosed a plan that would allow foreign creditors, including many big United States banks, to convert as much as $1.5 billion a year of the nation's debt into equity investments.


SOUTHWEST REALTY LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWEST REALTY LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,037,000
3,465,000
Net loss
b1,440,000
528,000
9mo rev
9,220,000
10,846,000
Net loss
b3,743,000
1,105,000
b-Includes a loss of $418,000 and $725,000 from the sale of a note receivable for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


MESTEK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MESTEK INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
34,295,000
23,152,000
Net inc
1,412,000
2,201,000
Share earns
.15
.25
Shares outst
9,378,000
8,732,000
9mo rev
93,831,000
55,319,000
Net inc
4,137,000
3,677,000
Share earns
.43
.46
Shares outst
9,386,000
7,943,000


Argentina Loan Plans
LEAD: As expected, Argentina has sent to the International Monetary Fund a list of economic adjustments it has designed to insure continued availability of a $1.4 billion I.M.F. loan.
Terms of the loan, originally agreed upon in February, were adjusted in July.
Since then, Argentina's deficit has mushroomed and inflation has soared, requiring the country to undertake additional economic adjustments to remain on favorable terms with the I.M.F.


House Panel Clears Bill On Family Leave Policy
LEAD: Legislation requiring large companies to allow their employees to take unpaid family or medical leave and return to their jobs has cleared a Congressional committee but has yet to achieve broad bipartisan support.


Overriding Need for Philippine Land Reform
LEAD: To the Editor:


Smokers Hide and Drag Harder As Society Makes Them Outcasts
LEAD: Andrea Green, a marketing and promotion consultant for banks, was on the telephone with a man who helps companies develop programs for employees who want to quit smoking.
She lit a cigarette, quietly, she thought.
But she was not quiet enough.


K-V PHARMACEUTICAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*K-V PHARMACEUTICAL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,790,386
5,335,544
Net inc
321,177
331,636
Share earns
.03
.07
Shares outst
5,021,698
4,991,666
6mo sales
13,246,485
11,576,979
Net inc
625,538
555,842
Share earns
.09
.11
Shares outst
5,019,169
4,964,734


MERRIMAC INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERRIMAC INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 10
1987
1986
Sales
4,784,061
4,436,684
Net inc
376,637
61,867
Share earns
.23
.04
40wk sales
12,100,513
11,828,619
Net inc
400,128
460,669
Share earns
.25
.29


Cocaine Jury Is Told Defendant Viewed Hitler as His Hero
LEAD: A former cellmate of Carlos LehderRivas today described a drug deal they took part in and testified that the cocaine defendant's heroes were John Lennon, Adolf Hitler and Che Guevara.


Walsh Sees Little Effect Of Report on His Inquiry
LEAD: The special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair said today that his investigation had ''its own momentum now'' and would not be significantly affected by the reports from Congressional committees that investigated the affair.


Figure 22-2: Enterprise Income
LEAD: Chart from committee report shows income from the Enterprise, a covert organization run by Richard V. Secord, a retired Air Force general, and Albert Hakim, Secord's business partner.
Iran Arms Sales
$31.29 million
65.2%
Arms Sales to Contras (Colero)
$11.35 million
23.7%
Contra Donations
$3.86 million
8.1%
Arms Sales to Central Intelligence Agency
$1.2 million
2.5%
Interest and Other Income
$0.26 million
0.5%


O'NEILL UNDERGOES CANCER SURGERY
LEAD: Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the former Speaker of the House, underwent a 6 1/2-hour operation for removal of a bowel cancer today.


CHEEKS HELPS 76ERS END 3-LOSS STREAK
LEAD: Maurice Cheeks scored 11 of his 25 points in the fourth quarter tonight to help the Philadelphia 76ers break a three-game losing streak with a 113-109 victory over the Detroit Pistons.


Mystery Death At L.I. Hospital Torments Son
LEAD: When Sam Falabella buried his mother, Nancy, at Calvary Cemetery in Woodside, Queens, last month, he thought he had put her to rest.


Peso Hit By Panic In Mexico
LEAD: The Bank of Mexico halted its efforts today to support the value of the peso against the dollar on the open market here, setting off a panic that sent the peso's value down as much as 59 percent.


CARE ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARE ENTERPRISES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
63,660,000
67,771,000
Net loss
b14,592,000
c1,086,000
9mo rev
193,826,000
197,131,000
Net loss
13,017,000
c772,000
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $744,000.


DOMINION SECURITIES reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOMINION SECURITIES
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
102,100,000
82,200,000
Net loss
19,000,000
b4,300,000
Share earns
-
.19
Yr rev
491,700,000
425,600,000
Net inc
17,583,000
36,702,000
Share earns
.79
2.16


Obstetrician in Queens Shot to Death in Office
LEAD: An obstetrician was shot and killed yesterday by a well-dressed man who walked into his Queens office, the police said.


TELEBYTE TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELEBYTE TECHNOLOGY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,083,446
1,107,309
Net inc
25,257
41,708
Share earns
.01
.02
9mo sales
2,900,793
2,970,651
Net loss
129,627
92,523


SENATE APPROVES WATER PROJECTS
LEAD: The Senate voted today to spend $4.26 billion on Federal water projects this fiscal year, including $13.5 million for a dam repair that the Reagan Administration says could set a costly precedent.


Nomura No. 1 in Japan
LEAD: The Nomura Securities Company, Japan's largest brokerage firm, has surpassed the Toyota Motor Corporation as the nation's most profitable company, a Nomura official said today.
Nomura's pretax earnings in its fiscal year ended Sept. 30 rose 26.8 percent, to 493.8 billion yen, or $3.6 billion, topping Toyota's 488.3 billion yen, or $3.56 billion.


Metro Datelines; U.S. Jury Indicts Man In Youth-Sex Case
LEAD: A bus company manager was indicted yesterday on Federal charges of unlawfully transporting two young girls to New Jersey to engage in prostitution, the authorities said.


Key Sections of Document: The Making of a Political Crisis
LEAD: Following are key sections of the majority report, issued today, of the Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair:  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  SUMMARY OF THE FACTS  Nicaragua


AMERICAN REAL ESTATE PARTERS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN REAL ESTATE PARTERS LP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
14,431,284
14,787,805
Net inc
6,817,692
6,737,349
Share earns
.45
-
9mo rev
43,431,755
44,686,986
Net inc
20,451,060
21,332,352
Share earns
1.35
-


The Laws, Unfaithfully Executed
LEAD: The Iran-contra committees charge Ronald Reagan with the second worst offense for a President.
They conclude that he did not fulfill his constitutional oath ''to take care that the laws be faithfully executed.'' The judgment by the committees' Democrats and three Republicans could have been more harsh, but only if they judged that the President knew about the illegalities committed by trusted subordinates or, like Richard


BERKSHIRE GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BERKSHIRE GAS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,523,000
4,348,000
Net loss
881,000
439,000


REGAL INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REGAL INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,438,000
960,000
Net loss
448,000
b3,494,000
9mo rev
6,210,000
3,821,000
Net loss
875,000
4,964,000
b-Includes a writedown of $1,243,000 on non-current assets.


Encor Rejects Bid
LEAD: The Encor Energy Corporation said its board rejected a $980 million Canadian, or $742 million, bid from Transcanada PipeLines Ltd.
Encor, which is 42 percent owned by Dome Petroleum Ltd., called the offer ''inadequate from a financial point of view.'' An Encor director abstained from the vote because of a potential conflict of interest, the company said, but all of its other directors, including those representing Dome, were unanimous.


RUSSIANS GIVE U.S. MORE MISSILE DATA
LEAD: The Soviet Union gave the United States some detailed data today about the Russians' missile force as American and Soviet negotiators pressed to complete the treaty banning medium- and shorter-range missiles.


MARKITSTAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARKITSTAR INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,286,768
3,838,684
Net loss
1,272,691
b891,934
Share earns
-
.08
9mo rev
4,451,792
4,424,750
Net loss
1,215,661
b300,405
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


In Cradle of AIDS Theory, a Defensive Africa Sees a Disguise for Racism
LEAD: When Nigeria's first national AIDS conference opened last month, delegates were greeted with an accusation that is increasingly heard across Africa.


SEMTECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEMTECH CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,969,000
2,858,000
Net inc
b305,000
41,000
Share earns
.11
.02
9mo rev
11,255,000
8,787,000
Net inc
b693,000
5,000
Share earns
.26
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $110,000 and $266,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Opera: Charpentier's 'Acteon' by Canadian Troupe
LEAD: IN classical times, apparently, the criminal got only one chance.
No probation.
No work release program.
No time off under bail to write his best-selling confessional book.
Acteon, for the crime of spying on the chaste goddess of the hunt, Diana, while she bathed, was immediately turned into a stag and devoured by his own hounds.


LA-Z-BOY CHAIR CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LA-Z-BOY CHAIR CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 24
1987
1986
Sales
121,466,000
109,578,000
Net inc
7,363,000
6,852,000
Share earns
.40
.37
6mo sales
214,947,000
191,001,000
Net inc
10,700,000
10,205,000
Share earns
.58
.56


FARMSTEAD TELEPHONE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FARMSTEAD TELEPHONE GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
912,538
381,431
Net loss
70,665
95,005
9mo rev
2,211,067
1,246,979
Net loss
303,494
134,719


Gullickson Negotiates
LEAD: The Yankees have begun preliminary talks with Doug Baldwin, the agent for Bill Gullickson, the right-hander who had a 4-2 record with a 4.88 earned run average in eight starts after he was acquired in a late-season trade with Cincinnati.
Baldwin said that he had spoken with Bob Quinn, the Yankees' vice president for baseball administration, although terms of a new contract were not discussed.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''Fundamental processes of governance were disregarded and the rule of law was subverted.
If the President did not know what his national security advisers were doing, he should have.''  The Iran-contra report. [ A1:6. ]


Jacques Anquetil; Former Cyclist, 53
LEAD: Jacques Anquetil, a five-time winner of the Tour de France bicycling race, died of stomach cancer today in a Rouen hospital, his doctors said.
He was 53 years old.


A Designer In Untrodden Byways
LEAD: ''THERE'S something seductive about the Yellow Pages,'' said Richard Saul Wurman, the New York graphic designer, cartographer, architect and guidebook guru. ''They're so pervasive.
They're like a street curb.
You can look at them your whole life and never really see them.''


The Intricacies of African Strip Weaving
LEAD: Strip weaving, one of West Africa's oldest art forms, is the subject of a new exhibition here at the National Museum of African Art.


Rangers Back on Right Track
LEAD: The Rangers, having finally accomplished what had been an impossibility for the last few weeks, a single victory, are now being encouraged to create a winning streak to make up for the ground they lost.


PARKWAY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARKWAY CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
956,000
2,541,000
Net inc
544,000
1,528,000
Share earns
.33
.91


Poll Finds Cuomo Preferred By Democrats in California
LEAD: California Democrats prefer Governor Cuomo of New York to any of the declared candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination, a new California Poll says.


ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PARTERS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PARTERS LP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,415,000
3,935,000
Net inc
2,185,000
b1,117,000
Share earns
.14
-
9mo rev
34,930,000
14,439,000
Net inc
6,480,000
b46,227,000
Share earns
.46
-


Sports of The Times; Tim Brown's Heisman Trophy
LEAD: AS part of its 100th anniversary celebration early next year, Notre Dame intends to display each of the Heisman trophies that its football players have won.
Asked to return his trophy for the exhibit, Paul Hornung preferred to bring it to the campus himself rather than risk shipping it.
So not long ago the 1956 winner was walking through the South Bend, Ind., airport, carrying the bronzed statue of a running back as if it were a football.


DOUGLAS COMPUTER INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOUGLAS COMPUTER INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
906,953
827,203
Net inc
1,494
24,999
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
3,105,566
2,133,502
Net inc
13,021
118,196
Share earns
-
.05
The company said the latest quarter results reflect a gain of $40,653, after expenses, from litigation successfully brought against Lincoln Securities.


VR BUSINESS BROKERS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VR BUSINESS BROKERS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
296,340
1,390,642
Net loss
943,549
24,337
9mo rev
1,693,005
3,768,738
Net loss
1,460,617
451,385


New Hampshire Poll Shows Bush Leading Dole, 40-27%
LEAD: Vice President Bush leads Senator Bob Dole of Kansas among New Hampshire voters in the race for the Republican Presidential nomination, a poll indicates.


TWO BOOKS WILL BE SOLD
LEAD: At least two versions of the Iran-contra committees' report will be available to the public.


FAY'S DRUG CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAY'S DRUG CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
124,083,000
109,406,000
Net inc
912,000
706,000
Share earns
.07
.05
Shares outst
13,158,091
14,130,900
9mo rev
359,141,000
325,242,000
Net inc
2,208,000
709,000
Share earns
.17
.05
Shares outst
13,156,329
14,133,845


Oil Imports a Problem Again
LEAD: The stubbornly high trade deficits in recent months are making the United States rediscover an old nemesis: oil imports.


THE MINORITY REPORT
LEAD: Excerpts from the introductory chapter of the minority report of the Congressional Iran-contra committees were published Tuesday in The New York Times.
The document was made available to The Times before its formal release.


AMERICAN MEDICAL ALERT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MEDICAL ALERT
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
341,595
258,055
Net inc
6,903
b142,479
9mo sales
1,057,274
729,646
Net loss
52,913
386,783
b-Net loss


Talking Deals; Joint Ventures In Soviet Union
LEAD: PICTURE the sights of Moscow: the Kremlin, Red Square, Lenin's Tomb.
And the Pizza Hut.


Rock: Sting in Preview of World Tour
LEAD: STING offered New Yorkers a preview of his world tour on Sunday and Monday at the Ritz, introducing the seven-member backup band that will play at an arena in Rio de Janeiro this weekend. ''We might make some mistakes, we might get it wrong,'' he told the $20-a-ticket audience Monday, ''but what the hell.


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (CHATTAOOGA) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (CHATTAOOGA)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,675,000
1,302,000
Share earns
.59
-
Year-ago share earnings are not available; the company converted to a stock concern Dec. 18.


OCCUPATIONAL MEDICAL CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OCCUPATIONAL MEDICAL CORP OF AMERICA
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,373,398
1,653,675
Net loss
285,000
b178,695
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income


DENIABILITY OVER ACCOUNTABILITY
LEAD: The committees described what they called a ''lack of accountability'' at the heart of the Iran-contra affair.


ZAYRE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZAYRE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,601,688,000
1,316,424,000
Net inc
21,136,000
22,876,000
Share earns
.36
.38
9mo sales
4,300,408,000
3,573,630,000
Net inc
b120,380,000
c45,182,000
Share earns
2.03
.76


U.S. Study Of Plunge Under Way
LEAD: The panel appointed by President Reagan to investigate the causes of last month's stock market collapse has begun an extensive round of interviews but is unlikely to finish its work before January, said Nicholas F. Brady, the panel's head and chairman of Dillon, Read &amp; Company.


HEMODYNAMICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEMODYNAMICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,673,577
123,314
Net inc
b792,832
cd70,221
Share earns
.59
-
9mo sales
3,239,348
853,668
Net inc
b1,309,631
d31,404
Share earns
1.02
.05
b-Includes tax credits of $27,000 and $220,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Carbide and India Strive for Bhopal Fund Accord
LEAD: The Union Carbide Corporation and the Government of India told a court here today that they had not yet agreed on how much to pay the victims of the 1984 gas leak tragedy.


Calendar: Canal Tour and Decorations
LEAD:  Gowanus Canal Tour


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: COMMON door problems -rubbing, binding or difficulty in closing - are usually easy to repair.
But success depends on identifying their source, and often this is tricky.


JAMES RIVER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JAMES RIVER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 25
1987
1986
Sales
1,286,152,000
1,160,378,000
Net inc
53,429,000
36,119,000
Share earns
.61
.43
6mo sales
2,465,368,000
2,230,050,000
Net inc
100,741,000
82,356,000
Share earns
1.16
1.01


Always With Us
LEAD: Oct. 19, Black Monday on Wall Street, produced a lot of talk, if not much action, about fixing what's wrong with the economy.
Too little is being said or heard, however, about the nation's most egregious economic problems - the persistence of so much poverty amid so much wealth, and the declining standard of living for the middle class.


SATELLITE MUSIC NETWORK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SATELLITE MUSIC NETWORK INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,767,170
4,356,105
Net loss
167,578
b265,522
Share earns
-
.03
9mo rev
10,986,423
12,097,224
Net loss
655,737
b753,468
Share earns
-
.08


Yale, Harvard Build-Up Grows
LEAD: Mike Stewart read in the Boston newspapers how the Harvard players were so excited about playing Yale for the Ivy League championship that they wanted to get on the bus, come down and play the game right away.
They couldn't wait until Saturday.


U.S. Aides Say Panama General Proposed Sabotage in Nicaragua
LEAD: Panama's military leader offered to undertake sabotage and possibly assassinations in Nicaragua for the Reagan Administration, Government officials said today, explaining a veiled allusion to the matter in the Iran-contra report.


Chrysler Raises Some 1988 Prices
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said it had raised the prices of its 1988 domestic car models an average of 1 percent over those of its comparably equipped 1987 models.
But prices were cut on the Dodge Daytona and Aries, the Plymouth Reliant and the Chrysler LeBaron coupe.
The price of its New Yorker model rose by more than $2,000, to $17,416.


QUAREX INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUAREX INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 2
1987
1986
Sales
36,419,365
40,662,503
Net inc
389,982
171,864
Share earns
.20
.09
9mo sales
110,574,000
108,291,209
Net inc
1,187,542
645,247
Share earns
.60
.343
Shares outst
1,965,409
1,890,537


CADEMA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CADEMA CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
302,401
249,912
Net loss
81,453
170,600
9mo rev
916,365
711,221
Net loss
171,905
205,284


Cardinal Seeks to Clarify Remarks About Jews
LEAD: The Vatican office of Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger sought late today to clarify a controversial statement the Cardinal made about dialogue with Jews, according to a Roman Catholic interfaith offical here.


Heart Surgery for Betty Ford
LEAD: Betty Ford will undergo coronary artery bypass surgery at Eisenhower Medical Center on Friday.
A spokeswoman, Ann Cullen, said the decision to operate on the former First Lady was not prompted by an emergency but was ''a preventive measure.'' Mrs.
Ford, who is 69 years old, underwent surgery on a carotid artery at the medical center on July 24.


STUDY DETAILS RISK TO WOMEN SMOKERS
LEAD: Women who smoke as few as one to four cigarettes a day increase their risk of heart attack two to three times, according to a major study released today.


Racketeering Suit Filed Against PTL Ministry
LEAD: Major contributors to PTL television ministry filed a $758 million racketeering and fraud suit Tuesday against Jim Bakker and several associates, alleging widespread fraud in obtaining donations.


Lima's 16 Papers Are Soldiers in Political Wars
LEAD: Several daily newspapers use the old standbys of sex and violence to entice readers toward their editorials.
Others scream out their political messages in headlines that decorate corner newsstands.
One newspaper boasts its conservatism with a front page heavy with sobriety.


CHARTER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHARTER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
275,813,000
249,121,000
Net inc
b6,651,000
c4,989,000
Share earns
.14
.10
Shares outst
47,416,000
17,273,000
9mo rev
770,841,000
784,301,000
Net inc
b12,562,000
c34,405,000
Share earns
.26
1.42


Eased Rules for Athletes Upset Many at Columbia
LEAD: Columbia University students expressed indignation and disappointment yesterday over reports that since 1985 the college has admitted 11 football players who did not meet the minimum academic requirements of the Ivy League.


Russian Immigrant Dies Gangland-Style In Car in Brooklyn
LEAD: A Russian immigrant on probation for drug and weapons convictions was shot to death gangland style early yesterday in a car in the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn, the police said.


Smith Barney Reports Loss
LEAD: Smith Barney Inc., the big securities firm owned by the Primerica Corporation, had a net loss of $43 million in October, caused primarily by its risk arbitrage activities.


Metro Datelines; A Colon Problem For Gov. O'Neill
LEAD: Doctors treating Gov.
William A. O'Neill said yesterday that they had diagnosed diverticulitis, an inflammation and infection of small pockets of the colon, as the probable cause of the high fever that hospitalized him on Sunday.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: TWICE AS LESS.
Black English and the Performance of Black Students in Mathematics and Science.
By Eleanor Wilson Orr. 240 pages.
Norton. $15.95.


Washington Talk: Budget Politics; How to Win Elections: Don't Cut the Deficits
LEAD: The politicians' tortuous path to deficit reduction in the last three weeks reflects an ambiguous logic among their constituents: they abhor deficits but don't want to do what's necessary to reduce them.


A Suspect in 2 Murders Is Killed by a Detective
LEAD: A 22-year-old man wanted in connection with two Bronx murders last December was shot to death yesterday afternoon during a struggle with two detectives.


Whalers Triumph
LEAD: Ron Francis registered his sixth career hat trick tonight as the Hartford Whalers beat the Buffalo Sabres, 9-1, to end a six-game streak without a victory.


HEALTHWAYS SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTHWAYS SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,031,063
12,034,767
Net loss
975,961
b27,200
b-After an $186,912 income tax benefit.


Metro Datelines; Winner of Lottery Is Charged in Thefts
LEAD: A telephone repairman who won $7.2 million in the Connecticut lottery in August has been charged with possessing stolen goods from a burglary ring that robbed homes in the Hartford suburbs, the police said yesterday.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on brunches and a related picture caption in Weekend last Friday misidentified a group performing at the Barking Fish restaurant.
It was the Big Mamou, not Loup Garou.


PRICE PUT AT $900 MILLION
LEAD: Kuwait said today that it owns a 10 percent stake in the British Petroleum Company, Britain's largest corporation and the world's third-biggest oil company.


New Yorkers Urge Plan for Museum
LEAD: In a rare and strong expression of unanimity, New York State and city officials today argued in favor of a plan to keep the Museum of the American Indian in New York while pledging to lend its holdings liberally to other museums, in Washington and around the country.


TOYS 'R' US CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOYS 'R' US CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
600,167,000
471,728,000
Net inc
18,432,000
12,755,000
Share earns
.14
.10
9mo sales
1,590,754,000
1,266,126,000
Net inc
49,606,000
36,157,000
Share earns
.38
.28


Back on Trial
LEAD: Denny McLain, major-league baseball's last 30-game winner, will be tried for a third time on Federal charges of cocaine trafficking and loan sharking, according to a spokesman for the United States Attorney's office in Tampa, Fla.
United States District Judge Elizabeth Kovachevich, who was cited for judicial error in an August ruling that overturned the former Detroit Tiger pitcher's 1985 conviction, will preside at the Jan.


Topics of The Times; Fashion Footnote
LEAD: The phrase ''de rigueur'' no longer applies to clothing styles - that's clear to anyone watching the eclectic parade on any city street corner, at any downtown movie house, at any urban cocktail party.
But in a small town in southern New England, the tyranny of fashion remains alive and well.


Record Federal Bailout For Texas Savings Unit
LEAD: Federal regulators pledged $1.3 billion today to resolve the difficulties of the Vernon Savings and Loan Association in Dallas, the largest such Government bailout of a savings institution.


Film: 'Boy From Calabria'
LEAD: LUIGI COMENCINI'S ''Boy From Calabria,'' opening today at the Carnegie Screening Room, is an inoffensively sentimental Italian movie about a poor peasant boy's efforts to become a marathon runner, much to the horror of his hard-pressed father.


Wherehouse Bid
LEAD: Shamrock Holdings Inc. said it planned a hostile tender offer of $12 a share, or $91.9 million, for the interest it does not already own in Wherehouse Entertainment Inc.
In addition, Shamrock, based in Burbank, Calif., sued Wherehouse in a state court over the company's anti-takeover plan.
Wherehouse, one of the nation's largest video, record and computer software chains, rejected an unsolicited $14.25-a-share bid from Shamrock last month.


1931 Bugatti Fetches Record Price in London
LEAD: A 1931 Bugatti 41 Royale, owned originally by the Bugatti family, was sold yesterday for $9.8 million, a record at auction for an automobile.
The buyer at the Christie's sale, held at London's Royal Albert Hall, was Nicholas Harley, a British vintage-car dealer.


Campus Rally for Yeltsin, a Rare Sight
LEAD: Several hundred students gathered Tuesday at Moscow State University in an unusual expression of public concern over the Soviet hierarchy's ouster of the popular Moscow Communist Party chief, according to a participant.


Art: Gothic Sculpture of Giovanni Pisano at Met
LEAD: ''GIOVANNI PISANO IN GENOA'' is a slightly smaller version of a show that took place this spring in Genoa.
It brings together the recently restored marble fragments of the last two works by Giovanni Pisano, the great Gothic sculptor who had never before had an exhibition in the United States.
There are around 20 works, some by Pisano's contemporaries and students.


Sports People; Paiement Demoted
LEAD: Wilf Paiement, who has not played in the minor leagues since 1974, was assigned yesterday to the Muskegon Lumberjacks of the International Hockey League by the Piitsburgh Penguins.


Report Doubles the Estimate Of U.S. Radiation Exposure
LEAD: New calculations of the average amount of radiation an American is exposed to in a year have doubled the estimate.
For the first time, the calculations include the effects of radon gas seeping into houses.


CONTRAS SPURNING BID FOR CEASE-FIRE
LEAD: Senior contra officials say that they reject a recent Sandinista cease-fire proposal and that they will probably make a counterproposal to an intermediary for the Nicaraguan Government sometime next week.


About Real Estate; A 20's Feature Returns: The Servants' Quarters
LEAD: Around the turn of the century, in a period of opulence somewhat similar to today's, it became customary for builders to include servants' quarters in middle-class houses in the growing industrial cities of the Northeast.
That practice continued until the Depression, when homes and living styles started to grow simpler.


Senate Panel Backs Burnley
LEAD: The Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee today approved the nomination of James H. Burnley 4th as Transportation Secretary and sent it to the full Senate for confirmation.
The committee also approved Mary Ann Dawson, a member of the Federal Communications Commission, to replace Mr.


Perfect 11-0 Ending For Lockbaum Era
LEAD: Gordie Lockbaum finished an incredible career, and Holy Cross finished its first unbeaten season since 1918 tonight.


43.77 Drop Sends Dow Below 1,900
LEAD: Stocks continued their seesaw course yesterday, falling broadly amid worries that a deficit-reduction plan would not be reached.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which rose nearly 17 points on Wednesday, plunged 43.77 points, or 2.26 percent, to close below 1,900.


More Killings Laid to Police In Argentina
LEAD: What the judicial authorities describe as a kidnapping-for-ransom network within the Argentine federal police force has come to light with the discovery in recent days of the bodies of three missing businessmen.


Judge Removes a Juror Holding Out for Acquittal
LEAD: An 11-member jury convicted six defendants on drug charges yesterday shortly after a Federal judge, in an unusual action, removed the lone juror who had been holding out for acquittal.


Nurse in L.I. Deaths Indicted on 3 Assault Counts
LEAD: A Suffolk County grand jury indicted a 25-year-old nurse today on three counts of assault, and the authorities exhumed two bodies in what could become a multiple-homicide case against the nurse, Richard Angelo.


Monk and McFerrin Harmonize in Brooklyn
LEAD: ''LAST spring I was feeling very strongly that I wanted to try something I'd never done before,'' Meredith Monk recalled the other day. ''So I called Bobby McFerrin and asked him if he wanted to do some singing together.
We just started singing, and working out the best way to proceed.
He likes to improvise from zero, whereas I like to have more of a structure.


A Reporter Brings Glasnost to Connecticut
LEAD: After telling the Soviet television reporter what they knew about her country - it is part of both Europe and Asia and Moscow is its capital -the geography class at a school in the rural town of Litchfield had some questions.


College Drug Test Barred
LEAD: A Superior Court judge, declaring a National Collegiate Athletic Association drug-testing unconstitutional, today barred the N.C.A.A. from testing Stanford athletes for drugs, with the exception of the men's basketball and football teams, where limited testing, probably for cocaine and steroids, will be permitted.


Duro-Test Refusal
LEAD: The board of the Duro-Test Corporation said it had rejected a tender offer of $14 a share, or $66 million, from a partnership led by William P. Lyons, a Yale University professor, and said it was considering a sale of the company to a third party or in a leveraged buyout.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Duro-Test said it had provided information about the company to others who had expressed an interest in the light bulb manufacturer, based in North Bergen, N.J.


President Gets Compromise Military Measure
LEAD: The Senate today approved legislation establishing military programs, at a cost of up to $296 billion, that restricts President Reagan's space-based anti-missile program and halts missile deployments that exceed a 1979 treaty limiting strategic arms.


Bid for Tesoro
LEAD: The Tesoro Petroleum Corporation, already the object of overtures from a Hong Kong oil-trading concern, said it had received an unsolicited $15-a-share takeover offer from Pentane Partners L.P., a New York investment group.
The offer from Pentane, which owns 9.7 percent of Tesoro's stock, values Tesoro at $206 million.


Stage: 'House Arrest'
LEAD: LET writers of other epochs contemplate the myths of antiquity or the deaths of kings as they struggle with the fine points of existence.
For American playwrights of a certain generation, ''I Love Lucy'' is a deeper commentary on the family constellation than ''Oedipus''; ''Wheel of Fortune'' says more about democracy's drift than ''Leaves of Grass.


Award and Job Set By Magazine Publishers
LEAD: The Magazine Publishers of America yesterday heralded the names of the 1987 Publisher of the Year and of the group's new executive vice president/ marketing development.


Canada Accord On Drug Bill
LEAD: After an impasse of several months, the Canadian Government today enacted into law a measure sought by the United States that will give 10 years' patent protection to drug manufacturers marketing their products in Canada.


L.I. Man Found Slain Near Queens Highway
LEAD: A Long Island man was shot to death gangland style early yesterday in Bayside, Queens, and the police said he might have been an associate in the Colombo organized-crime family.


G.O.P. Leaders Oppose Address By Gorbachev
LEAD: Republican Congressional leaders today strongly criticized a proposal to invite Mikhail S. Gorbachev to address a joint meeting of Congress.


Bundesbank's Rate Silence
LEAD: The Bundesbank, West Germany's central bank, made no announcement today about its short-term interest rates after a meeting of its central committee.
Many economists had predicted that the bank would announce a reduction today.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Weinberger Postscript
LEAD: Amid the military pageantry of the farewell ceremony for Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger on Tuesday came a poignant reminder of military reality and a footnote to recent history.


Jewish Anger With Vatican Brings Postponement of Talks
LEAD: A Catholic-Jewish conference scheduled to be held here next month to explore the role of the Roman Catholic Church in Europe during the Nazi Holocaust has been indefinitely postponed at the request of Jewish leaders who are angry about recent Vatican actions.


N.B.A.-TBS Extension
LEAD: The National Basketball Association and the Turner Broadcasting System have reached a two-year contract extension granting TBS exclusive national cable rights to games through the 1989-90 season for $50 million.
The fee is double that of the current contract, which expires at the conclusion of the present season.


Film: 'Honeymoon,' Frenchwoman in Manhattan
LEAD: ''HONEYMOON'' was made in English, but it seems to have been designed as a cautionary tale for European audiences, a warning about hellish New York.
It stars Nathalie Baye, and from the first shots of Miss Baye's trim little high-heeled legs making their way through ruffian-filled Manhattan, it's clear that this gentle


New York Bonds Upgraded Despite Worries on Economy
LEAD: New York City's bond rating was raised yesterday to its highest level since 1975, despite concerns that recent declines in stock prices and employment at securities concerns would weaken the local economy and strain the city's financial condition.


United Nations Journal; On World Stage, a Wake, and a Villain in the Wings
LEAD: This year's General Assembly session opened on an upbeat note, with a Security Council peace initiative in the Persian Gulf and signs that the United Nations was shaking off its reputation as a hot air machine, grinding out endless resolutions that no one reads, much less acts on.


New Compound Seen as Weapon Against Tumors
LEAD: Researchers at the National Institutes of Health said today that an amino acid compound had proved in laboratory tests to be a ''very, very promising'' drug for the treatment of tumors.


Verity Urges Shift by Japan
LEAD: United States Commerce Secretary C. William Verity Jr. accused Japan of seeking to destroy foreign industries in the past with floods of exports and said the practice must be stopped, Japanese officials said today.


SENATE UNIT VOTES TO END PANAMA AID
LEAD: The Senate Foreign Relations Committee, increasing American pressure on Panama's military leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, voted unanimously today to cut off all but humanitarian aid to Panama until civilian rule is restored.


Detective Cites an Admission Of Beating in Howard Beach
LEAD: A defendant in the Howard Beach murder and assault trial admitted the day after the incident that he and two other white teen-agers beat one of three black men involved in the case, a detective testified yesterday.


Film: 'Jean Renoir'
LEAD: ''Jean Renoir, the Boss'' was shown as part of the 1985 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 5, 1985.
The film opens today at the Bleecker Street Cinema.


U.S. Doctor Challenged on Brazil Radiation Aid
LEAD: An American physician's assertion that he led an international medical team treating victims of a recent radiation accident here has been challenged by American diplomats and Brazilian doctors and officials.


Capital Gains Taxes: the Long and Short of It
LEAD: To the Editor:


Christopher Wilmarth, 44, Dies; Sculptor Is an Apparent Suicide
LEAD: Christopher Wilmarth, a critically acclaimed sculptor whose works are on permanent display at many of the nation's best-known museums, apparently hanged himself yesterday in his studio-home in Brooklyn, the police said.
He was 44 years old.


Villa-Lobos Concert
LEAD: The Villa-Lobos Music Society will present an all Villa-Lobos concert, including several premieres, tonight at 8 o'clock in Cami Hall (165 West 57th Street).
Tickets are $10.
Information: 427-5103.


Bridge: Book by Australian Expert Is Filled With Good Advice
LEAD: If an intermediate player is considering buying a bridge book, he is entitled to ask, ''How much will it tell me that I did not know before?'' The answer may be, ''Nothing, a little, quite a lot or a great deal.''


Deaver's Client Tells of Business Call From Plane
LEAD: Three months after he left his post as White House deputy chief of staff in 1985 to become a private lobbyist, Michael K. Deaver apparently used the radio telephone on Nancy Reagan's official airplane to conduct his consulting business, witnesses at Mr.
Deaver's perjury trial said today.


Westfield Symphony
LEAD: The Westfield Symphony will give a free performance of works by Mahler and Tchaikovsky tomorrow at 2 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The symphony, based in Westfield, N.J., and conducted by Brad Keimach, will perform Mahler's Symphony No. 4 and Tchaikovsky's Violin Concerto.
The soloists are Peter Winograd, violinist, and Cheryl Parrish, soprano.


N.F.L. Matchups; Quarterback Is a Sore Spot
LEAD: Injured quarterbacks abound this week, many of them limited in practice or not able to make it at all.
They have hurt their ankles or shoulders or knees or egos.
So the backups will become major factors Sunday.
And that means teams with sophisticated defenses could fool some of the inexperienced second-stringers.


Orange Juice, Soybeans Advance as Grains Fall
LEAD: Prices of frozen concentrated orange juice futures soared yesterday on the Cotton Exchange in New York because of revised estimates of lower harvests in South America.


U.S. Communists May Not Field a 1988 Slate
LEAD: The Communist Party U.S.A. is not likely to run candidates for President and Vice President next year to protest what it says is a ''very undemocratic electoral system'' in the United States, the party leader announced yesterday.


Champion International Selects Next President
LEAD: L. Clark Heist, who has been with the Champion International Corporation for 30 years, has been named president and chief operating officer, effective Dec. 1.


Film: 'Last Emperor,' an Epic
LEAD: PU YI (1906-1967), the last Manchu emperor of China, came to the Dragon Throne at the age of 2 and some months.
Four years later, the prince regent, Pu Yi's father, was forced to abdicate all imperial authority to republican forces.
The boy-emperor continued to stay on in lonely, unreal splendor in Beijing's Forbidden City for another decade or so.


For Collectors, New Sites For Antiquities and Art
LEAD: This was a bustling week for the antiques market in New York.
Manhattan's newest and most elaborately designed antiques center - Place des Antiquaires, at 125 East 57th Street -opened to the public yesterday after many delays, and an ambitious show of period art, furnishings and decorations opened Wednesday at Didier Aaron, 32 East 67th


Numbers Game Flourishes Despite Lotteries and Raids
LEAD: Despite police raids and the advent of state lotteries and offtrack betting, numbers - a time-honored form of illegal gambling as easy as buying a pack of cigarettes - continues to thrive in poor neighborhoods of New York City.


Russians Tour U.S. Chemical Arms Stockpile
LEAD: Six Soviet scientists and diplomats toured a chemical weapons installation in the western Utah desert today, an event that some officials said could lead to a treaty banning the weapons.


1,155 G.M. LAYOFFS
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it would indefinitely lay off about 1,155 of its hourly employees in January, when it will slow auto production at three of its United States plants.
The cut would increase the company's list of indefinitely laid-off workers by 2.5 percent.
A Lansing, Mich., plant that makes the Buick Skylark and Oldsmobile Cutlass will lay off 850 of its 4,350 workers.


Fire Damages Church in Massachusetts
LEAD: The Rev.
William Huegel, left, pastor of First Baptist Church in Winchester, being comforted after fire damaged the church yesterday.
With him are the Rev.
L.
Stanley Manierre and the Rev.
Veronica Lanier of the American Baptist Churches.
No injuries were reported.
Part of the building was being converted into condominium apartments.


Elizabeth Corday Producer, 75
LEAD: Elizabeth Corday, the longtime executive producer of the daytime drama ''Days of Our Lives,'' died of respiratory failure Monday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center here.
She was 75 years old.


MEXICO REASSURES PUBLIC ON ECONOMY
LEAD: Mexico's Finance Minister appealed for confidence in the economy today as the peso fluctuated in chaotic trading after Wednesday's plunge.


NEW LAWYERS: WHERE THEY WORK
LEAD: The growth of large law firms and the salaries they pay is having a logical effect: in a survey of 1986 law school graduates, the National Association for Law Placement has found that 61.6 percent entered private practice, the highest percentage since the association started keeping records in 1974, when 52.2 percent went into private practice.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


Shultz Is Expected to Meet Shevardnadze Next Week
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz will meet next week in Geneva with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, to resolve remaining differences on a missile treaty and to review the agenda for the summit meeting next month, Reagan Administration officials said today.


U.S. Catholic Bishops Set Policy Backing Central American Talks
LEAD: The country's Roman Catholic bishops today threw their moral and political weight behind efforts to bring peace to Central American, in particular backing the mediation of their fellow prelate, Miguel Cardinal Obando y Bravo of Nicaragua.


Dr. Samuel Engle Burr Jr.; Professor, 89
LEAD: Dr.
Samuel Engle Burr Jr., a former professor of education at the American University in Washington, died Monday at the Princeton (N.J.) Medical Center.
He was 89 years old and lived in Hightstown, N.J.


Art: Paintings and Drawings by Andre Derain
LEAD: IT has never been easy to make an exhibition of Andre Derain that validates the very high regard in which he was held by those who knew him.
Derain the man was clearly a man of good will, a marvel of intelligence and the best of companions in the Louvre.
As a young man, he wrote some of the most vivid and amusing of all artists' letters.


At the Bar
LEAD: The money might come from drug trafficking or insider trading or loan sharking or embezzlement.
But until recently, two things about it were always true.
First, no matter how ill-gotten it might be, the wrongdoer was always free to spend it on a lawyer.
Second, that lawyer was always free to accept it - and keep it.


Art: Martin Kippenberger Sculptures
LEAD: SCULPTURE is so abundant in New York art galleries these days that it may well qualify as the season's dominant art form.
Nowhere is it more plentiful than at Metro Pictures in SoHo, where Martin Kippenberger's exhibition threatens to spill out onto the street.
Mr.
Kippenberger, a 34-year-old artist who lives in Cologne, West Germany, has exhibited paintings and sculpture in Europe for nearly a decade.


Sports People; World Cup Bid
LEAD: The United States made a formal request yesterday to host the 1994 World Cup Championship.
President Reagan made the bid in a meeting with Joao Havelange, president of FIFA, soccer's governing body, at the White House.


Jersey Parkway Plans to Double Its 25-Cent Tolls
LEAD: The New Jersey Highway Authority voted today to double the 25-cent tolls on the Garden State Parkway.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Mets have signed Larry Milbourne, a former major-league infielder, as an instructor in their minor-league system.
Milbourne, who retired after the 1985 season after 11 seasons in the big leagues, including two stints with the Yankees, will be assigned specific duties later. . . .
Norm Drucker, former supervisor of officials for the National Basketball Association and the American Basketball Association, has been named assistant director of basketball operations in charge of officiating for the new International Basketball


3 OFFICIALS SUE KOCH ON SHELTERS
LEAD: The Borough Presidents of Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx yesterday sued Mayor Koch and the Board of Estimate, of which they are members, to stop the Mayor's plan to build shelters for the homeless in their boroughs.


Thomas W. Eglin, 55, Dean at Lawrenceville
LEAD: Thomas W. Eglin, the dean of students at the Lawrenceville School, died of a brain tumor Wednesday at his home in Lawrenceville, N.J.
He was 55 years old.


56 HURT AS BUS RAMS INTO STORE AFTER COLLISION
LEAD: Fifty-six passengers on a city bus in Brooklyn were injured yesterday morning when, after a collision with a car, the bus driver swerved to avoid a crowded bus stop and crashed into a storefront, the police said.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-13 khail S. Gorbachev, to address a joint meeting of Congress when he is in Washington next month was strongly criticized by Republican Congressional leaders.
Page A1


Films From the 30's
LEAD: Two films from the 1930's by the French director Pierre Chenal - an adaptation of Dostoyevsky's ''Crime and Punishment,'' and ''The Man From Nowhere,'' a comedy based on Pirandello's ''Late Mathias Pascal'' - will be screened through Thursday at Film Forum 2, 57 Watts Street.
The actor Pierre Blanchar was featured in both films; at the 1935 Venice Film Festival, he was named best actor for his role as Raskolnikov in ''Crime and Punishment.


Hill Samuel Withdraws
LEAD: Hill Samuel &amp; Company said today that its brokerage would no longer act as a primary market maker in gilt-edged securities, as British Government bonds are called.
Several other British brokerages have pulled out of the unprofitable gilts market in recent months.
Hill Samuel said the move was part of a plan to sell or close its debt-trading activities.


Starting Children on a Lifelong Reading Habit
LEAD: To the Editor:


CREDIT MARKETS Treasury Prices Up Slightly
LEAD: Prices of Treasury debt issues moved slightly higher yesterday in what dealers described as the slowest session of an uncommonly dull week, as market participants continued to wait for the Administration and Congress to resolve their differences over the Federal budget deficit.


Art People
LEAD:  Glasnost for Lunch


Senate Waste Proposal Upsets House Panels
LEAD: Influential House committee chairmen are upset over Senate legislation that would scuttle a plan establishing two dump sites for the accumulating tons of high-level nuclear waste.


Violin-Piano Duo
LEAD: Avram Weiss, a violinist, and Joseph Seiger, a pianist, will perform works by Handel, Grieg, Bach, Kreisler, Bloch and others on Sunday at 8 P.M. in Merkin Concert Hall (129 West 67th Street).
Tickets are $12, or $6 for students and the elderly.
Information: 362-8719.


Uganda Reports a Clash
LEAD: Ugandan Government forces killed 30 rebels Wednesday when the guerrillas ambushed a military convoy near the eastern town of Mbale, army sources said.
They said nine soldiers guarding the 21-vehicle convoy and seven civilians were also killed.


Talks Held By Bell &amp; Howell
LEAD: The Bell &amp; Howell Company disclosed yesterday that it was negotiating with an investor group headed by Robert M. Bass of the wealthy Texas family on a management buyout of the publishing and information services company.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 411 money market mutual funds increased $1.54 billion, to $262.91 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 111 institutional funds were up $781.2 million, to $74.37 billion.
Assets of the 207 general-purpose funds were up $294.5 million, to $79.12 billion.


Rangers Lose To Stars
LEAD: Marcel Dionne was correct: The Rangers should not have assumed that they could reproduce the work ethic that brought them out of their slump just by writing it into their game plan.


Lee Byung Chull, 77, Industrialist of Korea
LEAD: Lee Byung Chull, chairman and founder of the Samsung Group and one of the fathers of modern industrial South Korea, died of lung cancer today.
He was 77 years old.
Mr.
Lee started his business in 1938 and rebuilt it after the Korean War into a high-technology manufacturer and South Korea's first major trading company.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Restaurants
LEAD: A SPLENDID Provencal flower has taken root in the craggy industrial terrain of TriBeCa.
Called Bouley, it is the creation of the French-schooled David Bouley, who made his mark at nearby Montrachet.
The three-month-old restaurant has the potential for greatness, although a wobbly kitchen prevents it from reaching its potential.


Louisiana Governor-Elect Acts Early
LEAD: Louisiana's Governor-elect, Buddy Roemer, faced with a four-month waiting period before he takes office and with a budget crisis that he said would empty state coffers by Inauguration Day, moved this week to try to get control over state policy and spending.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Not Off the Record
LEAD: When William E. Brock 3d took over as chairman of Senator Bob Dole's Presidential campaign two weeks ago he stressed the need for an ''open campaign.''


Our Towns; Amid Growling, 14 Neurotics Try To Defeat Angst
LEAD: ''This kind of neurotic behavior is not usually handled in groups,'' Dr.
Perry Frantzman explained.
His 14 patients were in a circle.
The doctor had agreed to take them on because he knew otherwise it might mean death.


Jets Will Get a Close Look at Bennett
LEAD: Cornelius Bennett wishes people would stop comparing him with Lawrence Taylor.
But Kurt Sohn, who will run against Bennett on Sunday, said today there wasn't any comparison.


Economic Scene; Assumptions Of U.S. Growth
LEAD: HOW valid are the assumptions that underlie the relatively hopeful forecast of most American economists and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris that the United States economy will continue growing slowly next year?


Diner's Journal
LEAD: NOT many restaurants serve the rustic French appetizer called rillettes de canard, which is a spread made with shredded duck and spices.
At six-week-old L'Ecluse, a snug French bistro on Avenue of the Americas at King Street, a ramekin of delicious rillettes (this one combines duck and pork) comes as an appetizer along with grilled garlic toast and a little green salad.


O'NEILL STABLE AFTER SURGERY
LEAD: Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the former Speaker of the House, was alert and in stable condition today after undergoing surgery that removed a cancerous tumor, hospital officials said.
The 74-year-old Massachusets Democrat un-derwent nearly seven hours of surgery for cancer of the rectum at Brigham and Women's Hospital on Wednesday.


Washington Talk: The Iran-contra Hearings; ALL OVER BUT THE CLEARING-OUT OF PIECES OF HISTORY
LEAD: For the 181 lawyers, investigators, clerks and secretaries on the staffs of the Iran-contra Congressional committees it is all over but the cleanup - a 10-month whirlwind in which strangers came together and shaped a piece of history, ''It's a once in a lifetime experience - once you do this, what could ever be as exciting again?


McCann Gets Studio Work
LEAD: McCann-Erickson, New York, has been assigned the retail media account of Columbia Pictures for the New York region.
The billings are around $10 million.


Sports People; Alcohol Awareness
LEAD: A series of mandatory lectures on drinking and driving is being lined up for Minnesota Vikings players by General Manager Mike Lynn after the arrests of several players for drunken driving.


Rosario Hopes Stock Keeps Rebounding
LEAD: In August 1980, Wilfredo Gomez, the World Boxing Council superbantamweight champion, knocked out Derrik Holmes in five rounds in a nationally televised bout.


Views From Miami
LEAD: As everyone knows, Miami is an odd place.
It is definitely part of the United States, but it is also the capital of a misty Latin American republic called Exilia, Refugia or Nostalgia, according to choice.
It lives steadily preoccupied with Cuba, some 90 miles and a world away, but Cuba can be approached from various directions.


Dance: Armitage Ballet
LEAD: ''STRETCH your arm no farther than your sleeve,'' as the old French saying goes.


KNICKS BEATEN AS NETS RALLY
LEAD: As the Knicks broke out of their timeout huddle with 4 minutes 56 seconds remaining in the fourth period tonight, holding a lead of 101-93 over the Nets, Coach Rick Pitino's final words were, ''Forget the score, keep playing offense.''


18th-Century Music
LEAD: The Orchestra of the 18th Century will perform at the Fine Arts Center of the State University campus at Stony Brook, L.I., tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $14 to $18.
Information and directions: (516) 632-7235.


William A. Sutherland; Law Firm Founder, 91
LEAD: William Anderson Sutherland, a founding partner of Sutherland, Asbill &amp; Brennan, an Atlanta and Washington law firm, died Nov. 7 of a heart attack at his home in Washington.
He was 91 years old.


Lives of Amerasian Children Studied on ABC's '20/20'
LEAD: A father and daughter, strangers to each other, are united on ABC's ''20/ 20'' tonight.
The father had fought in Vietnam; the daughter, in a way, was one of the war casualties.
The program, on Channel 7 at 10 P.M., is touching.


SAVINGS ENVISIONED IN HOME AIDS CARE
LEAD: The cost of caring for some AIDS patients could be reduced to less than $100 a day from about $800 a day if public and private health insurance plans would pay for home care of AIDS patients, health care officials say.


News Corp. Profits Rise
LEAD: The News Corporation, the media group headed by Rupert Murdoch, today reported a 31 percent jump in after-tax profits for the first quarter, ended Sept. 30.


Auctions
LEAD:  Egyptian Goddesses


DYNAMIC ACTING DUOS ON NEW YORK STAGES
LEAD: One of the great joys of Laurence Olivier's professional life was watching John Gielgud and Ralph Richardson act together onstage.
Seeing those two knights in tandem was ''a dream,'' observed Lord Olivier, ''a brilliant double act'' with ''all guns blazing.'' In modern theatrical history, there have, of course, been other twinned performances of the highest caliber, though perhaps not with the astonishing symbiosis - and contrast of opposites - of these theatrical eminences.


Crazy Eddie Deficit In Inventory Found
LEAD: The new managers of Crazy Eddie Inc. said yesterday that they had discovered an inventory shortfall estimated at $45 million and that the consumer electronics retailer expected a ''substantial'' third-quarter loss.


Reagan and Democrats Split On Using Pressure on Haiti
LEAD: The Reagan Administration and a small group of Democratic Congressmen are divided over how the United States should use its leverage to insure a free and fair election in Haiti this month.


Official Support Growing for Haitian Election
LEAD: With 10 days remaining before the scheduled date for presidential elections in Haiti, election officials say the Government has finally begun lending its support, and concern about a possible postponement appears to be fading.


Tourists Face Mixed Picture
LEAD: Americans traveling to Mexico may not see hotel rates or air fares reduced immediately by the plunging value of the peso, but they will be able to find shopping bargains, travel agents said yesterday.


De Larrocha Recital
LEAD: The pianist Alicia de Larrocha will perform works by Schumann, Mompou and Granados tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College, one block from the intersection of Nostrand and Flatbush Avenues.
Tickets are $10 to $20.
Information: (718) 434-1900.


If Reagan Were F.D.R.
LEAD: The immediate economic outlook hinges on confidence.
Will consumers, businesses and investors continue their healthy patterns of spending and investment or will Black Monday and its aftermath frighten them into retrenchment and bring on recession, or worse?


Godfrey Bloch; Manufacturer, 86
LEAD: Godfrey Bloch, a former carpet manufacturer, died at Lenox Hill Hospital on Wednesday.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Mr. Gorbachev and Congress
LEAD: It's certainly arguable whether inviting Mikhail Gorbachev to address a joint meeting of the United States Congress is a good idea.
But indisputably the confused squabble between the White House and Congressional leaders over that invitation is a shameful global embarrassment.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Atlas Corp., Princeton, N.J., a natural resources company, appointed Keith R. Hulley president of the mineral division.


Film: Prince in 'Sign o' the Times'
LEAD: ''SIGN O' THE TIMES,'' which opens today at the Warner and other theaters, is mostly a concert film, but it also plays like science fiction: a visit to the Prince planet, where life is strange indeed.
And madly, viscerally exciting, peopled by red-hot, inexhaustible Princelings whose onstage excesses become the perfect backdrop for the star's own antics.


CITING BIAS ORDER, U.S. CURBS YONKERS ON AID TO BUILDERS
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday barred Yonkers from aiding ing commercial and residential development until the city complies with his desegregation order by planning new public housing.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Oct. 25 about a program to assign police liaison officers to some New York City hospitals incorrectly described the history of the program at Bellevue Hospital Center.
A liaison officer has been assigned to Bellevue for many years.


Advertising; Lintas's 'Hot' Idea For Lipton
LEAD: ''WE'RE out to make hot tea hot,'' exclaimed Susan Read, effusive executive vice president and executive creative director of Lintas:New York, as she turned to the VCR to bring the new campaign for Lipton tea to the screen.
It was, she promised, a big idea.
In any event it was big enough to supplant Don Meredith, the one-time Dallas Cowboys quarterback who had been spokesman for the flow-through tea bags for more than a decade.


Film: Streisand In 'Nuts'
LEAD: IN ''Nuts,'' Barbra Streisand has the kind of downscale role that has been known to win Oscars, a role in which a star forsakes her usual cocoon for the mud streaks, the tattered clothes, the rude invective that prove she has grit.
Luckily, Miss Streisand's performance is better than that, but it's the showboating aspects of '


Wayne Newton Libel Award Is Cut to $5 Million by Judge
LEAD: A Federal district judge has reduced to $5.3 million the $22.8 million libel judgment that the entertainer Wayne Newton won against NBC, ruling that the evidence did not support Mr.
Newton's assertion that television broadcasts linking him to organized crime figures had hurt his reputation or income.


Sports of The Times; Cup Running Over With Lasix?
LEAD: MORE than anyone else, the nation's horse breeders should care about the medication crisis in thoroughbred racing.
Instead, when they present their $10 million Breeders' Cup extravaganza at Hollywood Park tomorrow, they will be perpetuating the sport's most unsavory aspect.


Washington Talk: Briefing; I.R.S. Snips Snacks
LEAD: It's now official.
The Internal Revenue Service had ruled that Election Night parties, assuming they are given by a candidate's campaign committee for the candidate's campaign workers, are an ''exempt function'' under Section 527(e)(2) of the tax code.


British Gas Drops Bow Valley Offer
LEAD: British Gas P.L.C. called off its bid of $940 million (Canadian), or $717 million (United States), for a controlling interest in Bow Valley Industries.
But British Gas said it would try to modify its offer to satisfy shareholders and the Canadian Government, and analysts said the Canadian energy company was still vulnerable to a takeover by another suitor.


From Courtroom Wars, Battle Fatigue
LEAD: John Martel has stalked the courtrooms of America for 28 years, compiling a record other lawyers admit places him in the upper realms of America's top corporate trial lawyers.
In an era when few cases reach final trial, Mr.
Martel has battled nearly 100 to conclusion, representing such major clients as the Bank of America and the Hearst


F.T.C. PURSUING TRUMP
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission has asked the Justice Department to prosecute Donald J. Trump, the New York developer and investor, for making use of a ''parking'' agreement to facilitate an acquisition.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''It will have an enormous effect on the floor of the House and the Senate and help us capture the votes we need to pass a compromise.''  - Representative  Pat Williams, Democrat of  Montana, on the prospect  of automatic budget cuts.  [ A1:6. ]


Judge Bars Taylor Perfume
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday barred ''Elizabeth Taylor's Passion'' perfume line.


Plan for School Review Is Criticized by Cuomo
LEAD: Governor Cuomo last night criticized and refused to participate in a ''sweeping review'' of the New York City school system by the State Board of Regents.


On the Surest Footing
LEAD: The most accurate kickers in National Football League history are playing right now.
And two of them are performing for New York teams.


Pressure On Broker Fees Seen
LEAD: At a closed-door meeting in New York this week, executives controlling several hundred billion dollars of corporate pension funds vowed to take steps to reduce the amounts they pay Wall Street brokers and investment management organizations.


S.E.C. Submits Plan On Insider Trading
LEAD: Three days after an inconclusive Supreme Court decision on insider trading, the Securities and Exchange Commission and prominent securities lawyers today submitted a proposal to Congress to define illegal trading in securities using confidential corporation information.


DEFENDENT TELLS OF ONE NIGHT IN THE HOSPITAL WARD
LEAD: J. Angelo made the following written statements to the Suffolk County police:  FIRST STATEMENT


Corrections
LEAD: The Eating Well column in The Living Section on Wednesday gave an incorrect figure for the amount of omega-3 fatty acids in certain fish.


Film: 'Loyalties,' On Friends
LEAD: ''Loyalties'' was shown as part of this year's New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times March 21.
The film opens today at the Quad Cinema.


Coach Has 2 Winners
LEAD: Anson Dorrance, the head coach of both the men's and the women's varsity soccer teams at the University of North Carolina, may face an unusual decision Saturday night.


A British Policy on Hemophiliacs And Doctors Infected With AIDS
LEAD: The British Government has made two public policy decisions this week that organizations representing AIDS-infected individuals are hailing as important and enlightened steps in dealing with the needs of AIDS-sufferers in Britain and in helping check the spread of the disease.


On Stage
LEAD:  Big Money From a Small Country


Starting Children on a Lifelong Reading Habit; Textbooks' Objectives
LEAD: To the Editor:


MARCOVICCI: ESSENCE OF ROMANCE
LEAD: ''THERE is a Portuguese word, saudades, that means nostalgia for people, places and things that may never have existed,'' Andrea Marcovicci said the other day. ''In my singing, I've stretched that to mean nostalgia for a time we never lived in.
My father was 63 and my mother 29 when I was born.
Because he was a creature from another era, I grew up surrounded by musical influences that were not of my own time.


Lincoln Journal
LEAD: Lettered high on the tall facade of Nebraska Stadium here is a noble tenet: ''Courage, generosity, fairness: These are the true awards of manly sport.''


The Board of Education Plays Truant
LEAD: School may be the only source of stability in the lives of New York City's homeless children.
Yet the city's Board of Education has lost track of several hundred school-age children in emergency hotels and shelters.
No one checks up on them to make sure they go to class.
Children already ''at risk'' are thus put in further jeopardy.


Bid Fails to Block Custody of Boy
LEAD: An appellate judge in Manhattan strongly rejected a bid yesterday by Joel B. Steinberg and Hedda Nussbaum to prevent the biological mother of 17-month-old Mitchell Steinberg from taking custody of him.


In the Night
LEAD:  Honoring an Innovator


2 Chosen to Lead New Gillette Units
LEAD: The Gillette Company created two new operating units from three existing groups yesterday and said each would be led by a vice chairman.


Koch Modifies Proposal For New Units in Bronx
LEAD: Mayor Koch yesterday scaled back his proposal for 1,000 new apartments for middle-income New Yorkers in the Kingsbridge section of the Bronx, in the hopes of winning the Board of Estimate's approval for the disputed plan.


Allegis to Prepay Big Boeing Note
LEAD: The Allegis Corporation, parent corporation of United Airlines, has agreed to prepay a $700 million convertible note issued by the Boeing Company last spring when United placed an order for 36 Boeing jets.
Boeing said Allegis would be required to pay the $700 million plus accrued interest of $50 million before Jan.


U.P.I. PICKS TEAM OF NEW EDITORS
LEAD: United Press International, which has reeled from crisis to crisis in its struggle to survive, announced yesterday that it was making its third change of top editors in less than a year.


Starting Children on a Lifelong Reading Habit; Written Words' Value
LEAD: To the Editor:


Goldman, Sachs Layoffs
LEAD: Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company laid off several employees yesterday in two divisions.


At the Movies
LEAD:  Mora's 'Communion'


Washington Talk: Briefing; Experts Declined
LEAD: George Washington University turned down a request from White House officials to allow the press corps to use the university's gym as a media center for the upcoming visit of the Soviet Leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev, but that doesn't mean the university would mind having some of its experts in Soviet culture be used as press sources.


Uncovered Short Sales Down 8.8% on Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short and not yet covered in the month ended Nov. 13 decreased from the previous month by 44.7 million shares, or 8.8 percent, to 465.5 million.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.77
6.46
6.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.77
5.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.18
6.25
6.08
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.64
8.65
8.42
30-YR.


Taylor Remains A Question Mark
LEAD: Will he or won't he?
Will Lawrence Taylor, despite an injured hamstring, be well enough to play for the Giants Sunday against the Saints in New Orleans?


Film: 'Teen Wolf Too,' Family Curse
LEAD: WHEN a clean-cut college student turns into a werewolf, he does unspeakable things.
Nothing violent, but this monster cuts classes!
He starts hanging around with a frivolous crowd - oh, no! college students who like to dance! - so his jilted girlfriend confronts him in biology class. ''They don't like you, only the wolf,'' she warns.


Concert: Julie Andrews
LEAD: NEAR the end of her one-woman retrospective show at the Westbury Music Fair, Julie Andrews sings a piece of special material called ''50 Words or Less,'' by Larry Grossman and Buzz Kohaan, in which she rattles off a list of adjectives that have been applied to her.
They range from ''sweet'' to ''wholesome'' to ''cold.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE VELVET PRISON: Artists Under State Socialism. By Miklos Haraszti.


Issue for '88: Who Is George Bush?
LEAD: When Vice President Bush told reporters early this year that he had ''expressed reservations'' to the White House about the secret sale of arms to Iran, many officials in the Reagan Administration were surprised.


REAGAN PLANNING TO CUT SPENDING ON DEADLINE TODAY
LEAD: The White House said today that President Reagan would put $23 billion in automatic spending cuts into effect to reduce the Federal budget deficit even if Administration and Congressional negotiators agree on alternatives before the Friday deadline.


The Budget Deficit Disgrace
LEAD: The stock market collapse and the dollar's decline created the urgent need and the opportunity for Washington to prove that tough budget issues could be resolved through bipartisan negotiation, that national interests could transcend parochial ones.
Now, after a month of buck-passing, Congressional and White House leaders propose to reduce the deficit by less than the automatic cuts scheduled in the Gramm


Savvy Record Chief for Sony
LEAD: As one of the world's largest manufacturers of consumer electronics, the Sony Corporation knows plenty about the hardware side of the music business.
But it has had little experience with the recording side, which includes the delicate task of handling temperamental artists.


Washington Talk: The Summit Meeting; Capital Trying to Squeeze In Visitors
LEAD: The summit meeting is less than three weeks away and much of this city is in a bit of a dither.


Occidental in Joint Deal To Build Plant in Soviet
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Company, in a consortium with an Italian chemical company and a Japanese trading house, signed an agreement today with Moscow to build a petrochemical plant near the Caspian Sea that could cost as much as $6 billion.


Dollar Off in Quiet Day; Gold Climbs Slightly
LEAD: The dollar edged lower in quiet trading yesterday as traders eyed faltering budget negotiations in Washington with increasing pessimism that they said could spark a selloff of the currency.


Dining Out Guide: Thanksgiving
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
THE BALLROOM, #253 West 28th Street (244-3005) - *(Nov. 8, 1985) This restaurant-cum-cabaret is holding its fifth annual Festival of the Birds on Thanksgiving Day.


Let Moscow Expose Stalin's Wave of Terror
LEAD: To the Editor:


Recycling of New York City's Garbage Is Safer Than Incineration
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  New on Fridays: The Law Page


Rookie Scores 4 Goals
LEAD: Joe Nieuwendyk, a rookie, scored four goals as the Calgary Flames routed the Quebec Nordiques tonight, 9-1.


Capitol Gains Taxes: the Long and Short of It
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the high level of oil imports incorrectly described the Institute for International Economics.
The Washington-based group is a nonprofit research organization, financed by foundations, corporations and government.


Union Pacific Bids for USPCI
LEAD: The Union Pacific Corporation, the railroad holding company, said yesterday that it would make a $327.5 million tender offer for USPCI Inc., an Oklahoma-based hazardous waste management company that had rebuffed a better offer in June, before stock prices fell.


Doubles Match Steals Show
LEAD: This was one night when the sneak preview took top billing over the featured attraction.
What a pair of quarterfinal matches of the Virginia Slims championships lacked in intrigue, drama and excitement was more than compensated for in a doubles confrontation between the team of Steffi Graf and Gabriela Sabatini against Martina Navratilova and Pam Shriver.


New Intimidation in Chile
LEAD: Fourteen years after Gen.
Augusto Pinochet's military coup destroyed democracy in Chile, his reign of terror not only is continuing but has noticeably worsened in the last month.


TV Weekend; Three Wimsey Dramatizations, on 13
LEAD: PUBLIC television's ''Mystery!'' series, broadcast on Channel 13 Saturdays at 9 P.M., is heading into the stretch this weekend of what has turned out to be a first-rate Dorothy L. Sayers festival.
Dramatizations of three of her Lord Peter Wimsey novels have been scheduled back to back, the collection recounting, even as assorted mysteries have to be solved, Lord Peter's persistent wooing of Harriet Vane, herself an Oxford-educated writer of mystery novels.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Golf


DE LARROCHA RECITAL
LEAD: The pianist Alicia de Larrocha will perform works by Schumann, Mompou and Granados tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College, one block from the intersections of Nostrand and Flatbush Avenues.
Tickets are $10 to $20.
Information: (718) 434-1900.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  ONCE UPON A TIME, ETC.


Singer in Talks
LEAD: Pressing its defense against a $1.1 billion takeover bid from Paul A. Bilzerian, the Singer Company said it had begun preliminary discussions with a number of domestic and foreign companies.
Singer added that it could not give any assurance that anything would develop.
Singer said it had begun talking to suitors ''as a possible alternative'' to the Florida corporate raider's $50-a-share tender offer and had been furnishing these suitors with confidential data on Singer.


IN THE NIGHT
LEAD:  Choir in the Park


Seizing of Truants Upheld
LEAD: Detaining suspected truants is among the duties New York City police officers can legally carry out, the state's highest court ruled today.
In a 6-1 decision written by Chief Judge Sol Wachtler, the Court of Appeals said the city's charter gives officers in New York City responsibility for guarding the ''public health'' and preventing ''the violation of all laws and ordinances in force in the city,'' Judge Wachtler wrote.


Topics of The Times; Cruelty in the Name of Life
LEAD: Several years ago, having listened hard to America's right-to-lifers, the Reagan Administration found a way to throw them a bone.
The Agency for International Development would not renew its contract with Planned Parenthood unless the birth control agency pledged not to help any overseas programs that also offer abortion services.


Forced Migration at the Zoo
LEAD: Two pelicans waiting in a van at the Bronx Zoo yesterday before they were taken to their winter quarters indoors.
It took a dozen zookeepers, some in waders and some in boats, to capture the four pelicans on the zoo's Cope Lake and bring them in for the season. (NYT/Ruby Washington)


Delta Jet Lands in Honolulu After Losing Power in Engine
LEAD: A Delta Air Lines jet with 112 people aboard lost power in an engine over the Pacific but landed safely after flying 400 miles on its two remaining engines with a military escort, officials said today.


Lebanese Suspect Linked to '85 T.W.A. Hijacking
LEAD: A Lebanese citizen awaiting trial in the United States on charges that he took part in the June 1985 hijacking of a Jordanian airliner was also involved in the hijacking of a Trans World Airlines jet the same month, Reagan Administration officials said today.


What the Iran-Contra Committees Wish They Had Done Differently
LEAD: While most members of the Iran-contra committees think their inquiry was a success, many of the lawmakers and their staff assistants say in hindsight that various aspects of the investigation should have been done differently.


The U.N. Today; Nov. 20, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


Simon Discovers It's Lonely at the Top
LEAD: Senator Paul Simon of Illinois found today that the problem with becoming a front-runner is that competitors start snapping at your heels.


Gas Company to Cut Rates
LEAD: The Brooklyn Union Gas Company has agreed to lower its rates by $8.2 million or 1.6 percent a year, Governor Cuomo's office announced today.
The agreement, worked out between the utility and state officials, will mean a savings of about $1.20 a month through Oct. 1, 1989 for the typical Brooklyn Union customer, the Governor's office said.


The Quarterback Who's Now Crucial
LEAD: STILL breathing hard after a practice last week in Norman, Okla., Charles Thompson was saying that nothing had changed in his existence as a quarterback for the football team at the University of Oklahoma.


Peru Extends Emergency
LEAD: The Government extended a 60-day state of emergency in 18 provinces in the southern Andes today to combat Maoist guerrillas.


TIFFANY TREASURES AND HOMEY WARES IN MODERNISM SHOW
LEAD: FORESTS of Tiffany lamps cast a color-pulsing glow on Bauhaus chromed metal tables, Art Deco frosted-glass vases and vehemently Victorian carved desks.
The bazaar called ''Modernism: a Century of Style and Design, 1860 to 1960,'' one of New York's youngest and liveliest antiques and decorative arts fairs, returned yesterday for its second visit to the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 66th Street.


Starting Children on a Lifelong Reading Habit; Television's Influence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Piedmont Orders Warning Devices for Airliners
LEAD: Piedmont Airlines today became the first airline to order devices for its planes to warn against collisions.
The Government has said it will require the equipment on all large airliners by 1991 or 1992.


Former Belfast Councilman Critically Hurt in a Shooting
LEAD: A former Protestant city councilman who once said Roman Catholics should be burned was shot in the head and critically wounded today, the police said.


Biden Says Final Vote on Court Nominee Is Unlikely Until February
LEAD: The chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee said today that, although he expected the confirmation process for Judge Anthony M. Kennedy to ''move pretty swiftly,'' the full Senate was unlikely to vote on his nomination to the Supreme Court until early February.


20 ACCUSED OF PLAN TO IMPORT COCAINE FROM SOUTH AMERICA
LEAD: Twenty people were arrested yesterday at their homes in Brooklyn and Queens and charged with conspiring to import large amounts of cocaine from South America, officials said.


British Plan Inquiry Into Subway Fire
LEAD: As transportation experts and opposition politicians pointed to possible safety lapses, the Government announced today that it would hold an inquiry into a fire that killed 30 people at London's busiest subway station.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about a rehearsal for a concert production of Heitor Villa-Lobo's ''Magdalena'' misidentified the woman standing at left.
She was Dona D. Vaughn, co-col-laborator and director of the musical.


Season of Worry for El Paso Stores
LEAD: The $14 slacks and blue jeans are stacked high at the Starr Western Wear store here, a few blocks from the Mexican border, in preparation for the annual rush of holiday shoppers.


For Most Smokers, a Choice
LEAD: The nation's 46.8 million smokers had a choice between abstinence and defiance yesterday on the Great American Smokeout Day.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about a mur-der suspect who was fatally shot in a struggle with two New York City Po-lice detectives misidentified the sus-pect and the detective who shot him.
The suspect was Stephen Randol; the detective was Mark Hembury.


New Attack on Iranian Nuclear Plant Is Reported
LEAD: Iran said today that Iraqi warplanes had raided an unfinished nuclear power plant for the second time this week, and Iraq said it bombed three tankers in Iran's waters and shot down two enemy planes.


SIGMA DESIGNS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIGMA DESIGNS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,096,000
8,365,000
Net inc
1,526,000
713,000
Share earns
.31
.15
9mo sales
32,469,000
17,385,000
Net inc
4,054,000
1,461,000
Share earns
.82
.39


Liberals vs. Cuomo: Debating His Record
LEAD: In a cramped and sweltering loft on West 72d Street in Manhattan, Mario M. Cuomo met his match Thursday night: a group of his earliest supporters who told him that he had not done enough to help the homeless, to build affordable housing, to make real the eloquent vision of his speeches.


CARMIKE CINEMAS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARMIKE CINEMAS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 24
1987
1986
Revenue
24,224,000
16,085,000
Net inc
1,385,000
703,000
Share earns
.25
.16
9mo rev
64,158,000
43,664,000
Net inc
2,542,000
912,000
Share earns
.46
.21
Shares outst
5,534,000
4,200,000


CHANCELLOR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHANCELLOR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
14,673,000
7,759,000
Net inc
1,923,000
467,000
Share earns
.51
.17
Shares outst
3,738,000
2,710,000
6mo rev
22,233,000
14,451,000
Net inc
2,118,000
304,000
Share earns
.58
.11
Shares outst
3,647,000
2,710,000


Boulanger Remembered
LEAD: Marie Sirot, a violinist, and Olivier Sorenson, a pianist, will present a concert in honor of the 100th anniversary of Nadia Boulanger's birth, today at 5 P.M. at the Maison Francaise (16 Washington Mews) of New York University.
The concert is free.
Information: 998-8750.


GALAXY CARPET MILLS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GALAXY CARPET MILLS (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Sales
71,903,000
62,841,000
Net inc
1,556,000
1,020,000
Share earns
.46
.31
Yr sales
262,726,000
204,007,000
Net inc
5,798,000
1,200,000
Share earns
1.72
.36


The Winners Take a Lot
LEAD: All sorts of clinchings will be available on television today, starting at 1 P.M. on Channel 13, which will show the Ivy League football title game between Yale and Harvard at the Yale Bowl in New Haven.
At 3:30, Channel 2 will televise the clash between unbeaten Oklahoma and unbeaten Nebraska, which will result in an Orange Bowl berth for the winner, and Channel 7 will show the U.C.L.A.-Southern California game, the winner of which will go to the Rose


SILVER STATE MINING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILVER STATE MINING (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,954,115
1,338,725
Net inc
600,578
554,421
Share earns
.01
.02
Shares outst
46,884,126
36,074,111
9mo rev
8,781,184
4,188,524
Net inc
1,672,850
1,944,196
Share earns
.04
.06
Shares outst
46,824,693
35,552,290


Backward Can Be Forward
LEAD: BEYOND the coincidence of mere place, there is a connection between Andre Dawson, who took a chance in accepting a 50 percent salary cut and went on to win the most valuable player award in the National League, and Billy Williams, who rejected a chance to manage the Cubs' Triple-A farm club in Des


Clarinet and Voice
LEAD: The clarinetist Gervase de Peyer, Lucille Beer, a mezzo-soprano, and others will perform works by Schubert and Schumann tonight at 7:30 in the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine (112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue).
The concert is free.
Information: 662-2133.


M.T.A. Urges End to One-Way Toll on Verrazano
LEAD: The Metropolitan Transportation Authority recommended yesterday the repeal of the Federal law that introduced one-way tolls last year on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge between Staten Island and Brooklyn.


FONAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FONAR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,029,000
9,092,000
Net inc
b888,000
b350,000
Share earns
.04
.02
b-After tax credits of $435,000 for the latest quarter and $171,000 for the year-ago period.


Soybean Prices Soar On Meal Sales to Soviet
LEAD: Soviet soymeal purchases sent futures prices for soybeans soaring and grain prices generally followed the advance yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade.


ELECTRONIC ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTRONIC ASSOCIATES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,743,000
6,945,000
Net inc
30,000
101,000
Share earns
.01
.03
9mo sales
22,218,000
19,836,000
Net inc
217,000
258,000
Share earns
.08
.09


Officer Leaving Pacific Post
LEAD: James S. Gallagher, president of the Pacific Stock Exchange since 1981, said today that he would resign Jan. 19.


Met Opera: 'Traviata,' With Two Stars Out With the Flu
LEAD: When undertaking a trip in a car with two flat tires, just getting out of the garage is something of an accomplishment.
Viewed in that light, a concertgoer might be inclined to look sympathetically on the Metropolitan Opera's bumpy traversal of Verdi's ''Traviata'' Thursday evening.


Colgate Coach Quits
LEAD: Fred Dunlap, who played fullback at Colgate in the late 1940's and later returned to direct a Red Raider football resurgence, announced his resignation as head coach on Friday.
Dunlap, 59, has been athletic director and head coach since Jan. 10, 1976.
He will continue in the former position, university officials said.


Consumer Prices Up By 0.4%
LEAD: The Consumer Price Index climbed four-tenths of 1 percent last month as the cost of shelter, new cars and clothing rose, the Labor Department reported today.


Four More Banks Fail
LEAD: State banking regulators have closed four banks, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said.
The closures bring the number of American bank failures to 164 so far this year, compared with last year's total of 138, the F.D.I.C. said.
The banks that were closed were the Republic Bank of Oklahoma City; the Peoples Bank and Trust of Iberia Parish, New Iberia, La,; the Timken State Bank in Timken, Kan., and the Alexander State Bank in Alexander, Kan.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 15.


PLANE'S ENGINES HAD NORMAL POWER
LEAD: Both engines of the Continental Airlines DC-9 jet that crashed while taking off in a snowstorm in Denver Sunday produced normal power until the plane hit the ground, officials with knowledge of the inquiry said yesterday.


Judge Denies Bail for Nurse Suspected in L.I. Hospital Deaths
LEAD: A nurse suspected of killing several patients at a West Islip hospital was ordered held without bail on assault charges today.


Moderate Governor Pleases New Mexico
LEAD: To the west in Arizona is Evan Mecham, the beleaguered first-term Republican Governor facing efforts to oust him from office that appear likely to lead to a special election.


PHYSICIANS INSURANCE CO OF OHIO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHYSICIANS INSURANCE CO OF OHIO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
33,170,153
36,082,907
Net inc
1,013,155
861,996
Share earns
.33
.28
9mo rev
69,166,229
77,510,237
Net inc
b364,886
2,153,194
Share earns
.12
.70


MMR HOLDING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MMR HOLDING
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
102,032,000
57,059,000
Net inc
2,131,000
2,519,000
Share earns
.39
.61
Shares outst
5,402,000
4,152,000
Revenue represents contract revenue.


Learning Style Of Minorities To Be Studied
LEAD: The New York State Board of Regents has appointed a special panel of three of its members to explore whether black and other minority-group students have distinct ''learning styles'' that may call for teaching techniques that are different from those used for whites.


Stung on Yeltsin, Gorbachev Renews His Call for Change
LEAD: Faced with an unexpectedly strong public backlash against the recent dismissal of one of his political allies, Mikhail S. Gorbachev today renewed his call for change in the Soviet Union.


Dance: At Joyce Theater, American Ballroom Group
LEAD: The American Ballroom Theater swept into the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street,) on Tuesday night to open a two-week season.
And that is reason to cheer, for the company is one of our most unusual and delightful dance groups.


Treasury Bond Prices Climb
LEAD: Treasury bond prices advanced yesterday as traders expressed relief that Administration and Congressional leaders had reached an agreement on ways to reduce the Federal budget deficit.
The most pronounced gains came among bonds with longer maturities.


Big Texas Bailout Seen As Start of Aid Effort
LEAD: A $1.3 billion Federal bailout for the Vernon Savings and Loan Association, the costliest in the nation's history, is a step toward dealing with ailing savings institutions in Texas, analysts said today.


Figure In Winans Case Guilty
LEAD: David W. C. Clark, a former New York lawyer implicated in the insider trading circle that included R. Foster Winans, a former Wall Street Journal columnist, was found guilty yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan on all but one of 17 counts of fraud, tax evasion and perjury.


U.N. Passes Measures to Combat Apartheid
LEAD: The United Nations adopted a package of anti-apartheid resolutions today that call for an oil embargo against South Africa and criticize Israel for doing business with the Pretoria Government.


Music: Bernstein Conducts Mahler and Schubert
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein speaks several musical languages fluently, but Mahler is to him like a native tongue.
Though that is hardly news by now, his conducting of the Mahler Symphony No. 1 Thursday evening with the New York Philharmonic reminded one how effortlessly he seems to slip under that composer's skin.


PROPERTY CAPITAL TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROPERTY CAPITAL TRUST (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,849,000
3,835,000
Share earns
.82
.42
b-Includes a gain of $3,809,000 from sales of properties.


Texaco Spurns Bid By Pennzoil
LEAD: The Pennzoil Company has proposed a provisional settlement of its longstanding dispute with Texaco Inc., but Texaco yesterday called the amounts involved ''clearly unreasonable.''


Reagan Opposes Indoor Clean-Air Bill
LEAD: The Reagan Administration said today that it opposed pending legislation intended to protect the public from indoor air pollution.


Saints Try to Limit Euphoria
LEAD: In their 20 previous seasons in the National Football League, the New Orleans Saints never finished with a winning record.
They have never made the playoffs.
They have never won four games in a row.


Breeders' Cup: Coastal Clash
LEAD: Anyone who thinks that New Yorkers are parochial about the importance of their own racing should spend a few days at a California track.
By comparison, New Yorkers seem positively broad-minded.


Mr. Reagan's Deficit, and History
LEAD: Deficit-reduction negotiators delivered the anticipated turkey yesterday amid reports that Congressional Republicans would refuse to choke down even this scrawny, pallid bird.


AIDS Test Is Weighed In Sex Cases
LEAD: New York's City's Health Commissioner said yesterday that the AIDS epidemic may require the city to consider mandatory AIDS testing for prostitutes and sex and drug offenders, as well as a heavy crackdown on all forms of prostitution.


Christopher Keating Weds Jeanne Conte, a Copywriter
LEAD: Jeanne Marie Conte, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Henry Conte of Bedford, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Ball Keating, a son of Cornelius Francis Keating of New Canaan, Conn., and Elizabeth Ball of Washington Depot, Conn.
The Rev.
Stanley M. Koziol, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Waveny in New


Navratilova Out In 6-4, 7-5 Upset
LEAD: The applause began when Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina was still 4 points away from perhaps the biggest victory in her career.
This would be her second opportunity of the match to end Martina Navratilova's four-year reign in the Virginia Slims championships, and most in the crowd of 13,854 at Madison Square Garden sensed that she would not fail.


Silent 1925 'Phantom' At Donnell Library
LEAD: The auditorium at the Donnell Library Center, 20 West 53d Street, has reopened after six months of renovation.
The hall is now called the Bankers Trust Company Auditorium.


Raid by Police Frees Kidnapped Girl, 5, in Spain
LEAD: A kidnapped 5-year-old girl was freed unharmed and one of her abductors was wounded today when the police stormed a hideout on the Costa del Sol.


New York Working and Learning
LEAD: Can big business help young people find jobs?
Yes, if they're qualified.
Can big business help young people qualify for jobs?
Yes, with the cooperation of the schools.
Those two aims describe an ambitious experiment just launched in New York by business leaders with state and foundation support: New York Working and New York


Mexican Holiday Calms Peso Chaos
LEAD: After four days of turmoil, calm returned to Mexico's foreign-exchange and stock markets today, thanks to a national holiday that closed all banks, Government offices and businesses until Monday.


TV for Cowboy Fans
LEAD: A cable television network has agreed to buy the remaining tickets to the Sunday night game between the Miami Dolphins and the Dallas Cowboys.
The action will keep the game from being blacked out in the Dallas-Fort Worth area.


Your Money; Tax-Swapping Confusion
LEAD: THE technique of municipal bond tax swapping traditionally reaches its peak this time of year.
But the mid-October stock market plunge and a proposal in Congress to change the way certain bonds are taxed has added substantial confusion to the process this year.


HADRON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HADRON INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,666,464
5,946,294
Net inc
332,358
308,182
Share earns
.02
.02
6mo rev
13,448,054
11,241,716
Net inc
716,394
558,041
Share earns
.05
.04


After 6 Weeks, Prosecution Rests in Howard Beach Trial
LEAD: After six weeks of testimony by 60 witnesses, the prosecution rested its case yesterday in the Howard Beach, Queens, murder and assault trial.


Wait on a New High Court Justice Till After '88
LEAD: To the Editor:


PETRIE STORES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PETRIE STORES (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
300,393,000
291,442,000
Net inc
4,640,000
11,158,000
Share earns
.10
.24
9mo sales
885,376,000
819,045,000
Net inc
23,721,000
31,569,000
Share earns
.51
.68


TEXAS UTILITIES reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS UTILITIES
Year to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,060,657,000
3,954,266,000
Net inc
677,785,000
622,471,000
Share earns
4.58
4.44


Oil Scandal In Norway
LEAD: The six state-appointed members of the board of Statoil, Norway's biggest company, resigned today in an industrial scandal in which the company experienced a $780 million overrun on a refinery project.


ICOT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ICOT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,902,000
11,903,000
Net inc
b739,000
b1,781,000
Share earns
.07
.17
b-After tax credits of $246,000 for the latest first quarter and $750,000 for the year-ago period.


UNIMED INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIMED INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,306,000
685,000
Net inc
33,000
b274,000
Share earns
.01
-
Yr rev
4,160,000
2,551,000
Net loss
524,000
759,000
b-Net loss


BALDWIN TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALDWIN TECHNOLOGY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,451,000
16,430,000
Net inc
1,042,000
625,000
Share earns
.33
.31
Shares outst
3,157,500
2,000,000


ORMAND INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORMAND INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,585,000
2,973,000
Net loss
192,000
b37,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
8,085,000
11,094,000
Net loss
76,000
326,000
b-Net income


Curbs on C.I.A. Said Opposed
LEAD: William H. Webster, the Director of Central Intelligence, said today that the Reagan Administration would oppose legislation to restrict the Central Intelligence Agency in the aftermath of the Iran-contra affair, according to Congressional officials.


Merger at Tulane University
LEAD: The faculties at Tulane University and Newcomb College, separate institutions for 100 years, are to merge.
While Newcomb will maintain its campus and remain a school for women, the merger of the faculties will enable conflicts on tenure, promotion and other issues to be resolved.


LACLEDE GAS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LACLEDE GAS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
50,364,000
59,069,000
Net loss
2,939,000
2,444,000
Yr rev
446,549,000
548,980,000
Net inc
22,638,000
b29,514,000
Share earns
2.88
3.74
b-Includes a gain of about $5 million from the sale of half-ownership in an apartment project and the sale of a subsidiary.


Film: 'Flowers in the Attic,' From V. C. Andrews Novel
LEAD: The scary thing about ''Flowers in the Attic,'' now playing at the National and other theaters, is that the novel by V. C. Andrews that inspired the movie has sold more than 4 million copies.


AGREEMENT SIGNED TO REDUCE DEFICIT $30 BILLION IN 1988
LEAD: After four weeks of tortuous talks set off by the stock market plunge, White House and Congressional negotiators reached a bipartisan agreement today on a plan to reduce the projected Federal deficit by $30 billion this year.


ANDREW CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANDREW CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
66,928,000
61,024,000
Net inc
b9,203,000
3,228,000
Share earns
.91
.32
Yr sales
223,185,000
197,659,000
Net inc
b3,814,000
9,518,000
Share earns
.38
.95


Agony and Ecstasy for Syracuse Fans
LEAD: One night in early October, David Bennett, huddled and freezing, squeezed into a lonely telephone booth in a small coastal town in England.
The surf pounded the shore in the distance and the rain lashed the booth's windows as Bennett, bathed in darkness and uncertainty, dialed the number.


Pretoria Ousts Photographer
LEAD: South Africa announced today that it was expelling an American news photographer, accusing him of sending ''biased photo material'' overseas.
The Government said the photographer, David Turnley of The Detroit Free Press, must leave when his work permit expires on Nov. 30.
Mr.
Turnley is the 11th foreign journalist expelled since President P.


No Headline
LEAD: Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d explaining a section of accord on reducing the Federal deficit yesterday during a White House briefing.
At the left is James C. Miller 3d, the budget director. (The New York Times/Jose R. Lopez)


PRODUCTION OPERATORS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRODUCTION OPERATORS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,900,000
11,996,000
Net inc
673,000
b1,206,000
Share earns
.09
.16
Yr rev
44,773,000
52,924,000
Net inc
2,321,000
bc854,000
Share earns
.31
-





Betty Ford Has Surgery For the Heart and Neck
LEAD: Betty Ford underwent six hours of heart and neck surgery today but was expected to be well enough to be home for Thanksgiving, officials said.


Hallmark Adds Univision
LEAD: Hallmark Cards Inc. and a Chicago investment concern, as expected, have agreed to acquire Univision, the nation's largest supplier of Spanish-language television programs, for nearly $300 million.


Marian Van Tuyl, A Dancer, Educator And Writer, Is Dead
LEAD: Marian Van Tuyl, a noted dance educator, writer and performer, died of cancer at her home in San Francisco on Nov. 10.
She was 80 years old.


For a Broader New York Policy on AIDS
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health has increased dramatically its projection of AIDS cases for 1991 and its official count of the cumulative number of AIDS cases in the city.
Unfortunately, those revisions, while welcome, come as no surprise because they are long overdue.


Bridge:; More Than 2,000 Entrants Converge for Fall Nationals
LEAD: The Fall National Championships of the American Contract Bridge League began here this afternoon, with more than 2,000 players from all parts of North America assembled for 10 days of events ranging from national championships to one-session side games.


Carlucci Is Confirmed As Defense Secretary
LEAD: The Senate voted overwhelmingly today to approved President Reagan's nomination of Frank C. Carlucci to become Defense Secretary.


Hygiene in Nail Salons Termed Risk
LEAD: Hygiene in grooming establishments is drawing increasing attention from dermatologists and health officials.


White House Yields to Protest On Gorbachev and Congress
LEAD: In the face of fierce opposition from conservative lawmakers, the White House backed away today from a suggestion that Mikhail S. Gorbachev address a joint meeting of Congress during his summit meeting with President Reagan next month.


DYATRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYATRON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,721,000
8,041,000
Net inc
923,000
b344,000
Share earns
.28
.09
9mo rev
26,935,000
22,808,000
Net inc
2,066,000
b561,000
Share earns
.62
.11
b-After tax credits of $98,000 for the quarter and $162,000 for the 9 months.


Tenneco Units Get New Chiefs
LEAD: Tenneco Inc. has named new chief executives at two of its divisions: J. I. Case, a maker of farm and construction equipment, and Tenneco Automotive.


Film: 'Date With an Angel'
LEAD: ''Date With an Angel,'' which opened yesterday at the subterranean, shoeboxy Criterion 4 and other theaters, is about a breathtakingly lovely creature with feathers on her large, fluffy wings.
Unfortunately, she's also got feathers in her head.
The angel lands on earth and affixes herself to Jim Sanders (Michael E.


T.C.U. Runner Banned
LEAD: Tony Jeffery, a senior running back at Texas Christian University, was declared ineligible for his final collegiate game because of improper relations with an agent, school officials said yesterday.
T.C.U. officials received new evidence on Thursday from a National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation that Jeffery had improper relationships with an agent.


PANSOPHIC SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PANSOPHIC SYSTEMS (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
37,408,000
24,312,000
Net inc
4,158,000
3,644,000
Share earns
.23
.21
6mo rev
71,055,000
45,098,000
Net inc
6,802,000
5,937,000
Share earns
.37
.34


Holiday 'Mahabharata'
LEAD: A special New Year's Eve performance of Peter Brook's production of ''The Mahabharata'' has been added to the show's run at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, at 651 Fulton Street, in the Fort Greene section.
The performance begins Dec. 31 at 12:30 P.M. and ends at 10:45 P.M.
There will be two intermissions.


SHAMIR IS OFFERING TO MEET HUSSEIN
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel offered today to meet with King Hussein of Jordan, but he rejected both an international conference and territorial compromise as ways toward peace.


FOODMAKER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOODMAKER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Revenue
146,525,000
132,801,000
Net inc
4,394,000
2,149,000
Share earns
.33
.20
Shares outst
13,422,000
10,967,000
Yr rev
598,258,000
556,522,000
Net inc
13,860,000
9,230,000
Share earns
1.20
.84
Shares outst
11,531,000
10,967,000


Chicago Party Spurns Ex-Mayor in Clerk Bid
LEAD: Former Mayor Jane M. Byrne has failed to get the endorsement of the Cook County Democratic Party to seek election as Circuit Court Clerk.


COMPUTER SCIENCES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER SCIENCES (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 2
1987
1986
Revenue
281,254,000
249,428,000
Net inc
9,897,000
7,168,000
Share earns
.62
.46
6mo rev
555,874,000
483,426,000
Net inc
19,354,000
13,820,000
Share earns
1.21
.92


Bolipata Piano Recital
LEAD: Jaime Bolipata, a pianist, will perform works by Haydn, Beethoven, Ravel and Liszt today at 2 P.M. at Theodore Roosevelt's Birthplace (28 East 20th Street).
The concert is free.
Information: 866-2086.


GWC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GWC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
35,650,000
26,299,000
Net inc
6,086,000
5,258,000
Share earns
.61
.53
9mo rev
89,851,000
70,151,000
Net inc
12,905,000
12,006,000
Share earns
1.29
1.20


Guggenheim Decision Appealed by Coalition
LEAD: A coalition of preservationist and neighborhood groups have appealed the decision last month by the New York City Board of Standards and Appeals to allow the Guggenheim Museum to proceed with a planned 10-story addition to its building at Fifth Avenue and 89th Street.


Wells Fargo Loses Ruling
LEAD: A Federal judge has ordered the Wells Fargo Bank to stop offering a financial instrument that the Government contends is illegal and to repay investors, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission said today.


OSHAWA GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OSHAWA GROUP
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
891,598,000
826,235,000
Net inc
10,069,000
8,764,000
Share earns
.32
.28
9mo rev
2,878,511,000
2,655,941,000
Net inc
31,120,000
b30,763,000
Share earns
.98
.97
Shares outst
31,916,823
31,864,199


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.69
6.82
5.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.64
5.36
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.25
6.18
5.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.58
8.64
6.99
30-YR.


Music: Gunnar Idenstam
LEAD: Gunnar Idenstam, a young organist from Stockholm, played a brief recital at the Park Avenue Christian Church Wednesday night.
Mr.
Idenstam's program was easy to digest.
Indeed, its mix of Bach, Schumann, Vierne, and contemporary Swedish music, with some improvising at the end, all seemed aimed at the organ-shy listener rather than the experienced colleague.


BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
467,301,000
358,670,000
Net inc
50,008,000
40,814,000
Share earns
.33
.27
Yr rev
1,656,616,000
1,328,393,000
Net inc
172,025,000
136,853,000
Share earns
1.15
.95


Guinness Seeking Stock Buyback
LEAD: Guinness P.L.C., the scandal-plagued brewer, said it would seek shareholder approval to repurchase up to 10 percent of its stock. ''In the light of current stock market levels, it's now a very attractive time'' to purchase the shares on the open market, a Guinness spokesman, Alan Stewart, said.


REPUBLIC RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REPUBLIC RESOURCES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
581,940
166,591
Net loss
56,600
132,046
9mo sales
1,276,066
662,630
Net loss
370,314
261,897


ASEA GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASEA GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,757,500,000
1,721,200,000
Net inc
101,700,000
85,800,000
Share earns
.82
.68
9mo sales
5,212,600,000
5,311,100,000
Net inc
281,200,000
287,200,000
Share earns
2.39
2.41


VICON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VICON INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,729,639
8,997,200
Net loss
163,146
b17,778
Share earns
-
.01
Yr sales
39,117,509
33,704,000
Net loss
508,114
b390,049
Share earns
-
.16
b


ATWOOD OCEANICS reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATWOOD OCEANICS (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
25,065,000
33,948,000
Net loss
b9,806,000
10,489,000
b-Includes a non-cash after-tax charge for a loss on the disposition of drilling vessels of $5.1 million.


British Airways Revises Offer
LEAD: In a revised offer, British Airways said yesterday that it was willing to pay about $260 million to buy British Caledonian Airways.
The new bid, which involves a swap of stock, is considerably less than the $417 million that was offered originally.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.  76ers 116, Celtics 85: Charles Barkley had 22 points and 14 rebounds as Philadelphia routed Boston last night, the Celtics' worst loss to the 76ers in 21 years.
The last time Boston lost by as many as 31 points to Philadelphia was Nov. 29, 1966, when the 76ers won, 138-96.
Reggie Lewis and Mark Acres, two rookies, each had 14 for the Celtics, who were playing without the injured Larry Bird.(AP)


Bid for Encor
LEAD: TransCanada Pipelines Ltd. has enough support from shareholders of the Encor Energy Corporation to proceed with its hostile bid of $980 million (Canadian), or about $745 million (United States), even though it was rejected by the company as too low, Gerald Maier, TransCanada's president, said.
Several institutional holders of Encor stock have indicated they are satisfied with the $8.75-a-share (Canadian) offer, Mr.


KEWAUNEE SCIENTIFIC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEWAUNEE SCIENTIFIC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
18,883,000
16,107,000
Net inc
b269,000
c908,000
Share earns
.10
-
6mo sales
35,090,000
29,650,000
Net inc
b317,000
c1,513,000
Share earns
.12
-


Boy's Presence Renews Mother's Confidence
LEAD: Beaming and confident after her first night with her baby, Nicole Bridget Smigiel said yesterday that she hoped to combine college and motherhood in a new life dedicated to the child she surrendered at birth 17 months ago to Joel B. Steinberg.


TPA OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TPA OF AMERICA (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,674,000
8,476,000
Net loss
1,888,000
176,000
9mo rev
50,754,000
18,954,000
Net loss
4,409,000
242,000


Employee Benefit Changes by Ford
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company has changed the way it compensates its salaried employees by increasing the role of profit-sharing, replacing some health-care benefits with cash allowances and tightening the rules on overtime pay, the company said.


HANA BIOLOGICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANA BIOLOGICS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,143,000
1,708,000
Net loss
398,000
b35,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income and after a tax credit of $6,000.


OSHAP TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OSHAP TECHNOLOGIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,213,000
1,885,000
Net inc
27,000
b230,000
9mo sales
15,039,000
7,022,000
Net loss
10,000
441,000
b-Net loss


Chess Game Adjourned
LEAD: The 15th game of the world chess championship between Gary Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov was adjourned today after 42 moves.


Entitlements Do Not Equate With Welfare
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brand Blanshard Is Dead at 95; Teacher and Writer of Philosophy
LEAD: Brand Blanshard, a philosopher, writer and Sterling Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at Yale University, died after a long illness Thursday at his home in New Haven.
He was 95 years old.


The Danger of Debt: How Much Is Too Much?
LEAD: Installment debt can creep up at this time of year, endangering your credit rating.
Credit-card companies and lenders will not extend credit to consumers in the danger zone whose payments amount to 20 percent to 30 percent of their gross income.
Consumers, moreover, cannot get a mortgage if their total debt payments exceed 36 percent of their gross income.


Japanese Call Move on Budget an Important Step
LEAD: Japanese officials today welcomed the news of an agreement to cut the United States budget deficit as an important step that might calm troubled world markets.


Women as Witches
LEAD:  THE DEVIL IN THE SHAPE OF A WOMAN.
Witchcraft in Colonial New England.
By Carol F. Karlsen. 360 pages.
W.W.
Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: The At the Movies column in Weekend on Nov. 13 misidentified the producer and director of ''Heart of Midnight.'' They are Andrew Gaty and Matthew Chapman.


'Watch the Gate' in Construction
LEAD: Conversation between a teamsters' union official and a developer putting up an office tower in Lower Manhattan:


For Soviet Mezzo, Politics And Music Aren't in Tune
LEAD: ''It's a pity that stupid politics can prevent artists from performing,'' Elena Obraztsova said last week. ''Politics are politics and art is art.
The two shouldn't be mixed.'' The Russian mezzo-soprano was in New York to prepare for her Carnegie Hall recital Monday night, her first appearance in the city in eight years.


Further Revival Of Jets' Regulars
LEAD: This is the time of year the Jets are supposed to be going the other way - to the hospital.
The club has a history of damaging injuries in the second half of the season.


WESTERNWORLD-SAMUEL COMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERNWORLD-SAMUEL COMUNICATIONS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,167,827
443,699
Net loss
464,160
1,107,577
9mo rev
7,614,808
826,245
Net loss
918,352
1,560,958
The company attributed increased revenue primarily to the acquisition of Video Tape Co.


Transcript of Comments by the Principals on Agreement to Reduce Deficit
LEAD: Following is a transcript of a news conference at the White House yesterday announcing a bipartisan agreement on reducing the Federal budget deficit, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of Cable News Network:  OPENING STATEMENTS


LEWIS, PALMER G, CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEWIS, PALMER G, CO (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
58,896,821
60,018,339
Net inc
703,222
664,196
Share earns
.18
.17
9mo sales
169,823,763
140,382,319
Net inc
1,429,996
1,200,410
Share earns
.36
.31


Harry Liman, Dress Manufacturer, 89
LEAD: Harry Liman, a retired New York dress manufacturer, died of complications after surgery Thursday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 89 years old and lived in Lawrence, L.I.


NORTHEAST OPENS DRIVE TO CUT BACK OZONE POLLUTION
LEAD: Impatient with Federal efforts to control smog, New York, New Jersey and the six New England states are starting a major effort to reduce ozone by requiring changes in gasoline sold in the region in warmer months, beginning next summer.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 34.


Goldman, Sachs Chief Names 2 Vice Chairmen
LEAD: John L. Weinberg, the chairman and chief executive of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, yesterday named his two closest associates, Stephen Friedman and Robert E. Rubin, as vice chairmen, making them the heirs apparent to run one of the nation's most influential investment banking houses.


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 1987
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL 3-6, 28  A Cuban immigration understanding with Washington will be revived by that country's Government.
They will accept nearly 2,600 Cubans who are to be deported from the United States, State Department officials said.
Page 1  The top arms control official in the Pentagon, Frank J.


TV: 'King of the Birds' Offered on Channel 13
LEAD: As African birds go, the hammerkop, or hammer-headed stork, is not prepossessing.
It is dull brown and middle-sized, and wears, as George Page, the narrator, says, ''a guilty look.'' So, why is it called the king of the birds? ''Nature,'' on Channel 13 at 8 o'clock tomorrow night, tries to explain why.


BIO-RAD LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIO-RAD LABORATORIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
38,954,000
31,145,000
Net inc
1,452,000
1,320,000
Share earns
.19
.18
9mo sales
115,388,000
92,558,000
Net inc
6,112,000
4,781,000
Share earns
.81
.67
Shares outst
7,548,000
7,182,000


This Year in Moscow, a Kosher Feast
LEAD: For the first time in more than 50 years, kosher food is available again in Moscow, imported in regular shipments from Hungary and served up with the care and reverence that come of long decades of attacks on the traditions of Soviet Jews.


U.S. AND HAVANA AGREE TO RESTORE IMMIGRATION PACT
LEAD: The Cuban Government, in a policy reversal, has agreed to restore an immigration understanding with Washington that will allow the deportation of nearly 2,600 Cubans from the United States, State Department officials said today.


NBC and Turner In Venture Talks
LEAD: The National Broadcasting Company and the Turner Broadcasting System are discussing a range of possible joint ventures, according to sources at both companies.


Devils and Rangers Come Out on Top; DEVILS 5, BLACKHAWKS 2
LEAD: The Devils are becoming spoiled by their continued success at home and obsessed by their failure on the road.


Child Rescued from Texas Well Goes Home
LEAD: Jessica McClure, her right foot in a cast, leaving hospital in Midland, Tex.
The 19-month-old had been hospitalized since her rescue Oct. 16.
It took rescuers 58 1/2 hours to free her from an abandoned well. (AP)


Bilzerian Talks On Singer Bid
LEAD: Paul A. Bilzerian, the Florida investor, disclosed that his financial advisers had contacted unidentified third parties about purchasing all or a part of the military electronics and training systems divisions of the Singer Company if Mr.
Bilzerian succeeded in his $1.1 billion tender offer for the aerospace concern, based in Montvale, N


Encouraging a U.S. Space-Launch Service
LEAD: To the Editor:


On-Site Test Monitoring Questioned
LEAD: The House intelligence committee today challenged the Reagan Administration's assertion that new on-site monitoring measures are needed to verify Soviet adherence with nuclear testing limits.


STIFEL FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STIFEL FINANCIAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 30
1987
1986
Revenue
19,659,000
23,003,000
Net loss
1,525,000
b1,642,000
Share earns
-
.45
b-Net income


Organized Groups Flock to Iowa Trying to Gain Influence in '88 Campaign
LEAD: Organized groups representing causes ranging from the unborn to the elderly are more involved than ever in trying to influence the Presidential campaigns in Iowa.


TECHNOLOGY FOR COMMUNICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TECHNOLOGY FOR COMMUNICAIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
14,303,000
13,151,000
Net inc
1,489,000
1,413,000
Share earns
.48
.45
Yr rev
47,520,000
41,092,000
Net inc
4,355,000
b2,866,000
Share earns
1.42
.90


Bargain Forecast, Christmas and Beyond
LEAD: Anxiety about how much consumers will cut back spending is likely to produce unusually vigorous price cutting this Christmas selling period.


Seton Hall Gains
LEAD: Daryll Walker scored 20 points and Martin Salley added 18 tonight as Seton Hall opened its season with an 85-63 victory over George Mason in the first round of the Big Apple N.I.T.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 21, 1987
LEAD: GENERAL ASSEMBLY  Economic and Financial Committee - 10 A.M.


Illegal Aliens Need More Time to Emerge
LEAD: To the Editor:


WATSCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WATSCO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,541,000
3,972,000
Net inc
330,000
303,000
Share earns
.15
.14
9mo sales
11,411,000
11,455,000
Net inc
1,494,000
1,253,000
Share earns
.67
.58


Bank of New York Trims Bid for Irving
LEAD: The Bank of New York Corporation yesterday reduced its bid for the Irving Bank Corporation to $68 a share in cash and stock from $80 a share.
Analysts said the new offer would do little to reduce the Irving board's opposition to a takeover.


The Daily News And Guild Have Tentative Pact
LEAD: The Daily News and the Newspaper Guild have reached a tentative agreement that would reduce the newspaper's editorial and commercial staff by 64, including 10 of the paper's approximately 120 reporters.


Yale and Harvard Do the Unexpected
LEAD: A year ago, when Harvard and Yale completed losing seasons and both finished in the lower half of the Ivy League, there was much moaning and groaning.


LCS INDUS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LCS INDUS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,941,083
10,529,448
Net loss
506,382
b592,678
Share earns
-
.38
Yr sales
35,573,729
36,324,413
Net inc
204,105
1,252,067
Share earns
.13
.77
b-Net income


Army Tank Contract
LEAD: The Army has awarded a $605.4 million contract to the General Dynamics Corporation for 624 M-1A1 Abrams tanks.
The award, the latest installment in a four-year, fixed-price deal announced last spring, calls for delivery of the tanks by March 1990.


Editors' Note
LEAD: A picture caption on Thursday with an article about eased admission requirements for athletes at Columbia University carried an incomplete quotation from Stanley Broussard, a freshman football player, reversing the meaning of what he said. ''It annoys me to think the only way I could get in is to play football,'' the caption quoted Mr.


Dow Up on Budget Pact, But Wall St. Is Cautious
LEAD: The news that the White House and Congress had finally hammered out a budget-cutting agreement was greeted as somewhat of an anticlimax on Wall Street late yesterday afternoon.


Boy, 2, Is Crushed to Death By Tombstone in Cemetery
LEAD: A 2 1/2-year-old boy was crushed to death by a tombstone today while he and his sister played hide-and-seek in a cemetery.


Music: Pavarotti Gives Master Class
LEAD: Luciano Pavarotti's master class at the Juilliard Theater on Thursday reminded us that doing and teaching are not necessarily the same thing.
Mr.
Pavarotti, perhaps the most famous operatic tenor of our time, sat behind a desk at one side of the stage wrapped in an enormous red, white and blue scarf.


LOWE'S COS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOWE'S COS (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
645,600,000
594,300,000
Net inc
16,600,000
12,400,000
Share earns
.42
.31
9mo sales
1,940,000,000
1,790,000,000
Net inc
52,300,000
45,100,000
Share earns
1.32
1.16


Shultz, as Prosecution Witness, Makes Some Big Points for Deaver
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz gave high marks today to the ''integrity, honesty and truthfulness'' of Michael K. Deaver.


Rockefeller Gift Stirs Warm Soviet Response
LEAD: The Rockefellers dined out Thursday night at the home of their newest admirers: the Soviet Embassy in Washington.


2 Promoted At Seafirst
LEAD: The Seafirst Corporation, the Seattle bank holding unit of the BankAmerica Corporation, said today that its board had named Luke S. Helms president and Roy A. Henderson vice chairman, effective Jan. 1.
Seafirst also said that Richard P. Cooley would remain as chairman for approximately three years.


Cubs Pick Zimmer
LEAD: Jim Frey, who 10 days ago was named director of baseball operations for the Chicago Cubs, yesterday selected Don Zimmer, a boyhood friend from Cincinnati, as the team's manager.
Zimmer, who will be taking on his fourth managing job, recently signed a two-year contract as the third-base coach with the San Francisco Giants, but was allowed to negotiate with the


President's Proclamation
LEAD: Following is the text of President Reagan's 1987 Thanksgiving Day proclamation:  T HE WHITE HOUSE  By the President of the United States of America


Concert: Dresden Orchestra
LEAD: The Dresden Staatskapelle, which traces its history to 1548 and hence can claim to be the world's oldest orchestra, arrived in Carnegie Hall Thursday night for the first of three Manhattan concerts. (The two others, conducted by Colin Davis, will be Wednesday at Carnegie and Thursday at Avery Fisher Hall.) For this first program, the orchestra was led by Hans Vonk, who comes from the Netherlands and who became the Staatskapelle's principal conductor two years ago.


INSIDE
LEAD:  New on Saturdays: Consumers' World  A shaky economy means bargains for shoppers.
And Coping, a new column, talks about personal records you don't have to keep.
Page 56.
Prices Up 0.4% in October  Led by costlier shelter, cars and clothes, consumer prices rose again last month, putting inflation at a 4.8 percent rate this year.


NORSTAN reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORSTAN (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
20,296,000
23,945,000
Net inc
550,000
b533,000
Share earns
.13
.14
6mo sales
39,287,000
47,233,000
Net inc
893,000
b828,000
Share earns
.22
.21
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $34,000 and $41,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, and a tax credit of $107,000 and $164,000 for the same periods, respectively.


PAN ATLANTIC RE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAN ATLANTIC RE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,320,113
10,881,303
Net inc
b1,149,784
c660,973
Share earns
.26
.28
Shares outst
4,450,667
2,430,000
9mo rev
53,769,595
32,012,349
Net inc
b3,638,425
c3,558,873
Share earns
.89
1.47
Shares outst
4,100,167
2,430,000


Drawbacks Found in Deficit Package
LEAD: A month ago the markets sent a brutal message to Washington demanding credible cuts in the Federal budget deficit.
Prominent legislators promptly said the rout of the stock market was a cry for leadership., Special to the New York Times


From Agreement to Law
LEAD: These are the steps needed for the budget agreement reached yesterday to become law:


New York Approves Plan to Build 750 Apartments for Middle Class
LEAD: The New York City Board of Estimate, after heated testimony and almost 20 hours of negotiations, approved a plan early yesterday to build 750 condominium apartments for middle-income families in the Bronx.


MANAGEMENT CO ENTERTAINENT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANAGEMENT CO ENTERTAINENT
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,939,683
-
Net loss
8,527
-
6mo rev
8,363,606
-
Net inc
121,179
-
Share earns
.01
-
The company said since the acquisition of two of its four subsidiaries occurred subsequent to the initial public offering, figures for the year-ago periods are not comparable.


Amfac Ousts Its President
LEAD: Amfac Inc., a diversified company with operations in distribution, retailing, hotel and land development, said today that Ronald R. Sloan had been removed as its president and chief executive officer.
Henry A. Walker Jr., the company's chairman, has resumed his former positions as president and chief executive officer.


DELTONA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELTONA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,664,000
18,317,000
Net inc
1,271,000
1,909,000
Share earns
.11
.17
9mo rev
55,854,000
50,663,000
Net inc
b1,613,000
b1,291,000
b-After tax loss carryforwards of $698,000 for the latest period and $633,000 for the year-ago period.


Peter Serkin Recital
LEAD: The pianist Peter Serkin will give a benefit performance for the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity, at the corner of Clinton and Montague Streets in Brooklyn Heights, tomorrow at 4 P.M.
The recital is intended to raise funds for restoration of the church.
Tax-deductible tickets are $100.
Information: (718) 834-8794.


For Dairy Farmers, Debt, Sadness and Loss
LEAD: Before dawn today, Robert Podris milked his cows for the last time and went out of the dairy-farming business.


EQUATORIAL COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EQUATORIAL COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
14,421,000
7,759,000
Net loss
1,697,000
7,345,000
9mo rev
40,419,000
40,526,000
Net loss
7,584,000
10,939,000


John A. McCandless, Investment Manager, 82
LEAD: John A. McCandless, a retired president of Vance, Sanders &amp; Company, an investment management concern in Boston, Mass., died Wednesday in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 82 years old and a resident Delray Beach.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: A foot injury that has caused Joe Barry Carroll of the Golden State Warriors to miss the team's last three games will also sideline the 7-foot-1-inch center tonight when the Warriors play the Knicks at Madison Square Garden. . . .
The Yankees completed their 40-man roster Thursday by signing Steve Shields, a pitcher and a minor-league free agent.


ELGIN NATL INDUS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELGIN NATL INDUS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
27,130,512
33,463,952
Net inc
576,399
b1,624,088
Share earns
.19
-
9mo sales
84,319,148
80,378,740
Net inc
1,897,197
b7,630,202
Share earns
.62
-


OPPENHEIMER CAPITAL L P reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OPPENHEIMER CAPITAL L P (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,658,000
1,776,000
Per share
.33
.23
6mo net inc
5,271,000
3,963,000
Per share
.66
.50
Figures are pro forma.
The company completed its first full quarter of operations Oct.


Carlesimo Retiring
LEAD: Pete Carlesimo, who is credited with revitalizing the National Invitation Tournament, the oldest postseason basketball competition, announced his retirement yesterday as the tournament's executive director, effective June 30.
The announcement came several hours before the start of the Big Apple N.I.T.


DEC. 14 HEARINGS SET ON JUDGE KENNEDY
LEAD: The Senate Judiciary Committee decided today to begin confirmation hearings on Dec. 14 for President Reagan's latest nominee to the Supreme Court, Judge Anthony M. Kennedy.


ROSS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROSS INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,217,351
1,322,440
Net loss
113,149
b26,214
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


J. R. Ewing and Captain Furillo in Paris
LEAD: The world, they say, gets smaller all the time.


BOGERT OIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOGERT OIL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,422,000
4,075,000
Net inc
679,000
163,000
Share earns
.31
.08
Yr rev
18,183,000
19,290,000
Net inc
1,754,000
1,647,000
Share earns
.80
.77


Cities Group Says U.S. Policies Hurt Development Efforts
LEAD: Changes in the tax law and other Federal policies are undercutting the two economic incentives that cities use most often to lure development, municipal leaders said today.


CYANOTECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CYANOTECH CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
104,289
60,333
Net loss
502,465
368,293
9mo rev
283,248
130,334
Net loss
1,194,406
983,791


Corrections
LEAD: An art review in Weekend on Nov. 13 about a Guggenheim Museum exhibition, ''Fifty Years of Collecting:


Letter: On Government; Cabinet Should Have a Veterans' Seat
LEAD: To the Editor:


QUBIX GRAPHIC SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUBIX GRAPHIC SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
899,000
55,000
Net loss
551,000
945,000
6mo rev
1,754,000
55,000
Net loss
1,263,000
2,185,000


Nebraska Will Try to Stay No. 1
LEAD: The bus was waiting to leave the Orange Bowl.
It was about 1:30 in the morning on that memorable night in Miami nearly 16 years ago.
The cheering had stopped, if only temporarily.
And the football players and the coaches at Nebraska had reached that quiet moment when celebration turns to exhaustion and giddiness to satisfaction.


Europe Is Hopeful on Plan
LEAD: Nigel Lawson, Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer, welcomed the American budget plan today and said the industrialized nations should now prepare their response and call a meeting.


Carnegie Hall Tower On Its Way
LEAD: On a lot just to the east of Carnegie Hall, city officials and representatives from the hall gathered yesterday afternoon to break ground for the construction of a 59-story office tower.
The building will provide the concert facility with an additional area of 25,000 square feet in which to create new rehearsal spaces, dressing rooms and an enlarged backstage.


COPING: With Personal Records
LEAD: This is the time of year when many Americans feel as if they are drowning in a sea of paper, as dresser drawers and shoe boxes overflow with the year's accumulation of sales receipts, canceled checks and assorted other financial scraps.


Two Novelists Awarded Strauss Livings for '88
LEAD: Diane Johnson and Robert Stone have been named the 1988 recipients of ''The Mildred and Harold Strauss Livings.'' Each will receive $50,000 annually for five years, for purposes of allowing them to devote their time exclusively to writing.


Brooklyn Man Is Held In Killing of a Doctor
LEAD: A Brooklyn man was arrested yesterday in the slaying of a Queens obstetrician during an unsuccessful robbery Wednesday afternoon, the police said.


Tax Rises Expected Primarily for Corporations and the Rich
LEAD: The $9 billion of tax increases included in the budget package announced today were not designated, but they will likely be relatively limited in scope, with corporations and wealthier individuals shouldering most of the burden, according to Congressional tax writers.


WACOAL CORP reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WACOAL CORP
Year to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
832,986,000
750,109,000
Net inc
34,514,000
30,410,000
Share earns
1.12
.83
Latest year figures represent translations of the Japanese yen at the approximate exchange rate on Aug.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Cuts Seen at N.Y.U. Business School
LEAD: In a move that could affect thousands of New York business people, including hundreds on Wall Street, New York University will reduce by nearly a fourth the part-time student body at its Graduate School of Business Administration, according to faculty members at the school.


OVONIC IMAGING SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OVONIC IMAGING SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,077,000
393,000
Net loss
1,228,000
1,458,000


Mary Riordan and Timothy Gollin Wed in Houston
LEAD: Mary Elizabeth Riordan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice A. Riordan of Houston, was married there yesterday to Timothy John Gollin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Gollin of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and Chilmark, Mass.
The Rev.
Victor Brown, assisted by the Rev.
Francis X. Murphy, performed the ceremony at Holy Rosary Roman Catholic


Parking Non-Violation, Looking-Glass Hearing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stop the Clock
LEAD: To the Editor:


DEL LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEL LABORATORIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
28,436,000
28,871,000
Net inc
996,000
947,000
Share earns
.67
.63
9mo sales
85,181,000
84,330,000
Net inc
2,976,000
2,876,000
Share earns
2.00
1.91


BIOTECHNOLOGY DEVELOPENT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOTECHNOLOGY DEVELOPENT
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
715,419
384,673
Net inc
56,289
b199,483
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
1,664,266
1,132,958
Net inc
47,903
b667,325
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


ELECTRO-NUCLEONICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTRO-NUCLEONICS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
15,896,000
14,636,000
Net inc
b167,000
c195,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-After a tax credit of $57,000.
c-Net loss


OSHKOSH TRUCK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OSHKOSH TRUCK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
104,004,000
106,268,000
Net inc
5,176,000
7,496,000
Share earns
.58
.84
Yr rev
403,901,000
399,844,000
Net inc
25,811,000
24,824,000
Share earns
2.87
2.76


Circus: Big Apple Version, In 1 Ring at Lincoln Center
LEAD: Still flashing only one ring, like any faithful spouse after a decade of living together, the Big Apple Circus is celebrating, up at Lincoln Center, its 10th anniversary.
It is a pretty splashy affair for the modest circus, not in terms of large-scale Madison Square Garden three-ring splashiness maybe, but certainly big and bold for the radiant blue and yellow tent in Damrosch


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


Officials Arrest Six In Crack-Selling Ring
LEAD: Law-enforcement officials have arrested six people who reportedly sold an average of 12,000 vials of crack a week in the Albany region over the last two years, according to a spokesman for the Capital District Drug Enforcement Task Force.


Timerman Did Not Link His Arrest and Imprisonment to Anti-Semitism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Two Salvador Rebels Plan to Return Home To Test Latin Treaty
LEAD: The two senior leaders of the civilian wing of the Salvadoran rebel movement say they will return to El Salvador from exile in the next few days to test the the Central American peace treaty.


STEINBERG INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STEINBERG INC
Qtr to Oct 17
1987
1986
Sales
1,022,579,000
925,062,000
Net inc
6,238,000
9,731,000
Share earns
.16
.39
Shares outst
19,599,626
16,772,376
The company is listed on the Montreal Stock Exchange.


AIDS Virus in Pregnancy Studied
LEAD: One in 50 pregnant women was found to have antibodies to the AIDS virus in tests on 602 pregnant women at Kings County Hospital Center in Brooklyn, according to a report in the Journal of the American Medical Association.


N.C.A.A. to Proceed With Drug Testing
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association said yesterday that it would begin drug tests next Monday for athletes at all championship events despite a California judge's ruling that the tests generally violate both the California and United States constitutions.


U.S. and Laos in Accord on the Missing
LEAD: The United States and Laos announced today that Washington would begin considering the ''humanitarian problems'' of this isolated country as Laotians step up the search for Americans missing since the Vietnam War.


BEGLEY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEGLEY CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,200,000
17,600,000
Net loss
434,745
85,930
6mo sales
36,600,000
35,400,000
Net loss
275,537
b25,441
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''A balanced package.'' - Representative Jim Wright, Democrat of Texas and Speaker of the House.  [ 48:1. ]


Belem Journal; An Amazon Tribe Braves the Wilds of City Life
LEAD: Chief Poropot and 96 other Kaiapo Indians had come to the big city and stunned everyone with their body paint, their war clubs and their headdresses.
But they found the townsfolk pretty strange, too.


Officials Criticize New Plan For a Task Force on Schools
LEAD: A New York Board of Regents plan to name a task force to study the New York City school system has been criticized by state officials as a needless effort that would only delay solutions to the problems of the city's schools.


Stage: At American Place, 'That Serious He-Man Ball'
LEAD: In ''That Serious He-Man Ball,'' three old friends from high school meet on a suburban basketball court and compare the failed game plans of their lives.
Graduating with high ambition, each has, in a different fashion, pursued a path toward failure.
In common, the three are black men, and ethnicity remains a principal issue.


Tears In the Ruins
LEAD: Arriving in New York, I was amazed to find the streets still clogged with ultimate driving machines.
News reaching the hinterland had led me to believe that the fall of the stock market had wiped out 97 percent of the great city's famous yuppie population, and I could not believe they would have gone to the final wipe-out without taking their beloved ultimate driving machines with them.


Actors Get 3-Year Pact
LEAD: Representatives of the League of Off Broadway Theaters and Producers and the Actor's Equity Association have negotiated a three-year contract that will increase earnings for some actors and stage managers by more than 20 percent over the next three years.


Lagos Patrolled After Riots
LEAD: The police patrolled the city center and the old section of the capital today after three days of rioting by gangs of youths.
The riots started on Tuesday, but residents said no incidents had been reported since Thursday afternoon.
The police arrested 60 people during the clashes, touched off by the killing of two brothers who tried to mediate between the police and a motorist arrested by a traffic officer.


Dollar Little Changed; Precious Metals Climb
LEAD: The dollar was little changed yesterday in a session marked by wild, erratic swings, as market participants fell prey to trading on remarks by politicians about what had - and what had not - been achieved in cutting the Federal budget deficit.


Pentane May Add To Tesoro Offer
LEAD: Pentane Partners, a New York-based investment partnership, said that it would be prepared to raise its $15-a-share offer for the Tesoro Petroleum Corporation ''if additional value can be demonstrated.''


DYANSEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYANSEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,038,777
4,698,668
Net inc
447,053
211,907
Share earns
.09
.04
9mo rev
18,211,565
12,345,520
Net inc
974,605
578,902
Share earns
.20
.12


Top Arms-Control Official Quits; Criticizes Haste in Seeking Treaty
LEAD: The Pentagon's top arms-control official announced today that he was leaving the Government and criticized the Reagan Administration for what he called its rush to conclude an arms treaty with Moscow.


NORTH ATLANTIC INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH ATLANTIC INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,696,000
7,407,000
Net loss
144,000
b205,000
Share earns
-
.06
9mo sales
24,256,000
23,995,000
Net loss
585,000
b771,000
Share earns
-
.22


Wait on a New High Court Justice Till After '88; In Defense of Ginsburg
LEAD: To the Editor:


About New York; Getting Personal And Eating Tripe Among the Stars
LEAD: The celebrity interview used to be a simple affair: the interviewer published or broadcasted any self-serving thing the interviewee chose to pass along.
Then the rules changed.
The gaga press concluded, and rightly so, that vigorous, aggressive reporting turned up material with more pizzaz.


Radiation Level Is Cut Outside Plant in Queens
LEAD: A radium supply company in Queens has all but totally reduced radiation outside its plant to what the state regards as a safe level, state officials said yesterday.


OPTICAL SPECIALTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OPTICAL SPECIALTIES
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
2,000,000
2,900,000
Net loss
b2,600,000
2,300,000
Yr rev
8,900,000
9,900,000
Net loss
4,800,000
5,900,000
b-Includes a writedown of inventory of about $1,000,000.


Here's Where the Ax Will Fall Today
LEAD: While the mandatory spending cuts ordered by President Reagan today could affect a wide range of domestic and military programs over the course of the current fiscal year, they will immediately lower Government payments to doctors and dairy farmers and raise the price that students pay for Government-subsidized loans.


Malaysian Car for U.S.
LEAD: Malaysia's money-losing national auto manufacturer, Proton, signed an accord today to distribute its Proton Saga car in the United States.
Proton America Inc., headed by Malcolm Bricklin of Bricklin Industries, will import the car. ''Production of the models bound for the United States will begin in October 1988, once modifications to meet U.S.


Verity Warns Japan on Curb
LEAD: The United States could retaliate if Japan continues to bar American companies from participating in public works projects, Commerce Secretary C. William Verity Jr. said today.


Yonkers Unsure How to Satisfy Judge's Ruling
LEAD: City officials expressed confusion and anger today over a Federal judge's decision to bar the city from assisting developers until it complies with a court order calling for the construction of public housing.


TERRA MINES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TERRA MINES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
46,000
146,000
Net loss
1,119,000
b91,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
5,088,000
344,000
Net loss
1,239,000
73,000
b-Net income  Figures are in Canadian funds.


Copies of Popular Toys Are Often Hazardous
LEAD: Imported toys that resemble popular brand-name products can pose serious safety hazards, toy experts say.
These toys can even find their way onto the shelves of reputable stores across the country.


Haig, the Old Warrior, in New Battles
LEAD: Alexander M. Haig Jr. has been working hard to become a politician.
But sometimes the soldier in him shines through.


ALLIS-CHALMERS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIS-CHALMERS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
164,117,000
194,361,000
Net loss
b5,753,000
c800,000
9mo rev
494,899,000
576,635,000
Net loss
14,068,000
d2,825,000
b-Includes pre-tax bankruptcy costs of $3,460,000.


Devils and Rangers Come Out on Top; RANGERS 4, JETS 3
LEAD: The score was tied, 3-3, which was acceptable to the Rangers, but instead of relaxing, they used the final two minutes to bear down and avoid the strain of an overtime session so close after Thursday night's loss in Minnesota.


N.B.A. Building Code
LEAD: The heat is on the Miami Heat, a National Basketball Association franchise due to begin play in the 1988-89 season.
Heat officials were told this week by the N.B.A. that the number of bathrooms in its new arena now under construction must be increased from the present 76 to 125 or the city could lose the franchise.


FAIRFIELD-NOBLE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAIRFIELD-NOBLE CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,491,000
4,238,893
Net inc
1,124,000
900,302
Share earns
.49
.39


Bruce Would Return
LEAD: Earle Bruce, who will apparently end his career as head football coach at Ohio State this afternoon when the Buckeyes close their season against Michigan, has admitted that he could be talked into returning as coach of the Buckeyes.
Bruce, who was dismissed on Monday by Edward Jennings, the university president, said


Volkswagen to Shut U.S. Plant
LEAD: Volkswagen, the first foreign automobile company to build cars in the United States since the end of World War II, announced today that it will close its American assembly plant by next autumn.


Pitching of a Different Sort for a Central Park Baseball Field
LEAD: With his feet together in the required stance of a petanque player, a visitor to Central Park threw his ball toward a marker as he enjoyed a game with three friends yesterday on a baseball field near 62d Street.


Chavez Takes Lightweight Crown
LEAD: Julio Cesar Chavez won the World Boxing Association lightweight title tonight when he stopped Edwin Rosario, the defending champion, at 2 minutes 36 seconds of the 11th round of a scheduled 12-round fight at the Las Vegas Hilton outdoor stadium.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  The Statehouse Is Soiled


TRAVELS IN THE QUIRKY LATITUDES
LEAD: IT'S RAINING IN MANGO  Pictures From a Family Album.
By Thea Astley. 208 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $17.95.


Eve Parish Chilton Marries Film Company Executive
LEAD: Eve Parish Chilton, the director of family program acquisitions for the Miramex Films Corporation, a distribution and production company in New York, and Harvey Weinstein, a co-chairman of Miramex, were married last evening at the Lotos Club in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Fred Baldwin, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Charles D.


Who's In Charge Here?
LEAD: TO HIS SUPPORTERS in the early 1980's, Army Col.


A Motley Extended Family For Annual Giving of Thanks
LEAD: THREE years ago in a modest ceremony in Manhattan, a Methodist from Texas married a Jew from Ohio.
It was the second marriage for both.
Both had lived and worked in the city for more than a dozen years.
Both had happily stored Christmas tree balls and Hanukkah candles in the rarely opened little cabinets above their separate fridges.


WINTER SALMON RIVER FISHING
LEAD: IF considerable physical discomfort doesn't depress you and you can also persuade yourself that winter fishing in the snow belt is not a sport for idiots, you might enjoy trying for the big brown and steelhead trout that are even now surging up New York State's Salmon River, which enters Lake Ontario near


IT HAD THAT SWING
LEAD:  DUKE ELLINGTON  By James Lincoln Collier.
Illustrated. 340 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $19.95.


Joanne Cestone Marries
LEAD: Joanne Cestone, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Angelo Cestone of East Hanover, N.J., was married there yesterday to Michael Farrell McHugh, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas McHugh of Brick Town, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard Carlson, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church.


Fashion; JEWELED ARTISTRY
LEAD: BARRY KIESELSTEIN-CORD RE-members being ''somewhat taken aback, even apprehensive,'' at being ushered into the private vault of an investment banker client.
Assembled there in radiant profusion were some 35 pieces of jewelry he had designed.
When Kieselstein-Cord expressed his astonishment, the client replied, ''Your work is part of my investment portfolio.


60 Protesters Stalk Connecticut Deer Hunters
LEAD: Some 60 animal rights protesters, many of them carrying flash cameras and grisly photographs of freshly shot deer, stalked hunters in the Yale-Myers Forest today in an effort to disrupt the start of Connecticut's annual controlled deer hunt here.


Sloppy Knicks Get Their 2d Victory
LEAD: It won't be very often this season that the Knicks benefit from such charity.
Last night, they found themselves matched against the Golden State Warriors, a team that was both drained from a road trip and debilitated by injuries.
Still, it was three full periods before the Knicks could manage their second victory of the season.


Homeless Group Is Scattered From the Grounds of M.I.T.
LEAD: The police rousted more than a dozen homeless people from their makeshift shelters and tents on Massachusetts Institute of Technology property today, arresting several when they balked at leaving in the rain, school officials said.
A spokesman for the institute, Robert C. DiIorio, said people at the tent city had been warned since last month that they could not stay.


JOANNE KING WEDS
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church of the Presentation in Upper Saddle River, N.J., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Joanne K. King, a daughter of Ruth Glener of Hawthorne, N.J., and Carl J. King of Chicago, to Dr.
Kambiz Noruzi, a son of Sonia Noruzi of Upper Saddle River and the late Naghi Noruzi.


THE CONTRADICTIONS OF BOB DOLE
LEAD: I want to correct a misimpression created by the remarks attributed to me in the article on Republican Presidential candidate Robert Dole (''The Contradictions of Bob Dole,'' by Martin Tolchin and Jeff Gerth, Nov. 8).
The remarks quoted in the article were accurate - as far as they went.
What was left out were my other remarks, on Bob Dole's great strength: his ability to bring together opposing sides and mold a consensus on tough issues.


Oh, for the Spice of Eccentricity
LEAD: IN ''NUTS,'' BARBRA STREISAND PLAYS A WOMAN who curses frequently, exhibits violent mood swings and lashes out angrily at those she loves.
This behavior is supposed to convince an audience that a judge might find her certifiably insane, but by some latter-day, urban standards, it's really all in a day's work.


From Kim Young Sam, Appeal for the Safe Road
LEAD: As he demonstrated today before a thin crowd in front of the Chonju rail station, Kim Young Sam is no stem-winding orator.


Two Suspected Prostitutes Slain in New York
LEAD: Two women believed to be prostitutes were killed in separate incidents in New York City yesterday morning and Friday evening, the police said.


THE WONDERFUL ART OF VULGARITY
LEAD: PSYCHOTIC REACTIONS AND CARBURETOR DUNG  By Lester Bangs.
Edited by Greil Marcus. 386 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Ellen C. Shapiro Is Married to Bruce A. Wolfson
LEAD: Ellen Carol Shapiro, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Aaron Shapiro of Lawrence, L.I., and Bruce Alan Wolfson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Theodore Wolfson of Northbrook, Ill., were married last evening.
Rabbi Allan Blaine officiated at the Hotel Pierre in Manhattan.


Jennifer Scheck To Wed in May
LEAD: Jennifer Jane Scheck, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank F. Scheck of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Gary Wayne Lee, the son of Mrs.
James Mallicoat and Alton Lee, both of Spokane, Wash., plan to marry in May, the future bride's parents have announced.


Italy
LEAD: To the Editor: Having just returned from Italy we would like to advise its prospective visitors of yet another risk.


Rock: John Lydon and Public Image Ltd.
LEAD: JOHN LYDON could not believe the audience response when Public Image Ltd., his band, played Wednesday at the Beacon Theater.
The sold-out house stood and watched him perform, then applauded each song warmly - but it neither joined in on choruses nor sneered back at Mr.
Lydon's taunts.
As Johnny Rotten, the voice of the Sex Pistols, and then as the cynical, corrosive leader of Public Image Ltd., Mr.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  DOCTOR COYOTE  A Native American Aesop's Fables.
By John Bierhorst.
Illustrated by Wendy Watson.
Unpaged.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $14.95. (Ages 7 to 10)  DEATH OF THE IRON HORSE  Written and illustrated by Paul Goble.
Unpaged.
New York: Bradbury Press. $12.95. (Ages 5 to 8)


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bay Shore  $185,000  164 South Ocean Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 90-year-old Victorian; fireplace, study, original moldings; taxes $4,100.
Copiague  $280,000  50 Gateway Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 14-year-old ranch; fireplace, c/a, pool, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.


Donna L. Kaplan Is Wed To David E. Rabinowitz
LEAD: Donna Leigh Kaplan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley I. Kaplan of Old Westbury, L.I., and Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to David Edward Rabinowitz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul J. Rabinowitz of Bridgewater, N.J.
Rabbi Joseph Sternstein officiated at the Glen Head (L.I.) Country Club.


NEW YORKERS, ETC.
LEAD: IT'S true that Meghan Robinson is an actress, that she's in something called ''Psycho Beach Party,'' and that the campy mother she plays is based not so loosely on ''Mommie Dearest.'' All of which might lead one to the conclusion that Ms.
Robinson is a trifle offbeat (or even more than a trifle), and that it's no wonder that she would spurn any normal menu for


A Family's Legacy on Show In Amsterdam
LEAD: THE van Loon Museum offers visitors the opportunity to step inside one of Amsterdam's great homes and discover how the 17th- and 18th-century merchant princes of the Netherlands lived.


THE END OF A MARRIAGE, LIVE FROM TIMES SQUARE
LEAD:  CLEA &amp; ZEUS DIVORCE  By Emily Prager. 259 pp.
New York: Vintage Books.
Paper, $6.95.


Lawns Turn Brown, Pockets Are Green
LEAD: In an emotional response to two articles appearing on Oct. 25, I must write you this letter.
The articles were titled ''Nassau Water Restrictions Are Here to Stay''  [ Long Island Weekly ]  and ''Hempstead Opens Tap on Development,'' subtitled ''Water Curb Over, 3 Projects Planned For Mitchel Field''  [ Real Estate ] .


INSIDE
LEAD:  Ex-Gov.
Folsom Dies at 79  James E. Folsom, a colorful figure in Alabama politics for nearly five decades, was a Democrat with a reputation as a moderate on race issues who twice served as Governor.
Page 52.
Koch Faults School Board  Mayor Koch has accused the Board of Education of taking too long to pick a new schools chancellor.


SOUTH AFRICA LOOKS EAST, AND EXTENDS ITS MARKETS
LEAD: ALTHOUGH trade with its customary partners is slackening under pressure from economic sanctions, South Africa has managed an overall gain in commerce so far this year, the Government reports.
Experts here say that the country's recent 45 percent drop in exports to the United States, which was its largest trading partner, has been offset by trade with other nations, particularly in Asia.


The Editorial Notebook; The Jail Barge Blunder
LEAD: It seemed like a good idea last spring: Turn a floating barracks from England into instant New York City jail cells.
Today, all too late, it looks like an enormous blunder.


The Legacy
LEAD: It was just about as exciting as the Al Capone vault caper.


Trade Gap
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York to Deploy Cameras Against Red-Light Violators
LEAD: In its latest offensive against drivers who run red lights, New York City will soon begin deploying a new weapon at three intersections: cameras.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  AUGUST WILSON ENCORE  August Wilson's new play, ''The Piano Lesson,'' opens at the Yale Repertory Theater, York and Chapel Streets in New Haven, this week.
Mr.
Wilson's ''Fences,'' which also had its premiere at Yale Rep, won a Pulitzer Prize and Tony Award after it was transferred to Broadway, where it is still running.


The Military Spurns the Temptation Of a Draft
LEAD: MILITARY conscription, an issue that never quite goes away, and the closely related idea of having all young people devote a term of service to their country, are increasingly under discussion.


MILLION-MILE VOLVO IGNORES STOP SIGNS
LEAD: I WATCHED the man go in circles, trying to put a million miles on his car.
Indian summer had come and gone, so it was cold in New York.
I stood inside, inhaling a warm bloody mary and taking note of this silliness through the window, watching him go round and round.


Battle by Candidates Over Rules Divides Republicans in Michigan
LEAD: What was intended among state party leaders here as a kind of showcase event, the first national test of delegate strength among Republican Presidential contenders, has dissolved into an acrimonious battle over party rules that has left Michigan Republicans confused and badly divided.


HIKE BOOK DESCRIBES 38 TRAILS
LEAD: THE 15th edition of the Connecticut Walk Book, a hikers' guide for 50 years, is being published this month by the Connecticut Forest and Park Association.


Headliners; Reaching Out
LEAD: Not since former Mayor John V. Lindsay abandoned his upbringing to become a Democrat in 1971 had the Democrats made such a fuss over a New York Republican.
Donald J. Trump, the billionaire investor and real-estate developer, last week was asked by Jim Wright, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, to be the host at a major fund-raising event, the 25th annual Democratic Congressional dinner in Washington in March.


Koch Urges More Speed in Picking Schools Chancellor
LEAD: After months of virtual public silence on the search for a new schools chancellor, Mayor Koch has accused the New York City Board of Education of taking too long in its quest.
And he put forth two candidates of his own.


Gallup Poll Shows Rise in Compassion For Victims of AIDS
LEAD: Attitudes of Americans toward AIDS have shifted dramatically since last summer, marked by increased compassion for the victims of the disease, rising support for protecting them from being dismissed from their jobs and a growing opposition to requiring them to carry special identification cards, according to the latest Gallup


Gooden Weds
LEAD: DWIGHT GOODEN was married to Monica C. Harris last night in Tampa, Fla., in a private ceremony attended by some 600 guests, including Gary Carter, Dave Magadan and a few other of Gooden's teammates on the Mets.


DOCUMENTARY
LEAD:  Vietnam: In the Year of the Pig  Produced and directed by Emile de Antonio.
MPI Home Video. 103 minutes. $39.95.


Next Week; Who Should Win the Heisman Trophy?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Theater
LEAD: The Holocaust is given a deeply personalized dramatic treatment in ''A Shayna Maidel'' by Barbara Lebow.
The focus of her poignant new play (at the Westside Arts Theater, 407 West 43d Street) is the relationship between two sisters, separated for almost 20 years.
The younger sister emigrated to America with their father while the other one remained in Poland with their mother and was traumatized by a tortuous incarceration in


Decomposed Body Is Found; A Suspect Is Held in Bronx
LEAD: A 31-year-old man was arrested and charged with killing a woman whose decomposed body was found behind the suspect's apartment building in the Bronx yesterday, the police said.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  VINCE: A Personal Biography of Vince Lombardi.
By Michael O'Brien. (Morrow, $19.95.) For years, football fanatics and non-football fanatics have said that Vince Lombardi, the legendary head coach of the once-great Green Bay Packers, was a godsend to the sport.
His motto was ''Winning isn't the most important thing; it's the only thing'' and some have proclaimed that he was the personification of success.


Unbalancing the Scales of Justice
LEAD: THE judge glared at the defense attorney seated at the litigants' table before him and ordered him to stand up.


Designing Women: A Piece Strikes a Nerve
LEAD: Regarding ''Decorate Till You Drop,'' Long Island Sound, Oct. 11, and responses in letters to the Long Island editor, Nov. 1: The piece by Barbara Klaus must have contained enough truth to be truly effective humor - enough to encourage two designing women to take pens in claws and dash off biting, inappropriate responses to an article tat was plainly spoof; good-natured humor.


CHOOSING THE RIGHT PAINTBRUSH
LEAD: MANY homeowners give little thought to choosing a paintbrush.
Others find the array of brushes confusing and the choice difficult.


CAN WE ASK MOR OF OUR LEADERS THAN WE ASK OF OURSELVES?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Delay Seen in New York Rent-Control Rises
LEAD: For the second time since 1985, a problem in New York State's handling of the rent-control program could delay approval of standard rent increases for several months.


Land Sale To Lab Debated
LEAD: THE Nature Conservancy's plan to sell 10.3 acres to the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory has raised concerns among some local residents.


Conversion of 3 Hotels
LEAD: Lots of families, when planning for the future, think about one day having a little place at the shore.
A new conversion project in Westhampton Beach on Long Island that is under review by the Attorney General's office presents such an opportunity but on a scale many may not have imagined.
Goodstein Development, a Manhattan company active in commercial and residential projects, has purchased three beachfront hotels on Dune Road and is converting them into cooperative units.


CAREER SERVICES AT COLLEGES
LEAD: Regarding the article ''Fairfield U. Program: 10 Years of Career Help''  [ Oct. 18 ] , I would like to call attention to the fact that Fairfield University is not the only institution in Fairfield County to offer such career counseling and related services to the general public.


FOOD INSPECTION RESULTS
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 26 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


LAWMAKERS WEIGH AGRICULTURE CUTS
LEAD: A 2 percent cut in target prices for farmers' crops is being strongly considered by lawmakers searching for ways to reduce the agriculture budget as part of the deficit-reduction agreement.


Patricia Gillette To Marry in May
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley C. Gillette of Kent, Conn., and New York of the engagement of their daughter, Patricia Ann Gillette, to Steven R. Norman, the son of JoAnn Mickler-Bischoff of Sarasota, Fla., and stepson of Gustave Bischoff.
A May wedding is planned.


A Wedding of Darkness and Light
LEAD: CICELY COTTINGHAM is a landscapist who works at night using charcoal, which she massages into her paper until it resembles impacted soot.
Light is present in these drawings, but only to the degree that it defines the masses of darkness.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 1987
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL/3-25


Jersey Group Proposes Construction Tax to Finance Housing
LEAD: The New Jersey Economic Policy Council has proposed a statewide tax on new construction to finance housing for low- and moderate-income families.


VIDEOTAPE ON MYTHS AND LEGENDS IS FREE
LEAD: I read with interest Tessa Melvin's article, ''Tracing Steps of Leather Man'' in the Westchester Weekly on Sunday, Nov. 8.


The View From: The American Indian Archaeological Institute; AT THANKSGIVING, STUDENTS TASTE A BIT OF ALGONQUIAN LIFE
LEAD: EACH November, turkeys, football games and early glimpses of Christmas tinsel herald the nearing of Thanksgiving.
In the town of Washington, the season is also marked by the sight of bright yellow school buses traveling along the narrow roads, bringing groups of children eager to learn about the first Thanksgiving to the American Indian Archaeological Institute.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended Nov. 7  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill  $335,000  155 East 93d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, large kitchen, high ceilings; maintenance $750, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: A.J. Clark)  Chelsea


LEGISLATOR FOSTERS TOURISM PROPOSAL
LEAD: I read, with great interest, your article, ''New Efforts Seek to Tap County's Potential for Tourism''  [ Nov. 8 ] .
And I agree that there is a real need to promote our historic and cultural locations.


Eastern Europe
LEAD: To the Editor: I found the articles on ''Europe's Other Half'' (Travel, Oct. 4) most interesting, but there are a few notes I should like to add, based on a recent trip (self-guided).


Bounty of Concerts Heralds Thanksgiving
LEAD: THE rush to clear the musical decks before Thanksgiving is most decidedly on, with at least half a dozen attractive entries on today's concert calendar.
Squeezing in half an hour ahead of most of the competition is another of the New Rochelle Library's ''Music, Wine and Cheese'' recitals, the 2:30 P.M.


THE COURSING HUDSON GIVES SOLACE AND CARRIES AWAY A FRIEND'S SORROW
LEAD: THE autumn winds bring fierce whitecaps to Haverstraw Bay.
Even on the calmest days, I've yet to see another rowing shell scudding along the Hudson.
On the wild days, the whitecaps transform the smooth precision of rowing to a delicate balancing act that slams spray over the bow and threatens to overturn my slender craft.


Guest Observer; Salad Days
LEAD: YOU NEVER MEET A serious jogger under the age of 20 or so (why should they mortify themselves that way?), but youngsters are not indifferent to health.
And suddenly every one of them has an opinion about food.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  TINYTOWN  Little houses made of glass, ceramic, wood, stone and paper go on display today at The Gallery in the Municipal Building in Hastings-on-Hudson.
They have been constructed by 25 artists and craftsmen as dollhouses, sculptures or scale models.
One ''English cottage'' was built for the creator's cats and another artist's dog lives in the Art Deco dwelling on view.


Oklahoma (11-0) Rises to Occasion
LEAD: For two weeks, the Nebraska fans who regularly pack Memorial Stadium with their red outerwear listed the factors that would win this year's game of the century.


CALLING ON PROFESSIONALS IN SPECIAL EDUCATION
LEAD: In a world where television and stereo compete for children's attention, I would say that any positive endeavor to entice children to read is to be applauded.
Your article on the ''Debate on Tutoring Centers''  [ Nov. 1 ] , however, needs to be addressed from broader perspective.
As a professor of education and a private practitioner,


Costantino Will Retire From Federal Court
LEAD: Mark A. Costantino, who has served as a Federal judge in the Eastern District of New York since 1971, will retire from regular active service on Nov. 30 and assume the status of a senior judge.
In that capacity, he will continue to handle cases in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.91
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.68
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.82
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
9.67
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


Doubts Voiced on Murder Case Against L.I. Nurse
LEAD: As he ordered Richard Angelo held without bail on assault charges, Suffolk County Judge Alfred C. Tisch suggested that the 25-year-old nurse may have ''perpetrated the largest series of mass murders in the metropolitan region, if not the nation.''


SABATINI-GRAF FINAL OFFERS A GLIMPSE OF THE FUTURE
LEAD: The record has been one-sided, suggesting that what was being heralded as the next great rivalry in women's tennis is still several months away.
Quite unexpectedly, Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina has given herself another opportunity to show that the record is a bit misleading, and that she is closer to Steffi Graf than many tennis fans might think.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  HARLEM TROUPE IN BERGEN


Jefferson and His Slave: A Relationship in Doubt
LEAD: The widespread belief that Thomas Jefferson, the great theorist of American freedom, maintained an intimate 38-year relationship with one of his slave women, has been cast into doubt by new historical research.


Snuffed Out
LEAD: FOR most of its 15 years it attracted the top thoroughbreds in the nation to Belmont Park, but according to Gerard J. McKeon, the president of the New York Racing Association, the Marlboro Cup will be run no more.
McKeon said the mile-and-a-quarter race, which was named for a cigarette, had been canceled because a new marketing team had taken over at the cigarette company, Philip Morris USA


Can the Giants And the Jets Still Make The Playoffs?
LEAD: The Giants lost twice to a team (Dallas) that lost to the hapless Detroit Lions.
They're going to be lucky to break even -and it serves them right for going to New Jersey.
As for the other team in the Garden State - their chances are much better.
I'd prefer, however, that they're passed by the only football team in New York State - the Bills.


Bears of Summer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Farm Sale May Menace Wetlands
LEAD: TWO Old Field properties considered of vital environmental significance to the West Meadow wetlands could be developed following the untimely death of their owner.


Talking: Meetings; Getting A Good Turnout
LEAD: EFFICIENTLY run, well-attended meetings often seem to the officers of condominiums and cooperatives to be an impossible dream, much like an entire month free from complaints.


Top Historian Takes Helm at French Library
LEAD: Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, who has been appointed the director of the Bibliotheque Nationale, France's national library, is one of the few European scholars whose name is known to American readers as well as historians.
He is ranked as the foremost French historian of his generation and one of the two or three most influential historians in the world today.


For Mac Owners With Wanderlust
LEAD: PORTABLE computers are an increasingly common sight on airliners these days.
Even so, I was amused on a recent flight to see a businessman sitting nearby hugging an Apple Macintosh to his chest like a baby.
He was still hugging it and smiling vacantly as he wandered off the plane.


The Beggar: Vanished With His World
LEAD:  There is a Gimpel  in every human being.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; What $2 Million or So Gets a Home Buyer
LEAD: THREE Russian wolfhounds in northern Westchester have a room of their own, with seven-foot-high casement windows reaching almost to the floor so they can look out at the rose garden from their beds.


For Paralyzed Officer, a New Home
LEAD: In bitter, bonechilling weather, Steven McDonald returned home today to a warm welcome from friends, family and fellow police officers.


U.S. and Soviet Agree to Site Inspections
LEAD: The United States has decided to allow the Soviet Union to station inspectors on United States soil outside an American installation in return for monitoring rights at a Soviet missile assembly facility, senior Administration official said today.


Before Turkey, a Soup Course
LEAD: ONE of the most convenient first courses to serve for Thanksgiving dinner is soup.
Most soups lend themselves to advance preparation, if not several days beforehand at least early in the day.
They can be reheated when dinner is ready to serve.


North Korea Floats a Revolutionary Ideology: Realism
LEAD: NORTH KOREA has lost faith in its ability to reunify Korea under Communist rule and is prepared to negotiate peace with South Korea and the United States following next month's presidential election in the South.
This was my conclusion after 10 days of conversations in Pyongyang last month with a variety of North Korean leaders, including Prime Minister Li Gun Mo, Foreign Minister Kim Yong Nam and Hwang Chang Yop, the powerful secretary of the Workers (Communist) Party Central Committee responsible for foreign policy.


Wedding Planned For Ms. Norville
LEAD: Deborah Anne Norville, a correspondent for NBC News, plans to be married Dec. 12 to Karl G. Wellner, president of JS Products in New York.


Gifts of Gear And Gadgets
LEAD: THE best travel gift we ever got was a set of compact, high-quality folding binoculars.
They are now the second thing written on the family packing lists, after the plane tickets.


Rudolf Serkin Cancels
LEAD: Rudolf Serkin has canceled the recital he was to give at Carnegie Hall on Dec. 9, on the advice of his doctor, who said the 85-year-old pianist was suffering from fatigue.
No replacement date has been set.
Ticket refunds will be given only at the box office, before Jan. 9.
Hours are 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.


When Chaos Rules the Market
LEAD: THAT the stock market embodies turbulence, mayhem and unpredictability, no survivor of October 1987 can doubt.
Some economists, borrowing the vocabulary of a new branch of science, now believe that it also represents chaos.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Westfront 1918  Directed by G. W. Pabst.
Nelson Entertainment-International Collection. 90 minutes. $29.95.
You can't help thinking about ''All Quiet on the Western Front'' while watching ''Westfront 1918.'' Both are antiwar movies from the point of view of German troops in the World War I trenches; both were made in 1930, ''All Quiet'' in the United States, ''Westfront'' in Germany.


Conferees Urge More Local Input in Land Use
LEAD: Participants in a conference on land-use issues in New York City that ended yesterday came with an array of ideas.
Among all the opinions, one came closest to a consensus: neighborhoods should have a greater say in their own development.


Music
LEAD: The work of two Brazilian musical giants, Antonio Carlos Jobim and Heitor Villa-Lobos, will be featured in Lincoln Center concerts Monday evening.
At Avery Fisher Hall, Mr.
Jobim, the architect of bossa nova and composer of ''Desafinado'' and ''The Girl From Ipanema,'' will sing and play guitar in a concert celebrating the 25th anniversary of the introduction of bossa nova to American concert halls.


U.A.W. Members at Navistar Approve a New 3-Year Pact
LEAD: Members of the United Automobile Workers in Illinois and four other states have voted to ratify a new three-year contract agreement with the Navistar International Transportation Corporation, officials said.


THE PERILS OF A READY-MADE AUDIENCE
LEAD:  THE VELVET PRISON  Artists Under State Socialism.
By Miklos Haraszti.
Translated by Katalin and Stephen Landesmann with Steve Wasserman. 165 pp.
New York: A New Republic Book/ Basic Books. $14.95.


Correction
LEAD: A listing last Sunday in The World of New York, part 2 of The Times Magazine, about places to take children in New York City, misstated the phone number of Theaterworks/USA.


'92 GOAL IN DOUBT
LEAD: Facing a research budget substantially smaller than they had envisioned, officials in charge of President Reagan's program to develop a ''Star Wars'' missile defense system say they are planning sharp cutbacks and delays of up to two years in key experiments and development projects.


Jeanne L. Walker Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Jeanne Lockwood Walker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fisk Halsted Walker of Laurel, Miss., was married there yesterday to William Evans Hannum 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hannum 2d of Alexandria, Va., and Siasconset, Mass.


THE WOMAN WHO BEAT THE KLAN
LEAD: I thank Jesse Kornbluth for his gripping account of Michael Donald's tragic death and of his mother's commitment to justice.
I lived in the South at the time and was outraged that a pack of social misfits like the Klan could get away with such treacherous acts in the 1980's.


MS. PUGH TO WED W. G. FILMYER JR.
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Roger V. Pugh Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Robin Marie Pugh to William George Filmyer Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Filmyer of Philadelphia and Loveladies, N.J.


Dance: A New Work By Wim Vandekeybus
LEAD: TOUGH, brutal, playful, ironic and terrific.
Adjectives seem unduly passive in describing ''What the Body Does Not Remember,'' the extraordinarily innovative dance piece that concludes the ''New Work From Belgium'' series at the Kitchen.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Orient Express  Question:Whom should we contact to learn about a trip on the Orient Express? - R. K., Lake Forest, Ill.
Answer:Several trains go by the name Orient Express.
One is called the Venice Simplon-Orient-Express, which is run by Orient-Express Hotels, using original, restored Orient Express cars.


Northrop's Struggle With the MX
LEAD: DAVID N. FERGUSON peered through a plate-glass window into the pristine room where technicians, clad from head to toe in surgical garb, pieced together the spherical devices that would guide nuclear MX ballistic missiles through their globe-spanning trajectories.


Jay Leno, Common-Sense Comedian
LEAD: ''DON'T YOU JUST LOVE IT?'' says the comedian Jay Leno, beginning another of those hard-nosed, common-sense riffs that sound as effortless as a cool bop solo. ''I had Donna Mills on 'The Tonight Show' with me and she says  [ launching into a coquettish voice ] , 'I was just voted one of the 10 sexiest women in America, and I don't know what that means.


Philadelphia to Pay Bail for at Least 300 Inmates
LEAD: The city of Philadelphia has pledged to put up more than $150,000 bail to free at least 300 inmates in an effort to ease prison overcrowding.
But prosecutors and finance officials are challenging the plan.


Miss Barnett Wed To J. D. Schmidt In Pennsylvania
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr, Pa., Elizabeth Anne Barnett, a daughter of Mrs.
Benjamin Hoffman Barnett of Haverford, Pa., and the late Mr.
Barnett, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Dean Schmidt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Schmidt of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Timothy Pickering performed the ceremony.


THE WOMAN WHO BEAT THE KLAN
LEAD: When I read that ''the woman who beat the Klan'' locked eyes with her son's murderer and said ''I do forgive you,'' I know the next time I am asked to name the woman I most admire, I will say ''Beulah Mae Donald.''  LINDA ABELSON  Minneapolis


CRIME
LEAD: You finish THE JERICHO RUMBLE by Christopher Murphy (Walker, $16.95) and then turn back to the first page.
Facing it is a Xerox copy of a ''brevet d'invention'' from the French patent office dated Feb. 12, 1965.
It appears to be the real thing. (Later in the book an English translation is provided.) It is the patent of an invention that can scramble brains and destroy buildings by an ultrasound device.


Can We Ask More of Our Leaders Than We Ask of Ourselves?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The agreement will have its critics.
But it should reduce the number of skeptics who thought Congress and the White House couldn't work together.''
- Senator Lawton Chiles,
Democrat of Florida.  [ 38:3. ]


Catering to the 'Four-Wheel Religion' Folks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The red brick floor in our sunroom is 11 years old and has become soiled.
How should we clean this brick and what can we do to keep the bricks clean without painting?


A Jazzman Plays His Life in His Own Key
LEAD: A BRIEF MUSICAL PHRASE FROM ''All the Things You Are'' spirals up through the dark theater.


Rikers I. Inmates Protest Security Measures
LEAD: Nearly 500 of 2,530 inmates at a city jail on Rikers Island refused the noon meal yesterday on the second day of a peaceful protest against more searches and other security measures initiated last week to reduce violence at the institution, the New York City Department of Correction reported.


BARBARA KAGAN TO WED THOMAS A. KORNREICH
LEAD: Mrs.
Charles M. Kagan of New York and Southampton, L.I., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Barbara Lynne Kagan, to Thomas Adam Kornreich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton A. Kornreich of Harrison, N.Y., and Boca Raton, Fla.


AN UGLY FEELING
LEAD: Feelings of triumph and dominance are part of a long heritage of primate evolution and human social development.
That Sam Toperoff should fear and hate himself because he experiences these natural feelings is a pathetic comment on the way contemporary social ideologies alienate us from ourselves.
Sexual egalitarianism requires self-hatred.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  SKINWALKERS, by Tony Hillerman. (Perennial/Harper &amp; Row, $3.95.) In Tony Hillerman's eighth mystery novel set among the mesas and arroyos of the Navajo Nation, Joe Leaphorn and Jim Chee are faced with a multiple murder involving a strange mix of Indian witchcraft and modern medicine.
Earlier this year, Newgate Callendar said here that the story is told ''in sensitive prose that once in a while approaches poetry.


Zoning Dispute Stirs Valley Stream
LEAD: RESIDENTS of a Valley Stream neighborhood backing up onto one of the village's busiest streets are fighting the latest of many battles in which Long Island residents are trying to change zoning laws they think are distressingly antiquated.


L.I. Coach Homes
LEAD: In the Midwest, where winters can be mean, an attached garage is seen by many home buyers as a necessity, not a luxury.


Civil Service And an End Run
LEAD: AFTER appointing a planning director, Huntington, L.I., faced an embarrassment.
The director flunked the Civil Service test for the job.


D-DAYS AND THE END OF WORLD WAR II
LEAD: Sarah Clayton's moving essay, ''What Will Happen to My Sons''  [ Opinion page, Oct. 11 ] , was in error when she referred to June 6, 1944, as the day ''when the allies began their long-awaited advance on Europe that eventually brought World War II to an end.'' Historically, this was not the case.


Carter Says 'Moral Hunger' Is Key to '88 Race
LEAD: Former President Jimmy Carter said today that there is a recurrence of a ''moral hunger'' in the nation that he said helped him win the Presidency in 1976 in the wake of the Watergate scandals, the Vietnam War and revelations of abuses by the Central Intelligence Agency.


Dr. Elizabeth A. Jonas Plans to Wed in March
LEAD: Dr.
Saran Jonas and Dr.
Ruth H. Jonas of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Elizabeth Ann Jonas, to Dr.
Thomas Eisen, a son of Dr.
Herman Eisen and Dr.
Natalie Aronson Eisen of Newton, Mass.
A March wedding is planned.


WHEN A PAINTING BRINGS MILLIONS, IT'S ART FOR HYPE'S SAKE
LEAD: NOW THAT RECORD PRICES ARE SET AL-most daily in the auction rooms, statisticians may find the idea of compiling a ''Top 10'' listing of prices irresistible; those who truly care about art will place such lists among the silliest and most misleading formulations of our time. ''Those people had to be crazy,'' posterity will say.


Focus: Kansas City; Housing Just a Walk From Jobs
LEAD: IN the 1940's and 50's, the area adjacent to downtown was one of the nation's largest clothing-manufacturing districts.
But foreign competition and labor problems closed much of it down.
Few firms survived into the 1960's and many of the solid old buildings began to decay.


Development and the Environment
LEAD: THE would-be New Jersey homeowner is fast becoming a prime candidate for the official list of endangered species in the Garden State.


FOR BRIGHT BLOOMS
LEAD: THIS would be a good week to apply fertilizer to dogwood trees; rake up remaining leaves and discard them, do not compost, as a precaution for disease control; scatter acid-type fertilizer on the ground around the root zone according to rates on bag label; rain and melting snow will seep nutrients in during winter.


A Chore for the Pope
LEAD: To the Editor:


A New Cafe Sets a New Tone for a Street in Portland
LEAD: Congress Street blossomed as this city's central, downtown business strip in the early 19th century, but since World War II much of it has fallen into decline.


21 Are Reported Killed In Attacks by Contras
LEAD: Twenty-one people were killed today during attacks by United States-backed contra rebels on two settlements in southeastern Nicaragua, local radio said.


AN EYE FOR RICH GEOLOGY
LEAD: STAN GABY of Colchester shows people those places in Connecticut where contintents collided, glaciers melted, striking rock patterns were formed and mysterious stone ruins were left.
He is a professor of geosciences at Mohegan Community College in Norwich, and he wants his students, and others, to notice the geological features around them.


Winter and Repentance Descend Upon Moscow Again
LEAD: A VISITOR who never really expected shades of Dostoyevsky's creatures to loom amid the slanting snow is surprised to sense Koestler's Rubashov - a more likely ghost in the city these days.
This was the fictitious character of ''Darkness at Noon'' modeled on Bukharin, who was expelled from the Party in 1937 and executed the next year, the doomed star of Stalin's infamous purge trials and one of the more articulate Bolsheviks, who finally received a few words of rehabilitation last month from Mikhail S.


Rumanians Riot Over Pay Cut and Shortages
LEAD: Several thousand rioting workers ransacked the city hall in the industrial city of Brasov last Sunday, driven to the streets by severe pay cuts and the prospect of a third consecutive winter of food and energy shortages.


Income of Doctors Rises 6.5%
LEAD: The mean income of physicians rose 6.5 percent last year to almost $120,000 annually, says the American Medical Association.


ON FINANCIAL BRACKET OF PRESCHOOLERS
LEAD: I read your article, ''Baby Boom Hitting Nursery Schools''  [ Nov. 1 ] , with great interest.
I would like to make one important correction.
The article states that in the Prekindergarten Program of New Rochelle ''all 215 children fall below the income guidelines to qualify.'' This is inaccurate and was probably a misunderstanding; 10 percent of the 215 children do exceed the financial guidelines.


MOVIES
LEAD:  River's Edge  Starring Crispin Glover, Keanu Reeves, Dennis Hopper.
Directed by Tim Hunter. 1987.
Embassy Home Entertainment. 99 minutes. $79.95.
The first scenes of ''River's Edge'' evoke a horrifying triptych: a doomed baby doll, a tattered sex doll and a dead teen-ager.
The group connected with their fates is the crux of this harrowing vision of adolescence.


Broader View Of the World
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Broadcast TV
LEAD: Television is kind to ''Gandhi,'' which CBS will show in two parts Wednesday and Thursday, beginning at 9 each night.
If the physically grand scale of the film does not look squeezed or even much reduced on the video screen, it may be because we're used to seeing the sorts of spectacle we get here in television news programs.


Returns to El Salvador
LEAD: Ruben Zamora kissing the flag after return from exile.
He urged Salvadorans to ''build a road to peace through dialogue.'' Page 20. (Agence France-Presse)


'The Enterprise' and Public Trust
LEAD: President Reagan accepts nominal responsibility for the Iran-contra affair - yet still won't acknowledge the heart of the scandal: his irresponsible privatization of Government's most sensitive functions.


Updating Rights
LEAD: Beginning Dec. 1, owners of rent-stabilized apartments must attach a new form outlining tenant rights to all new or renewal leases.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''Confidential business information has long been recognized as property.''


Jersey Court Upholds Lawyer-Client Privilege
LEAD: The attorney-client privilege protects lawyers from divulging the whereabouts of their clients, an appeals court has ruled.


POLLUTERS NOW PAY FOR FISH THEY KILL
LEAD: THE State Department of Environmental Protection is now charging polluters for the fish they kill with spills of chemicals or toxic materials.


G.O.P. SEES SIGNS OF A ROBERTSON INCURSION
LEAD: Bob Dole's campaign chairman in Iowa, Steven Roberts, says that while Vice President Bush is still the major target, Dole forces are ''real concerned'' about Pat Robertson.
John Buckley, who does public relations for Jack Kemp, says, ''We have always taken Pat Robertson seriously.'' Lee Atwater, Mr.


Defensive Error Sinks Seton Hall
LEAD: A miscommunication between a defender and the goalkeeper cost Seton Hall dearly in its 2-1 loss to Rutgers this afternoon in the Mid-Atlantic final of the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament.


CONGRESS IS SEEN AS LIKELY TO BACK DEFICIT AGREEMENT
LEAD: Despite strong opposition from conservative Republicans, Congress seems likely to adopt the deficit-reduction plan announced Friday by President Reagan and Congressional leaders, officials in the White House and on Capitol Hill said today.


Sizing Up Moscow
LEAD:  THE SIXTH CONTINENT  Russia and the Making of Mikhail Gorbachov.
By Mark Frankland. 292 pp.
New York: Harper &amp; Row. $22.95.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bridgeport, Conn.  $225,000  241 Lake Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 52-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fireplace; taxes $2,990.
Kent, Conn.  $92,000  South Kent Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old cottage; 0.5-acre property facing pond, needed work; taxes $711.


MARGARET BREWER IS WED
LEAD: At Trinity Episcopal Church in Princeton, N.J., Margaret Jane Brewer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn A. Brewer Jr. of Pennington, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Alan Libbey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Libbey of Portland, Me.
The Rev.
Jean R. Smith officiated.
The bride was until recently the director of social work services at the Community Memorial Hospital in Toms River, N.J.


St. Lucia's Gallic Flair
LEAD: EVERYONE on St.
Lucia seems to be a charter member of the Chamber of Commerce, led by the cabdrivers.
Rarely does one meet drivers so in love with their country, so knowledgeable - and yet so willing to charge the correct fare.
They will tell you about the hiking trails that wind through the interior's rain forest, about the orchids and Amazon parrots, and the volcanic range that rises to more than 3,000 feet and includes the pyramidical cones of the twin peaks called the Pitons.


THE ACCENT IS SPANISH
LEAD: YELLOW roses everywhere - on gloves, hats, handbags and stoles - are just one of the lighthearted fashion accents supplied by Isabel Canovas for spring and summer.
Other frippery includes yellow satin cummerbunds embroidered with black braid, black lace fans on hand-cut Bakelite frames and even fluffy yellow silk bows to clip on the fronts of shoes.


NEUROLOGY, NEUROSIS AND ALL THAT
LEAD:  THE OXFORD COMPANION TO THE MIND  Edited by Richard L. Gregory with O. L. Zangwill.
Illustrated. 856 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $49.95.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The red brick floor in our sunroom is 11 years old and has become soiled.
How should we clean this brick and what can we do to keep the bricks clean without painting?


Forestry Group Seeks Tougher Pollution Controls
LEAD: The American Forestry Association says acid rain and other air pollution are harming the nation's forests and has called on Congress to act to strengthen controls on the pollutants.


Learning to Live With A Coalition Government
LEAD: THE American system of government usually proves more ingenious than the men and women who run it.
So it seemed last week, as the suppleness of the system permitted some self-correcting accommodation and compromise in the struggle between the legislative and executive branches over control of foreign policy.


MS. BERMINGHAM, A LAWYER, IS WED
LEAD: The marriage of Amy G. Bermingham and Charles M. Wilson, 1980 graduates of Holy Cross College, took place yesterday at the Chapel of the College of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The Rev.
Thomas V. Bermingham, an uncle of the bride, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.


Business, B.C.
LEAD: NEARLY 4,000 YEARS AGO, A COU-ple of business partners in Anatolia, (Turkey, in modern parlance) had a dispute in court. ''When I was in Kanesh, you went off to Durhumit,'' one said, ''and there you entered my guesthouse and took out two containers, sealed.'' In other words, according to Dr.
Ira Spar, research Assyriologist at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, ''the guy stole a safe.


Film; Bill Forsyth's Rorschach Test
LEAD: IT STARTED INNOCENTLY enough.
Bill Forsyth was in town to pick up a New York Film Critics'


Union Gains In Overtime
LEAD: Union, regarded as perhaps the best team in the state, responded to a Linden touchdown in overtime with one of its own yesterday and won, 10-9, at Union to gain the final round of the North Jersey Section 2, Group IVplayoffs.


Students Say Syrians Raided At American Beirut Campus
LEAD: Syrian soldiers patrolling West Beirut stormed dormitories at the American University of Beirut Thursday night, students said.


PICTURES FROM A WOBBLY LIFE
LEAD: It's on the cover of Tony Mendoza's pictorial autobiography, STORIES (Atlantic Monthly Press, Paper, $6.95): a photo, which might pass as a snapshot if it weren't in formal black and white, of three women, up to their necks in water, wearing beach hats, all smiling.
They're friendly.
The caption, steaming with paranoia, reads ''Yeye's sisters, Magda, Tota, and Manana, used to make me nervous.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Brick Town 172,000  32 Bay Bridge Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, new colonial; family room, wall-to-wall carpeting, 1.25 acres, central air-conditioning; taxes $1,800.
Freehold  $212,500  55 Ethan Allen Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 14-year-old expanded ranch; fireplace, wooded backyard, 2-car garage; taxes $2,387.


James Howard, Production Director, Is Planning to Wed Ris Miller in May
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Miller of New York and Lawrence, L.I., have announced the engagement of Mr.
Miller's daughter Marissa Harris Miller to James W. Howard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Howard of Gill, Colo.
The couple plan to marry in May.


Jazz: J. J. Johnson's Trombone and Quintet
LEAD: J. J. Johnson was the definitive modern-jazz trombonist in the late 1940's and early 50's, when his recordings with Charlie Parker and other be-bop innovators showed how graceful, fluid and hard-driving his often-cumbersome instrument could be.


Eastern Europe
LEAD: To the Editor: I have been to the East Bloc countries and would like to add a few useful notes:


SPACE AT THE END OF THE TUNNEL
LEAD:  THE LIFE BELOW THE GROUND  A Study of the Subterranean in Literature and History.
By Wendy Lesser. 207 pp.
Boston: Faber &amp; Faber. $19.95.


DEBORAH OESTREICH TO MARRY
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
David Arthur Oestreich of Scarsdale, N.Y., of the engagement of their daughter Deborah Ann Oestreich to Jason Seth Rubin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mel Rubin of Great Neck, L.I.
Ms.
Oestreich is an assistant vice president in the international department at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.


To The Manor Reborn
LEAD: A WELL DATED JUNE 21, 1887, COM-memorating Queen Victoria's jubilee as the British sovereign, is the newest addition to Heydon, an estate village in Norfolk, three hours outside of London.
This tiny hamlet consists of several cottages nestled in a widow's row, a miniature post office, a 14th-century church, a park and a village green.


BEARINGS CALLED CAUSE OF LONDON SUBWAY FIRE
LEAD: Investigators said today that overheated bearings in an escalator probably ignited the fire in a London subway station in which 30 people died Wednesday evening.


Streaking Canadiens Edge Devils
LEAD: Bobby Smith scored 17 minutes 5 seconds into the second period tonight and the Montreal Canadiens made the goal stand up for a 2-1 victory over the Devils.


Before Turkey, a Soup Course
LEAD: ONE of the most convenient first courses to serve for Thanksgiving dinner is soup.
Most soups lend themselves to advance preparation, if not several days beforehand at least early in the day.
They can be reheated when dinner is ready to serve.


ISLANDERS SCORE 5 IN THIRD TO RALLY OVER FLYERS By ALEX YANNIS
LEAD: The Spectrum was rocking with cheers after two periods, but they turned to jeers for the Flyers tonight after Philadelphia yielded five straight goals to the Islanders in the last period.


Dartmouth Trustees Endorse More Women in Student Body
LEAD: Dartmouth College trustees have endorsed a call by the school's president to seek more female undergraduates, but they say the effort will not mean considering gender in admissions.


THE WORLD AND OUR MOTHERS
LEAD: IT was the tone of ''Sons and Lovers,'' not the subject matter, that came as a shock when the novel was published in 1913.
The directness of the writing established the erotic hold the mother and the son had on each other.
People were amazed, but 10 minutes after the book had been published everyone who could read said, ''Of course.


Carol A. Cheswick Marries R. T. Ross
LEAD: At the Noroton Presbyterian Church in Darien, Conn., Carol Ann Cheswick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Reid Cheswick of Darien and Hobe Sound, Fla., was married yesterday to Richard Thomas Ross, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Ross Jr. of Darien.
The Rev.
Dr.
Lawrence McCall Horton, pastor emeritus of the church, and the Rev.


Fire In Tibet
LEAD: SINCE OCT. 1, JOHN ACKERLY HAS BEEN CARRYING IN HIS pocket a handful of bullet casings.
He says it is important for him to have these tangible reminders of the day when the Tibetan capital of Lhasa erupted in one of the bloodiest demonstrations against Chinese rule since Tibet was invaded in 1950.


Telltale Pantyhose Purchase
LEAD: WHAT a microcosm of human behavior (not all of it good) can be found in a large store's hosiery department on a Saturday morning, as I well know from working there.


A Missing Connecticut Judge Is Found Dead
LEAD: A Danbury, Conn., probate judge who had been missing for four days was found dead in a hotel room in Washington Friday evening, the police there said yesterday.


Out of Sight, Out of Soul
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday from Fort Lauderdale, Fla., about Antioch College's effort to acquire a state park omitted attribution for the opinion that the park was badly managed.
It was the college's opinion.


85 Minutes That Scarred History
LEAD: THERE IS NOTHING EXCEPT the plaque on the gatepost that hints of the infamy perpetrated here.


Storm Surprises Truk Island; 5 Are Dead Amid Wide Ruin
LEAD: A tropical storm with 70-mile-an-hour winds slammed into the capital island of the Pacific archipelago of Truk early today, killing five people and destroying most of the buildings.


Felicia Walker Plans To Wed Law Student
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Paul T. Walker of South Salem, N.Y., of the engagement of their daughter Felicia Louise Walker to Jeffrey David Saferstein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Saferstein of Paramus, N.J.


AN UGLY FEELING
LEAD: What Sam Toperoff describes in his article ''An Ugly Feeling'' (About Men, Oct. 25) is something that I've witnessed often enough to name the Male Operational Definition of Maleness.
By this, I mean that at an elemental level men define their maleness as ''triumphing over women.''


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Landscape Closes at Lunchtime  The classical British traveler goes abroad to suffer as well as to enjoy other countries.
This is Cyril Connolly writing to a friend from Greece in 1963.
It is quoted in ''The Norton Book of Travel,'' edited by Paul Fussell.


Mets Will Open At Home April 12
LEAD: There are just 142 days to go before the Mets' 1988 home opener at Shea Stadium, an afternoon game (1:35 P.M.) on Tuesday, April 12, against the Montreal Expos.


Amy Cifrino Plans Marriage in April To W. A. Rooney
LEAD: Amy Cifrino and William Anthony Rooney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis C. Rooney Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., plan to marry in April, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Cifrino of Cohasset, Mass., have announced.


THE WOMAN WHO BEAT THE KLAN
LEAD: I would like to have seen Michael Donald pictured as he was when he was alive -smiling, happy, full of the life that was stolen from him.
MARTHA PETKAS  Houston


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Nobody At Home
LEAD: For some years now Washington has been the site of a fascinating controlled experiment.
The study has been seeking the answer to this question: Can the American system of government work, in the modern world, with no one in charge?


Miss Speranza Marries Bruce Andrew Wiener
LEAD: Karen Elaine Speranza, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony R. Speranza of Springfield, N.J., was married last evening at the Plaza Hotel in New York to Bruce Andrew Wiener, a son of Ethelind Wiener of New York and Seymour Wiener of New York and Westhampton Beach, L.I.
Rabbi Shimon Berris and the Rev.


Betsy L. Osborne Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Betsy Lane Osborne to James Edwin Doherty took place yesterday at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York.
The Rev.
Andrew J. Mullins officiated.


Hockey, Anyone?
LEAD: Martina Navratilova joking around before doubles match at Garden.
Navratilova and Pam Shriver went on to defeat Claudia Kohde-Kilsch and Helena Sukova, 6-1, 6-1. (The New York Times/Ray Stubblebine)


Italian Policemen Arrested
LEAD: A prosecutor announced here today that 10 police officers were among 36 people charged with being members of a heroin trafficking ring in the northwestern Veneto region.
The prosecutor, Roberto Staffa, identified the ring's leader as Edoardo Ceresi, 25, a brigadier in the paramilitary Caribinieri force.


State to Acquire the Site Of Battle in War of 1812
LEAD: A group of local historians and veterans has persuaded the state to preserve a tiny Lake Champlain island that was the scene of a significant battle in the War of 1812.


Betty Ford Is Reported Doing Well After Surgery
LEAD: Betty Ford, the wife of former President Gerald R. Ford, was doing ''exceptionally well'' today after undergoing quadruple coronary artery bypass surgery, a spokeswoman for the family said.


FROM GUATEMALA, FURNITURE INSPIRED BY MAYAN THOUGHT
LEAD: TUCKER ROBBINS maneuvered his four-wheel-drive vehicle over 20 miles of rough, mountainous Guatemalan terrain, where the foliage is lush and thick with cedro - a tree similar to oak whose wood is ideal for making furniture.


Eastern Europe
LEAD: To the Editor: During 11 adventurous days our family explored by car parts of Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
While restrictions on the personal freedoms and economic choices of the citizenry were obvious, no limitations were placed on our very unstructured travels.


A LIZARD FOR THE AGES
LEAD:  THE IGUANA  By Anna Maria Ortese.
Translated by Henry Martin. 198 pp.
Kingston, N.Y.: McPherson &amp; Company. $14.95.


What Has a Weasel Ever Done to You?
LEAD: To the Editor:


AN UGLY FEELING
LEAD: I was struck by Sam Toperoff's need to continue to press for an answer to the disturbing question of why he ''somehow needed to make women, as a class, the defeated foes of  [ his ]  triumph.'' He experienced, in all its ugliness, the real nature of the power-worshiping system of male dominance (and female subordination) on which our social order is based.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  SHAKESPEAREAN PHOTOS


A Pair of Pop Albums Hit a Political Groove
LEAD: THE IRAN-CONTRA HEARINGS have made it to the dance floor.


Perspectives: 34th Street Growth; Stores Play a Pivotal Role in Mixed Uses
LEAD: ''THE more good retail you have, the better,'' says Robert H. Rodgers, a principal in Devon Properties. ''It improves the economics.''


JUSTICE GAGLIARDI IS BID FAREWELL
LEAD: ''SAYING goodbye to Joe Gagliardi is very heavy business,'' said Sol Wachtler, the state's Chief Judge of the Court of Appeals, during a recent well-attended dinner for the popular 75-year-old Larchmont jurist.
But it did not seem such a serious matter to most of those present that evening.


EXCELLENT SCHOOLS REQUIRE EFFORTS OF ALL
LEAD: IN the late 1960's and the early 1970's, there were two efforts in the educational professions taking place simultaneously but parallel to each other.
The first was the movement toward humanizing American education and establishing a greater relevance in the educational process to the experiences of young Americans.


ONE FAMILY'S WAR OVER SMOKING
LEAD: FOR many years, my family was a family divided.
We weren't divided by family squabbles or political or philosophical differences.
We were separated into smokers and nonsmokers.


Harvard Captures Ivy Title
LEAD: Harvard kept hitting Yale where it hurt today.
And the hit that hurt the most came with 90 seconds to play when Tom Aubin tackled the Elis' Troy Jenkins and the ball flew loose.
Harvard recovered the fumble, and the Ivy League championship belonged to the Crimson with a 14-10 victory before a crowd of 66,548 in the Yale


Half a Million 1983 Vehicles Are Being Recalled by G.M.
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation is recalling more than a half-million 1983 Chevrolet, Pontiac and G.M.C. vehicles to replace an emission control switch.


Choosing the Right Paintbrush
LEAD: MANY homeowners give little thought to choosing a paintbrush.
Others find the array of brushes confusing and the choice difficult.


DANGEROUS TIME OF THE YEAR FOR THE JETS
LEAD: This is the time of year the Jets have collapsed under Coach Joe Walton - the second half of the season.


Correction
LEAD: A review of Victoria Glendinning's ''Rebecca West: A Life'' on Oct. 18 misidentified Francis Biddle.
He was a judge on the war crimes tribunal at Nuremberg.
Robert H. Jackson was the United States' chief counsel for the prosecution at the trials.


The Editorial Notebook; The Jail Barge Blunder
LEAD: It seemed like a good idea last spring: Turn a floating barracks from England into instant New York City jail cells.
Today, all too late, it looks like an enormous blunder.


'DO THE SICK NO HARM'
LEAD:  THE CARE OF STRANGERS  The Rise of America's Hospital System.
By Charles E. Rosenberg.
Illustrated. 437 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $22.95.


New Law Buoys Volunteers
LEAD: VOLUNTEER groups in the state are hoping that a bill signed into law earlier this month will revitalize membership in volunteer ambulance and first-aid squads while protecting them from frivolous suits.


South Korea's Rivalries Are Provincial as Well as Political
LEAD: THE people of Kyonggi Province, which surrounds Seoul, are said to be cultured, but also vain.
In North and South Cholla Provinces, in the southwestern part of the country, they are supposed to be untrustworthy.
Over in North and South Kyongsang Provinces, to the southeast, folks have a reputation for hot tempers.


Train Students in the Art of War
LEAD: MONTHS before I started teaching a class at the Columbia University Business School, I described to my faculty superior a class that would be eccentric by the business school's standards.


TRENDY NEWCOMER IN NEW HAVEN
LEAD: NEW HAVEN is developing into a real diner's delight.
While there have always been many restaurants in town, the range, variety and quality seem to have improved over the last couple of years.


Unsnarling the Traffic Court
LEAD: UNDER the present Traffic Court system in the unincorporated areas of Nassau County, if you receive a parking violation, you have one of three choices.
You can simply pay the ticket, you can go to traffic court and wait on a crowded line for countless hours to fight it, or you can forget about it.


READERS ASK THE QUESTIONS
LEAD: OF the things that can make a columnist happy, letters from readers are second only to paychecks.
But there are times when they serve as reminders of how a simple thing like photography can be made to seem enormously complex.


Music: Ridge Quartet
LEAD: THE question about John Cage is whether he should be considered a composer or a critic.
Tuesday evening at the 92d Street Y, the Ridge String Quartet offered his ''String Quartet in Four Parts,'' which dates from 1949-50.
Even then, before developing the random-choice musical procedures most associated with his name, Mr.


Stage: Meredith Monk's Melange
LEAD: THE human voice is a paradox among musical instruments, being both infinitely flexible and totally beyond our control.
We cannot look at the larynx, repair it or adjust its components as we sing.
It is a part of us in whose function we take no part.


Koreans in U.S. Stump for Their Men in Seoul
LEAD: At a rally in Queens last week for a presidential candidate in South Korea, Kim Young Sam, the largest bouquet of red and yellow crysanthemums came from supporters of his chief rival in the opposition, Kim Dae Jung.


Dow Chemical Wants to be Your Friend
LEAD: TURN the clock back 25 years or thereabouts.
The Dow Chemical Company is making napalm - jellied gasoline that kills in a particularly painful way - for use in Vietnam, and American students are chasing Dow recruiters off campus.
Dow's reaction: part annoyance, part indifference.


A Big Day for Football and Other Runners
LEAD: Paul Killiamen, Harvard '37, with Ruth Dreyfuss and Susan Edwards, before Harvard beat Yale, 14-10, for Ivy League title.
Syracuse, which beat West Virginia, 32-31, will be in Sugar Bowl, its first major bowl game in 23 years, and Oklahoma beat Nebraska, 17-7, for No. 1 ranking.
In California, Ferdinand beat another Kentucky Derby winner, Alysheba, in Breeders' Cup Classic, richest horse race.


Indulging A Passion For Piazzas
LEAD: AGE, the weak dollar and Italian intransigence have conspired, happily, to change our travel strategy for good.
Late in life, my husband and I have learned to shape the days to our new interests and lesser energies, and thereby discovered a new and even nicer Italy.
We've exchanged the cities, with their rudely expensive hotels and restaurants, raucous traffic and endless ''chiuso's'' (''closed'') for the quieter pleasures of its hill towns, seductive landscapes and, above all, its piazzas.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Nov. 1 about stock market risk incorrectly explained a trading strategy.
As the value of stocks falls below the value of matching futures indexes, portfolio insurers sell stock index futures.
This strategy can inadvertently lead to further stock declines, because it may create an opportunity for program traders to buy index futures and sell the corresponding stocks.


Soviet Afghanistan Veterans Call For End of Neglect and for Honor
LEAD: Soviet veterans of the war in Afghanistan have started a nationwide organization to combat official neglect of those who served in the war and to press for monuments honoring soldiers killed there, organizers of the group said today.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Kent
LEAD: KENT'S 49 square miles of breathtaking scenery, which has not undergone major change since the Connecticut town was incorporated in 1739, has an irresistible lure.


KRASDALE'S 'NIGHTWORKS': AN URBAN-RURAL NOCTURNE
LEAD: FOOD Center Drive in the Bronx could be renamed Alimentary Avenue or even De Gustibus Road but it would still be gentry-proof.
All things considered, this is a mercy, because the drive is the very aorta of Hunts Point and without its warehouses and processing facilities New York City, Westchester, Long Island, southern Connecticut and a large part of New


GOONS AND GINKS AND COMPANY FINKS
LEAD: I would like to point out that there is more to fink and schmier than meets the eye.
The English ''canary'' is about the equivalent of the German ''fink'' - meaning ''to sing,'' thereby breaking the rule of ethics not to tell.


Dr. Swan to Wed Fellow Physician
LEAD: Dr.
H.
Jeremy C. Swan of Beverly Hills, Calif., and Pamela W. Swan of Long Beach, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Katherine Lucy Swan, to Dr.
Geoffrey Steven Ginsburg, the son of Dr.
Martin A. Ginsburg of Woodmere, L.I., and Sheila Horwitz of New York.


Thailand's Crafts Abound At Chiang Mai
LEAD: IT was late on a Saturday afternoon on Sankampaeng Road in Chiang Mai, the second largest city in Thailand, famous as a center for crafts and decorative arts.
The road was under construction and there was just room enough for one lane of traffic in either direction - plus the ubiquitous motorcycles that make their own rules.


'WE'RE NOT REALLY IN GREAT SHAPE'
LEAD: NORTHEAST UTILITIES, which supplies electricity and gas to most of Connecticut through its operating subsidiary, Connecticut Light and Power, recently announced that it would seek to cut its budget by 15 percent before 1990 by selling surplus property, cutting 600 jobs and eliminating unnecessary programs.


SUSAN S. MORRILL WED TO CLAY C. WOMMACK
LEAD: St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien, Conn., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Susan Shay Morrill, a daughter of DeWitt Crawford Morrill of Darien and the late Jane Ball Morrill, to Clay Carter Wommack, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Forrest Sinclaire Wommack of Suffolk, Va.
The Rev.
Walter H.


Miss Bitar Is Engaged
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Samir Bitar of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Yasmine Bitar to Lawrence Charles Liebers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Liebers, also of Brooklyn.
Miss Bitar, an assistant district attorney in Kings County, graduated from Vassar College and the Temple University School of Law.


O'Neill Improving
LEAD: Former House Speaker Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr. was moved from intensive care to a private room today at Brigham and Women's Hospital, where he is recuperating from bowel cancer surgery, said Kathleen O'Donnell, a hospital spokeswoman.
She said the 74-year-old Mr.
O'Neill was in good condition.


South Shore Surprises, Adams Breezes in Playoffs
LEAD: Arthur Davis ran for four touchdowns and 320 yards yesterday as South Shore of Brooklyn upset second-seeded Port Richmond, 42-12, in the quarterfinal round of the Public Schools Athletic League Division A playoffs.
Port Richmond (8-0) was one of two undefeated teams in the P.S.A.L. during the regular season.


THATCHER DISPENSES ECONOMIC ADVICE FOR ALL
LEAD: WHEN Margaret Thatcher's advisers are asked about her international role, they modestly assert that she realizes the limitations of a ''second-rate power'' as a platform for world leadership.
But whenever Mrs.
Thatcher speaks for herself it is always in the voice of a woman who, in her heart of hearts, thinks of herself as the senior guardian of Western interests.


U.S.C. Catches the Roses
LEAD: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 21 (AP) - Rodney Peete passed for two fourth-quarter touchdowns today as Southern Cal upset U.C.L.A., 17-13, to earn a Rose Bowl rematch with Michigan State, a 27-13 victor over the Trojans in the season-opener.


From Subway Graffiti to the Canvas: Bronx Program Transforms Vandals
LEAD: They used to paint subway cars.
Now they paint on canvases, and their works have sold for up to $200 each.


Taylor Still on Active List
LEAD: Despite an injured hamstring, Lawrence Taylor of the Giants may play Sunday against the Saints here.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  KAL 007: THE COVER-UP.
By David E. Pearson. (Summit, $19.95.) At least six books have now been produced on the shootdown of Korean Air Lines 007 by a Russian fighter.
None, including this one, has satisfactorily explained why the airliner strayed deep into Soviet airspace.
David E. Pearson has, however, made a significant contribution to the controversy over the incident.


Where Hopes Run as Deep as Roots
LEAD: Jim White, the state forester for Bennington County, walked into a stand of red pines a few days ago and saw a disaster area.
The tree crowns that were once 60 feet high and shaded the forest floor were at his feet.


U.S. Requires Safety Devices on Northeast Trains
LEAD: The Transportation Department has ordered that all freight trains traveling in the Northeast rail corridor be equipped with automatic braking devices by July 1990.
Amtrak passenger trains already have the equipment.


SPECIALTIES APPEAL TO COLLECTORS
LEAD: THE degree of acceptability of ''philatelically prepared'' material, which includes covers or related items manufactured for collectors, varies greatly.
Advanced collectors of postal history avoid prepared pieces whenever legitimate postal usages are available.


Martha Victoria Suits Marries M. C. Schram
LEAD: St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church was the setting in New York yesterday for the wedding of Martha Victoria Suits, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis E. Suits of Muttontown, L.I., to Michael Christopher Schram, a son of John Michael Schram of New York and Betty Dabbs Schram of Memphis.
The Rev.


South Korean Soldier Shot in a Border Clash
LEAD: A South Korean soldier was wounded today when North Korean troops opened fire inside the demilitarized zone, the South Korean Defense Ministry said.


Syracuse Finishes 11-0, Barely
LEAD: Five weeks ago, Joe Paterno walked into the Syracuse locker room and congratulated the Orange on their 48-21 thrashing of his Nittany Lions.
Before leaving, he turned and told them to keep the final No. 1 ranking, which had been his last season, in the East.


Bikers Trying to Steer Others to Sober Living
LEAD: With their black Harley-Davidson jackets, stubbly beards, hard-tipped boots and tattoos, the big men clomping through the gym looked more than a little out of place at the Y.M.C.A.


Miss Balfour Has Wedding
LEAD: The marriage of Kimberly Elizabeth Balfour, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thurston Theodore Balfour of Newport News, Va., and Annapolis, Md., to Hugh Franklin Bennett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Franklin Bennett of Greenwich, Conn., took place yesterday in Newburyport, Mass.
The Rev.
Richard Gosselin performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic


Shock Therapy's Return to Respectability
LEAD: IN A SMALL OFFICE IN the department of psychiatry at the State University of New York's Stony Brook, L.I., campus, an anxious man and a withdrawn woman face a blank television screen.
Irene Carasiti, a registered nurse, slides a 22-minute tape into a video-cassette player.
The man hunches forward; his wife remains apathetic.


Boy, 5, Stabs Girl, 2
LEAD: A 5-year-old boy took a kitchen knife and stabbed a 2-year-old girl his grandmother was caring for, then told the police he was inspired by two horror movies he saw on television, the police said today.
The girl, stabbed Tuesday, was released from the hospital after treatment for several wounds, the police said.


Can the Giants And the Jets Still Make The Playoffs?
LEAD: No they can't.
The Jets will be inconsistent as usual.
The Giants will come on strong.
They will come into their final game 8-6.
They will play to a 10-10 tie.
The Jets appear to be headed for victory, but Mark Gastineau roughs Phil Simms and the Giants drive for the tying field goal.
In overtime, Ken O'Brien is picked off three times.


THE CAREFUL SHOPPER
LEAD: Bounty at a Boutique Called Nicole Favella Nicole Favella is a new boutique in Larchmont that features French- , Italian- and some American-made women's shoes, boots, belts and handbags, leather fashions, evening wear and jewelry.
The owners have a Madison Avenue shop called La Difference with a similar range.


In Laos, Anne Gets a Royal Welcome
LEAD: A European diplomat was searching to explain why the Government of Laos, which by most accounts allowed the Laotian royal family to perish miserably in prison camps less than a decade ago, would even consider welcoming a British Princess.


Seeking a Buyer For Slave Museum
LEAD: TIME and money appeared to be running out earlier this year for the Old Slave Mart Museum in Charleston, S.C., whose collection included dolls and quilts made by slaves and bills of sales for human ''property.''


SYRACUSE IS ADDED ATTRACTION
LEAD: Syracuse University officials formally accepted an invitation to the Sugar Bowl today just five hours before its undefeated team staged a rousing comeback to complete the second perfect regular season in the school's 98-year football history.


TAKING THE MEASURE OF VLADIMER FELTSMAN
LEAD: WHAT IF, BEFORE ALEXAN-der Solzhenitsyn arrived in this country in 1976, all we knew of his work was one chapter of ''The Gulag Archipelago.'' Imagine the curiosity, the aura of mystery, the political speculation, the cultural glamour that would have surrounded the publication on these shores of the entire, all but legendary, book.


Which Way Public TV?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rent Vouchers
LEAD: To the Editor:


'THE WILD ONE' TAMED
LEAD: PLEASE take your seats, students of fashion, because we are ready to discuss this week's mixed metaphor.
To wit, the leather motorcycle jacket, made famous by Marlon Brando in ''The Wild One,'' that is now making the rounds in some very up-to-date company.
This jacket has a well-earned tough-guy reputation, but pair it with a miniskirt or baggy trousers, and it looks positively chic.


The Door Is Opened, but Sandinistas Keep the Keys
LEAD: THE former President of Venezuela, Luis Herrera Campins, came to Managua recently on an important mission.
As a leader in the worldwide Christian Democratic movement, he had been asked to mediate between contending factions in the Social Christian Party, which is one of many opposition groups trying to wrest power from the Sandinista Government.


ONE-BRAND AUDIO CAN BELIE THE RULE
LEAD: STAUNCH, TRUE-BLUE audiophiles commonly regard so-called one-brand systems with contemptuous disfavor.
Their attitude is clearly prejudiced, but not without its reasons.


All That Jazz
LEAD: A prison guard, a chemical engineer, a realtor, the representative of the Dutch bulb industry in the United States, a computer expert and a consulting engineer - all accomplished jazz musicians after business hours - are members of a group playing together in a newly formed jazz band.
The group, was organized by Norman Liss, who heads his own public relations firm in Hartsdale, and Peter Bard, a Westchester newspaper advertising executive.


The City Casts Its Theaters In Stone
LEAD: THE second-best Broadway ticket this month would put you in a 22d-floor hearing room overlooking Foley Square, where the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission has been methodically and quite rapidly casting a net over the theater district.
When November began, six theaters in and around Times Square had landmark status.


OFFERS INUNDATING ATHLETE
LEAD: IT was bad enough that Watertown High School had just beaten his team 58-0.
To make matters worse, Theo Byrd, a tackle for John F. Kennedy High School, had missed the team bus back to Waterbury.


Can the Giants And the Jets Still Make The Playoffs?
LEAD: ''Can the Giants and the Jets still make the playoffs?'' Only if Charlie Conerly and Joe Namath assume quarterback duties for the Giants and Jets, respectively, for the remainder of the season.
Otherwise, wait till next year!
NICHOLAS D. DECURTIS  New York


Why Diminish Columbia?
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Customer Needs
LEAD: To the Editor:


SOMETHING OLD AND NEW IN HARTFORD
LEAD: SOME of the youngest symphony players in the state and the world's oldest orchestra have Hartford performances coming up in the next couple of days as the Greater Hartford Youth Symphony plays tonight at Millard Auditorium, and the Dresden State Orchestra appears Tuesday at Bushnell Hall.


Kasparov Accepts Draw in Game 15
LEAD: Game 15 of the world championship chess match in Seville, Spain, ended in a draw yesterday, and with a wrangle.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Nov. 15 about the homeless misstated the amount the county expects to spend this year on its homeless population.
It is $35 million.


WHAT MAN HAS DONE TO A HOSPITABLE PLANET
LEAD: SCIENTISTS and scholars met recently at Clark University in Worcester, Mass., to report on what man has done to the planet.
In dozens of papers, they described how the pressures of human population and industrial activity had not only changed the face of the earth but also altered its physical elements.


Hildi Rosenfeld to Wed Richard Silbert in June
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Isadore Rosenfeld of Harrison, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Hildi Victoria Rosenfeld, to Richard W. Silbert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald F. Silbert of Boston and Chestnut Hill, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.


Armagnac From the South of France
LEAD: ROBERT CAME, seated among the damp wood barrels in the darkened barn that houses the cellars of Cles des Ducs, one of the many producers of the brandy known as Armagnac, talked of noses, tongues and mouths.
Cles des Ducs is in Panjas, a tiny crossroads in the western part of Armagnac, that roughly rolling district of southwestern France that the French call


Lions Valiant in Defeat
LEAD: Leading by 16-6 with less than 10 minutes to play, Columbia appeared today to be on the verge of beating Brown, a 26-point favorite, and ending a 40-game losing streak spanning four years.


Steelers Lose Lipps
LEAD: MORE than a month after he suffered a seemingly minor strain to his left hamstring, Louis Lipps, the Pittsburgh Steeler wide receiver, has reinjured the hamstring and been placed on the injured reserve list.
Lipps, who suffered the injury on Oct. 19, the first day of practice after the players' strike, thought he had recovered, but when he tried to run Tuesday he felt pain once again.


AGENCY FACES RISING CHILD ABUSE REPORTS
LEAD: AS reports of child abuse in the county reach a record level, officials in the Department of Social Services say the higher numbers reflect an increase in family stress that affects every area of the county and all income groups.


Ferdinand Wins by a Nose
LEAD: Two Kentucky Derby winners strained for the wire in the world's richest horse race today, and it took a photo finish to show that Ferdinand had nosed out Alysheba to win the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic at Hollywood Park.


WALSH MAKES HIS MOVE
LEAD: In Philip Shenon's article ''Walsh Makes His Move'' (Oct. 25), on the long hours being put in by the special prosecutor Lawrence E. Walsh and his staff in their $3 million effort to indict and prosecute Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and others in the Iran-contra affair, we read that Mr.
Walsh ''left the office each night with stacks of classified documents to read after a room-service dinner in his hotel.


Music: Parnassus Group Plays Harvey's 'Bhakti'
LEAD: THERE has probably been no more startling event this young music season than Jonathan Harvey's ''Bhakti'' at Merkin Concert Hall Thursday night.
As played by the members of Parnassus under the direction of Anthony Korf, this 12-part, 50-minute work is a triumph of exuberance.


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  Time for Temps


Christy Friz, Teacher, Is Married to Kirk Baugher
LEAD: At Christ Episcopal Church in Manhasset, L.I., Christy Anne Friz, the daughter of Mrs.
Frank Graf Oswald of Port Washington, L.I., and Richard Gerhard Friz of Peterborough, N.H., was married yesterday to Jonathon Kirk Baugher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Baugher of Plandome, L.I.
Bishop Robert P.


Sports of The Times; A Bit of a Chill in the Ivy League
LEAD: IT began with a traffic jam that was like something out of the Dark Ages - and this in one of the brain capitals of the modern era, yet.


THEATER: STOPPARD DUO OF ONE-ACT RADIO PLAYS
LEAD: IF it takes one man, working alone, eight years to paint a railway bridge, the bridge will need repainting by the time he has completed his task.
Therefore, the authorities decide, it would be more efficient to hire 1,800 men to do the project in a single day.
Naturally, the structure cannot support the weight of an army of painters, and, with a loud cracking, the bridge collapses.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  A Sign of the Times?


BORGES'S 'TO THE MIRRORS' ON STAGE IN NEW HAVEN
LEAD: IT is no wonder that the mysteries and the fantasies that encompassed childlike exploration and intense eroticism - in short, the wonderment of the world of Jorge Luis Borges - should inspire a so-called avant-garde troupe, for Borges's word puzzles, perceptions, paradoxes and plotlessness are not the stuff of conventional theater.


Hunting Decried At Higbee Beach
LEAD: An Oct. 25 article by Pete Dunne about encounters between birdwatchers and hunters at Higbee Beach in cause for concern in its content and its omissions.


GOONS AND GINKS AND COMPANY FINKS
LEAD: William Safire missed a chance to deal with the grammar problem of the Donna Rice campaign.
The jeans are labeled ''No Excuses''; therefore, the phrase ''No Excuses'' is synonymous with the product.
Ms.
Rice doesn't manufacture the product, does she?
Therefore, to be accurate, the copy line should read, ''I don't make No Excuses.


Lyrical Mist
LEAD:  SHAKESPEARE WALLAH  Starring Shashi Kapoor and Felicity Kendal (both in photo).
Produced by Ismail Merchant.
Directed by James Ivory.
Written by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala and James Ivory. 1965.
Embassy Home Entertainment. 120 minutes. $39.95.


Cameras Click, Rhinos Roam In Nepal Park
LEAD: A BULKY gray mass, just discernible in the late afternoon light, lumbers through the dense elephant grass at the edge of the shallow river.
Jag Dish, the mahout driving our elephant, whispers ''rhino.'' He thwacks the side of the elephant's head with a wooden stick to turn her toward the rhino, and the other three elephants in our group also approach, forming a broad arc.


Leaving His Imprint On Broadway
LEAD: WHEN LLOYD Richards was 9 years old, in the early 1930's, his father died of diphtheria.
It suggests something of the trauma of the event that Richards, a man with precise memories of childhood, can conjure up few of the details surrounding Albert Richards's passing.
The elder Richards had been a strong and secure man, a follower of the black nationalist Marcus Garvey, a breadwinner who moved from Jamaica to Toronto to Detroit in search of a $5-a-day wage on which to raise his family of seven.


TROVES FOR RESEARCHING AT HISTORICAL SOCIETY
LEAD: Tessa Melvin's article, ''1917: When Women Won Right to Vote''  [ Nov. 1 ] , did a fine job of presenting the highlights of an article written by Elizabeth Fuller, librarian of the Westchester County Historical Society.


CLOSED WINDOWS, GOOD NEIGHBORS
LEAD: I AM thinking of burglar alarms, barking dogs and other fences.
In this neighborhood you're bound to, you can't avoid it.


States Act to Provide Health Care Benefits To Uninsured People
LEAD: States around the country are taking action to make health care more available for millions of people who lack insurance, according to state officials and health researchers.


Land and Polaroid
LEAD: To the Editor:


Preschoolers and Ph.D.'s Plug In
LEAD: ''WHEN I first arrived here,'' said Bruce MacCombie, who took over as dean of Manhattan's Juilliard School last year, ''I went around to check out our electronic music department.
What I found was an archaelogical dig.'' He immediately set out to bring Juilliard into the electronic music age.


Storm Builds Over Commercial Rent Law
LEAD: MAYOR Koch and real estate lobbyists are pitting themselves against a majority of the City Council seeking rent protections for every retail, office and manufacturing concern in New York City.


Last Week's Tally in Key Eastern States
LEAD:  SENATE


Gleaming Jewelry From Three Eras
LEAD: WHETHER BEADED, shell-covered or crafted of gold, ancient, medieval and tribal jewelry have much in common with each other, as can be seen in the 40 austere yet robust selections on view at the Edward H. Merrin Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue (at 57th Street) through Dec. 24.


Roerich's 'Sacre' Shines in the Joffrey's Light
LEAD: SEVERAL KEY POINTS COME TO mind with the Joffrey Ballet's vibrant reconstruction of ''Le Sacre du Printemps.'' One is that this unprecedented attempt to revive Vaslav Nijinsky's lost choreography succeeds in revealing the full meaning of the ballet.
Dropped shortly after its premiere in 1913, the first ''Sacre'' and its content have been difficult to visualize over the decades, difficult to comprehend.


BIRD'S UNDERSTUDY STARS AS CELTICS DEFEAT NETS
LEAD: The Boston Celtics, minus Larry Bird, bounced back from their 31-point loss 24 hours earlier to the Philadelphia 76ers and defeated the Nets, 107-97, tonight at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


SYNTHESIZING A NIGHTMARE
LEAD:  THE HOLOCAUST IN HISTORY  By Michael R. Marrus. 267 pp.
Hanover, N.H.
University Press of New England/ Brandeis University Press. $16.50.


FICTION IN SHORT; FICTION
LEAD:  NIGHT NEVER FALLS.
By Bud Shrake. (Random House, $17.95.) Bud Shrake's sixth novel, set at the time of the Vietminh assault on Dien Bien Phu in 1954, uses the early stages of the war in Southeast Asia as a backdrop for a gritty romantic adventure.
Harry Sparrow, the central character, is a tough, hard-drinking American foreign correspondent.


BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 22, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Last
List
Fiction
1
1
5
KALEIDOSCOPE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
$18.95.) Three sisters, separated by fate, and the
lawyer whose mission is to find and reunite them.
2
4
3
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom
Wolfe.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE LETTERS OF BERNARD BERENSON AND ISABELLA STEWART GARDNER, 1887-1924: With Correspondence by Mary Berenson.
Edited by Rollin van N. Hadley. (Northeastern University, $49.95 until Jan. 1; $65 thereafter.) This is a volume for specialists in the life of Bernard Berenson, the renowned and recently much written-about art critic and business partner to the rapacious art dealer Joseph Duveen.


DEAVER TESTIMONY DETAILS HIS ACCESS
LEAD: The picture of Michael K. Deaver that is emerging at his perjury trial is one of an amiable, former small-town California public relations man who became one of the most trusted members of President Reagan's inner circle.


JAZZ QUARTET: RON ODRICH
LEAD: THE jazz quartet that Ron Odrich leads at Charlie O's (Park Avenue at 39th Street) on Thursdays from 6 to 9 P.M., might be viewed merely as an interesting novelty group if it were not also one of the best small jazz groups playing today.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: A Wren Church Is Reopened In City of London  A church designed by Sir Christopher Wren that was considered a model for St.
Paul's Cathedral has reopened in the City of London after a 20-year restoration.


The Art Advances at Warp Drive
LEAD: MUSICIANS have been synthesizing sound electrically since the turn of the century, when Thaddeus Cahill invented the Telharmonium, a mostly mechanical piano-like contraption.
The advancing art went into warp drive about eight years ago, however, with the arrival of digitally synthesized music.


STEPFAMILIES GATHER TOGETHER FOR SUPPORT
LEAD: WHEN Gerald and Carole Shaff said ''I do'' six years ago, they were agreeing to share not only their lives, but also the nine children from their previous marriages.


IOWANS STRUGGLE WITH GROWING WATER POLLUTION
LEAD: Ever since he discovered that his farm well was contaminated with fertilizers, Steve Shivvers had been carrying his drinking water home in a plastic jug, filled from the tap at his family's business in this small town in southern Iowa.


'Susie Finkel,' Comedy
LEAD: WHEN the Arena Players Repertory Theater opened its Second Stage theater, it was as a space in which to produce more challenging drama than the lightweight comedies and mysteries offered in its Main Stage theater.
Currently, however, Arena has reversed itself by offering the complex and innovative ''House of Blue Leaves'' by John Guare on the Main Stage, and ''Except for Susie Finkel'' by Joe Manchester on the Second


The Growing Need for Bridge Loans
LEAD: MANY home buyers are still feeling shockwaves from last month's stock market collapse.
Some were relying on now-devalued securities for the down payment while others lost buyers for their own homes.
Now, unwilling or unable to back out of contracts for new homes, they are scurrying for quick cash to close their deals.


Finding The 'Key Link'
LEAD: Too many Westerners are accepting the idea that communism can achieve prosperity by employing a form of controlled capitalism.
Buyers of this notion find few sellers, resulting in a wild run-up in the market of political optimism.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The red brick floor in our sunroom is 11 years old and has become soiled.
How should we clean this brick and what can we do to keep the bricks clean without painting?


Europe Hailing Plan on Deficit; Meeting Sought
LEAD: European officials today hailed Washington's plan to cut its budget deficit, saying the plan would help restore confidence to the world's nervous stock markets.


COUNTY, BANK JOIN IN PLAN FOR LOANS
LEAD: CITIBANK has agreed to match $750,000 to $1 million of the county's community-development funds each year to provide low-interest loans to individuals and groups to rehabilitate apartments and commercial buildings in declining areas.


BANKS AWAIT MOVE TO COMPLETE INTERSTATE RULES
LEAD: WITH the planned merger of the Hartford National Bank Corporation and Shawmut Bank Corporation of Boston approved last week by shareholders of both banks, the midsize bank has almost disappeared from the state.


BIOGRAPHY SERIES AT 11 SITES
LEAD: JOHN BURTON, an anthropology professor at Connecticut College, wanted to know more about the anthropologist Margaret Mead.
He said he wanted to ''delve into her personal side, to understand something about the person who has created such a powerful image.'' So he read her biography, ''With a Daughter's Eye,'' written by her daughter, Katherine Bateson, also an anthropologist and Mr.


Iran-Contra Panels Find Fault, but Not in the System
LEAD: IN terms of evidence, the final report issued last week by the Congressional Iran-contra committees added little to the startling public testimony last spring and summer about the secret activities of the Reagan White House.
But the committees' analysis of that evidence was devastating.
The report spoke of ''confusion and disarray at the highest levels of Government,'' of ''pervasive dishonesty and inordinate secrecy,'' of ''deception and disdain for the law.


U.S. Stiffens Rule on Formaldehyde Exposure
LEAD: The Occupational Safety and Health Administration has ordered a two-thirds reduction in the amount of formaldehyde that workers can be exposed to on the job.


Subtle Racism On the Mets
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Using Technology
LEAD: To the Editor:


A DAY-CARE CENTER FOR AILING CHILDREN
LEAD: A PEDIATRICIAN and a physician's assistant are hoping to transform a small white house in Bristol into Warm Fuzzies, the first day-care center in the state for sick children.


AIDS Helps Rescue Ailing Hospital
LEAD: St.
Clare's, a small general hospital near the theater district of Manhattan, has had so many brushes with financial oblivion that the staff has lost count.
But lately, St.
Clare's has begun to thrive, and officials say it is because of AIDS.


Taking the Pulse of the Aging Williamsburg Bridge
LEAD: In high winds and swirling snow flurries, the Williamsburg Bridge took an engineering ''electrocardiogram'' yesterday morning.


Ballet: 'La Sonnambula' Pairs Kistler and LaFosse
LEAD: IN ''La Sonnambula,'' performed by the New York City Ballet on Wednesday at the New York State Theater, George Balanchine has created a dark, almost satanic version of a romantic narrative ballet, set to sweeping and melodic music by Vittorio Rieti after themes from three Bellini operas.
Alain Vaes frames the action, a party attended by an unannounced Poet and a mysterious Sleepwalker, with a solid, bourgeois country home in his new set.


Diane Arlington Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Diane Elizabeth Arlington, the assistant director of the Institute for Health, Health Care Policy and Aging Research at Rutgers University, plans to be married Dec. 31 to Russell C. Leaf, an associate professor of psychology at Rutgers.


INDIA IS PRESSING BATTLE AT PAPER
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's Government stepped up its campaign against the newspaper Indian Express this week, assuming financial control over the building that houses its editorial offices and printing press and collecting rents once paid to The Express.


Julia A. Thomas to Wed Marc Johnson
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Thomas of Exeter, N.H., of the engagement of their daughter Julia Anne Thomas to Marc V. Johnson, a son of Anne F. Ryan and C. R. Johnson Jr., both of Greenwich, Conn.


Orchestra, and Conductor, Steeped in the Past
LEAD: THE ORCHESTRA OF THE EIGHT-eenth Century has been touring the Midwest by bus of late - pneumatic tires, diesel engines and state-of-the-art suspension systems bearing the weight of 200-year-old instruments, styles and sensibilities.


Officers Arrest a Man Outside White House
LEAD: An unarmed man was arrested by uniformed Secret Service officers today after he scaled a White House fence and ran to near the foot of a stairway that leads to the West Wing where President Reagan's office is situated, the authorities said.


Tears Mix With Optimism for Town's Future
LEAD: Collette Pustay fought back tears Friday as she finished her shift at the Volkswagen plant here.
Three hours earlier, she was among 2,500 employees who learned that the West German automobile maker would close the plant next year because of slumping sales.


Correction
LEAD: The By the Numbers statistical feature in Sports last Sunday inaccurately described the Oklahoma winning streak that was ended by Nebraska in 1959 and gave an incorrect figure for the length of the streak.


Lee Nicholson Martin, Journalist, 71
LEAD: Lee Nicholson Martin, a journalist who covered some of the pivotal events of her era in the United States, Europe and Asia, died Wednesday of cancer at her home in Washington.
She was 71 years old.


Spanish Leader Is Firm in Opposing U.S. Jets
LEAD: Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez said Friday that Spain would stick to its decision to bar United States F-16 jet fighters from Spanish soil, despite strong pressure from European allies on behalf of the United States.


Angola Drive On the Rebels Is Said to Fail
LEAD: An offensive started by Angolan Government forces last summer against American-supported rebels led by Jonas Savimbi has failed, according to American officials and independent experts.


Gasoline-Tax Rise Proposed in Trenton
LEAD: NOW that the legislative elections are over and the shape of the Senate and Assembly are set, lawmakers are talking about something that has been on their minds all year but not on their tongues, at least during the recent campaign: raising the tax on gasoline.


Mary Minton Eitel Marries L. H. Horne Jr. in Louisville
LEAD: Mary Minton Eitel, the daughter of Mary Minton Cregor Eitel and Paul Theodore Eitel Jr. of Louisville, Ky., was married there yesterday to Leon Hilary Horne Jr., the son of Margot Scheffler Horne of Atlanta and Mr.
Horne of New York.
The Rev.
Stewart M. Joy performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church.


Court Upholds Winans Verdicts
LEAD: R. Foster Winans lost his appeal in the Supreme Court, which unanimously upheld the mail and wire fraud convictions of the former Wall Street Journal reporter and two other men.
In 1983, Mr.
Winans was a writer of the ''Heard on the Street'' column, a Journal feature that often influences stock prices.


On the Prowl For Tigers In India
LEAD: GETTING into a machan from the back of an elephant isn't easy.


Susan Katz Is Married
LEAD: Susan Ellen Katz and Lee Gordon Schulman, 1984 graduates of Union College, were married last night at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel by Rabbi Mordecai Waxman.
The bride, the daughter of Leon A. Katz of New York and Joan Katz of Floral Park, Queens, graduated from the Brooklyn Law School and is an associate at the Albany law firm of Carter, Conboy, Bardwell, Case &amp; Blackmore.


INSIDE THE CONTINENT
LEAD:  EUROPE  A Tapestry of Nations.
By Flora Lewis. 587 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Soccer  North Carolina Extends Streak: Top-ranked North Carolina, extending its unbeaten streak to 48 games, easily beat third-ranked California, 4-0, yesterday in the semifinals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association women's soccer final four at Amherst, Mass.
The Tar Heels (22-0-1) advanced to the title game today against the University of Massachusetts (20-1), which defeated Central Florida, 2-1, in the other semifinal.


Access of Young to Telephone Pornography Faces Key Challenge in
LEAD: One day last June, a 12-year-old boy spent two and a half hours calling and listening to sexually explicit messages on telephone pornography services.
Two weeks later he sexually assaulted a 4-year-old girl.


Plans to Expand a Maine Ski Resort Stir Debate
LEAD: For Charles Rinaldi, an official with the National Park Service, hiking the three-mile stretch of Appalachian Trail along Saddleback Mountain's treeless summit ridge is ''a kind of euphoria.''


Charm, Down by the Old Mill Inn
LEAD: THE North Fork is as lovely in November as it is in June.
Blazing autumnal color, acres of vineyards, farm stands bursting with pumpkins, squash and cauliflower, and white-frame farmhouses line the country roads leading to Rosie's Old Mill Inn on the Mattituck Inlet.


Rights Group Links India to Moslem Deaths
LEAD: Amnesty International has charged that local provincial policemen were directly involved in the slaying or disappearance of dozens of unarmed Moslems during several days of Hindu-Moslem rioting in northern India last May.


Liquor Smuggling to Canada Is Brisk
LEAD: Philip Letourneau Sr. returned to his dairy farm in Derby, Vt., one evening early this month to find two trucks bearing Canadian license plates abandoned in mud in a hayfield.


GRANDMASTER TIMMAN FINALLY BREAKS THE HOMETOWN JINX
LEAD: THERE are players in any sport or game who have quite a time showing what they can do in front of their home-country crowd.
The pressure is so great to please those who root hard for their favorite that he may freeze up again and again, year after year, until it may be wondered whether he will ever escape what amounts to a jinx.


Marina Gundlach Weds John French 3d
LEAD: Marina Kellen Gundlach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Kellen of New York, and John French 3d, a son of Mrs.
Frank H. Teagle Jr. of Woodstock, Vt., and the late Mr.
French Jr. of New York, were married yesterday.


Cross Raised in Memory Becomes a Town Issue
LEAD: Rhoda Levesque remembers well when village workers placed a wooden cross atop a Christmas tree on the county courthouse lawn in 1958.
The cross was in memory of her young husband, a local sports star who died that year in a mill accident.


Downfall of a Mayor
LEAD: Anyone keeping a list of drug-blighted careers these days would have to add that of 42-year-old James E. (Mike) Roark, the popular mayor of Charleston, W. Va.


3 Alliances Head Standings In Fall Bridge Championship
LEAD: Three top-ranked partnerships headed the standings going into the final session of the American Contract Bridge League's Life Master Men's Pair Championship here tonight.


City Ballet: Lindsay Fischer in Debut
LEAD: THE New York City Ballet has a promising addition to its roster in Lindsay Fischer, a young American dancer who left the Dutch National Ballet to join the City Ballet as a principal dancer this season.
Mr.
Fischer made his debut with the company on Thursday in the ''Theme and Variations'' section of George Balanchine's ''Tchaikovsky Suite No.


Madison Avenue's Baby Boom
LEAD: THE baby, clad in a diaper and man-sized wingtips, carries a rattle in one hand, a briefcase in the other and a message from the Prudential Insurance Company of America: Small-business executives, the ad proclaims, should protect themselves from takeovers by heirs of deceased partners.
You've come a long way, baby.


West Islip Rolls, 34-15
LEAD: P. J. Feeney gained 205 yards and scored three touchdowns to lead the West Islip Lions past Connetquot, 34-15, in a semifinal of the Suffolk County Division I football playoffs yesterday.


Underwear Magnate Rules Out an '88 Bid
LEAD: An underwear magnate who has roundly criticized President Reagan and the Democratic Presidential candidates has decided against seeking the Democratic nomination himself because ''there is not time enough to run.''


New Warmth for New Plays
LEAD: REVIVALS once were the mainstay of regional theaters, with an occasional obligatory nod to the new play, about which artistic directors have traditionally felt an understandable ambivalence.


MUSEUM REOPENS ITS PLANETARIUM
LEAD: ''KEEP looking up,'' declare the bright blue and white buttons worn by members of the Hudson River Museum staff, and for two good reasons a lot of museum supporters last week were doing just that.


Alvin Ailey Dancers Follow The Steps of a Trailblazer
LEAD: ''I HAVE A STRONG SENSE of wanting to be original,''


Shaping the Dialogue of Mind and Matter
LEAD: IN A NOVEMBER LOADED WITH sculpture, there are three solo shows concentrated around 57th Street that are particularly worthy of attention.
All three sculptors make discrete objects.
Their approaches, however, and the complex issues with which they are concerned, are very different.
Each challenges prevalent ways of thinking.


Sir John Colville, 72, Secretary to Churchill
LEAD: Sir John Colville, principal private secretary to Sir Winston Churchill and two other prime ministers, has died, family death notices said today.
He was 72 years old.


California Spa Town With an Earthy Touch
LEAD: SEVENTY-FIVE miles north of San Francisco, Mount St.
Helena looms over the northern Napa Valley town that the Wappo Indians called ''Colaynomo,'' or ''oven place,'' because underground heat warmed the local hot springs.


6 Democrats Jockey for Support in New Hampshire
LEAD: The six Democratic Presidential candidates jockeyed for position at the New Hampshire Democratic convention today, heating up a cold autumn afternoon with tough talk about the Reagan Administration, the Federal budget and the importance of this state's primary.


ANNALS OF EMPIRE
LEAD:  THE GOLDEN ORIOLE  By Raleigh Trevelyan.
Illustrated. 536 pp.
New York: Viking. $24.95.


A Dog Bark or a Choral Crescendo
LEAD: THE array of devices now available to professional musicians, from $100 drum machines to $500,000 digital audio systems, has tranformed both the art of music and its practitioners.


A Producer's Gershwin Coup
LEAD: STILL stage- and star-struck after all these years, the 47-year-old Arthur Whitelaw, who at 23 was described as ''perhaps the youngest producer in the theater'' - and at 17 was indisputably the youngest, and reportedly the first, to bring professional live theater to Smithtown - is scoring a coup in television.


Harvard First in Soccer
LEAD: Harvard and Yale played to a 0-0 tie in soccer today and the result gave the unbeaten Crimson the Ivy League championship for the first time since 1970.


Can the Giants And the Jets Still Make The Playoffs?
LEAD: As much a chance as downhill skiing in Saudi Arabia.
EDWARD W. BRADLEY  Milltown, N.J.


Ms. Levin Weds A Fellow Lawyer In Massachusetts
LEAD: At the Ledgemont Country Club in Seekonk, Mass., Joan Susan Levin, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Milton Levin of Providence, R.I., and Charles Dewey Lohrfink Jr., a son Mr. and Mrs.
Lohrfink of Yonkers, were married last evening.
Chief Judge Albert DeRobbio of the District Courts of the State of Rhode


No Justification For Racism
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


THE FAT MAN'S GARDEN AND OTHER LANDMARKS
LEAD: NEW YORK CITY is a treasure trove of ''X-marks,'' even though the term is, to put it mildly, not very well known.
The reason for its lack of familiarity is that I have never used it since inventing it on a tour of Europe 25 years ago with a party of city planners.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 22, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
GARDEN OF SHADOWS, by V. C. Andrews.
(Pocket, $4.95.) The beginnings of the evil that
beset the Dollanganger family in four previously
published novels.
2
2
WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.


A MAGAZINE JUNKIE
LEAD: I thought I was the only such magazine junkie.
I, too, have classics and fine books waiting to be read - someday.
They wait on the end table beside my bed, but stacked on the floor is an even taller pile of magazines.
I subscribe to 11 regularly and buy four more each month.


Copter Crashes in Colombia
LEAD: Two American soldiers were injured when their Army CH-47 Chinook helicopter crashed and burned Friday in Colombia, the Pentagon said today.
The helicopter's pilot reported engine failure while it was returning to its base in Panama from a refueling mission.
The soldiers suffered first- and second-degree burns over about 30 percent of their bodies when the Chinook crashed near the city of Monteria, Colombia, the Pentagon said.


Commercial Property: Building Crowns; Bold New Flourishes Embellish the Tops of Towers
LEAD: SEVEN HUNDRED feet above street level, steel workers will soon begin bolting beams into a crazy-quilt of angles to form the crown of a skyscraper at 60 Wall Street.


Belt-Tightening At Army Corps
LEAD: THREE aircraft operated by the Army Corps of Engineers were bought for use in emergencies, but when the Army Audit Agency checked, it found that ''virtually all of the flights were for routine matters and could have been accomplished with commercial aircraft.''


Stage: Redd Foxx And Pals
LEAD: THE entertainment world of Las Vegas is so far removed in spirit from Broadway that performers who have become fixtures in Nevada often arrive in New York pathetically unprepared to translate their showroom acts into theatrically coherent variety shows.
One of the most painful illustrations in recent memory was provided on Thursday evening by Redd Foxx, the 64-year-old pioneer of blue humor, who arrived at the Academy Theater, 234 West 43d


Elizabeth Debra Halpert To Wed Todd D. Watson
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Phillip Halpert of Livingston, N.J., and Boca Raton, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Debra Halpert, to Todd David Watson, the son of Robert E. Watson of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Ann Watson of West Orange, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.


ENEMY OF MYSTERY
LEAD:  VLADIMIR'S CARROT  Modern Drama and the Modern Imagination.
By John Peter. 372 pp.
Illinois: The University of Chicago Press. $24.95.


THE WOMAN WHO BEAT THE KLAN
LEAD: Jesse Kornbluth's article ''The Woman Who Beat the Klan'' (Nov. 1) focuses attention on the importance of civil rights at a time when the Supreme Court's balance is being called into question.
The story of Beulah Mae Donald demonstrates that discrimination remains an issue and that racism continues to plague the lives of many.


On Language; Character Issue
LEAD: ON ''SATURDAY Night Live,'' the comedian Al Franken asked Bruce E. Babbitt, a Democratic Presidential candidate, ''Governor, what about the character issue?'' Babbitt: ''What about it?'' Franken: ''I'm referring to your long history of going into supermarket express lanes with more than 10 items.''


THE DAY AFTER THE FEAST BEFORE
LEAD: LEFTOVERS are not, by nature, inferior foods.
In a professional kitchen, for instance, a good chef finds a use for nearly every bone, morsel and scrap.
With a little imagination, the home cook can transform those foods that remain at the end of a meal into festive, serendipitous dishes the day after.


On the Fringe of Switzerland
LEAD: YOU can never understand a Swiss town unless you understand Switzerland as a whole.
And a whole is something that Switzerland does not seem to be.
To talk of the Swiss language is a joke, like talking of the Swiss Navy (though we ought to remember that there is a sizable merchant marine registered at Basel: there are at least


Allison J. Constantine To Wed Rick Beispel
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony A. Constantine of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Allison J. Constantine, to Rick Allen Beispel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul J. Beispel of New York.
A spring wedding is planned.


STAGE VIEW
LEAD: WITH HIS LATEST PLAY, ''Lettice and Lovage,'' Peter Shaffer has happily rediscovered something he mislaid so long ago we'd quite forgotten he ever possessed it: a sense of humor.


Which Way Public TV?
LEAD: To the Editor:


MOVIES
LEAD:  Defense of the Realm  Starring Gabriel Byrne, Greta Scacchi and Denholm Elliott.
Directed by David Drury. 1986.
Embassy Home Entertainment. 97 minutes. $79.95.
If moodiness was all that counted, this film might be a blockbuster.
It captures, with great success, the gray, somber, claustrophobic atmosphere that characterizes the best British espionage films.


Indian Troops Begin Cease-Fire in Sri Lanka
LEAD: Indian troops began a unilateral 48-hour cease-fire today to give ethnic Tamil rebels time to comply with an accord aimed at ending the four-year-old civil war in Sri Lanka, an Indian spokeswoman said.


Knight Causes Forfeit
LEAD: Coach Bob Knight pulled his Indiana players off the court with him after he drew his third technical foul and automatic ejection tonight, and the Hoosiers forfeited an exhibition basketball game with the touring Soviet national team.


Fatal Attraction Indeed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tureens: Functional, Fanciful, Fantastic
LEAD: AN IDEA first cooked up at the Campbell Soup Company complex here in 1976 is proving able to retain its zest the third time around.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption on the film page of the Arts and Leisure section today gives an incorrect title for a movie directed by Leonard Nimoy that is to open on Wednesday.
It is ''Three Men and a Baby.''


Sports of The Times; A Sense of Class, Anyone?
LEAD: FOR anyone interested in the Mets and college football, all gall was divided lately into three parts:


A MAGAZINE JUNKIE
LEAD: I was surprised and pleased to read James Atlas's article ''A Magazine Junkie'' (Guest Observer, Nov. 1).
I thought I was alone in my affliction.
There is a pile of Penguin classics sitting atop my coffee table, and on a bookshelf.
I've even stopped buying magazines.
But can I help it if every day, when I arrive home from work, my mailbox is crammed with mail-order catalogues?


Brick by Brick, A Polish Company Rebuilds the Past At Home And Abroad
LEAD: BRICKLAYERS CLAMBER-ing over spare wooden scaffolds were setting large Gothic-style brick.


For Equatorial Guinea, the Yoke of Freedom
LEAD: In 1913, as a cocoa boom began to transform this West African island, a Spanish planter erected La Barcelonesa, a mansion with curving balustrades and verandahs cooled by sea breezes.


EVERY STRAW WAS THE LAST
LEAD:  THE DEVIL AND DR.
BARNES  Portrait of an American Art Collector.
By Howard Greenfeld.
Illustrated. 306 pp.
New York: Viking. $19.95.


RIGHTIST PARTIES FORMING IN EUROPE
LEAD: Exploiting mounting resentment over refugees and workers from third world nations, small right-wing parties have cropped up across the northern tier of Western Europe demanding the expulsion of foreigners who are said to be taking jobs from Europeans.


New York May Forfeit Housing Grants
LEAD: THREE years after the Federal Government gave New York City 13 housing grants worth nearly $30 million, the city has spent less than $2 million of it and faces the possibility of losing almost half of what is left unless construction can start on several projects by Nov. 30, a prospect city officials consider unlikely.


Can the Giants And the Jets Still Make The Playoffs?
LEAD: Only if they play their remaining games against the Knicks. TOD COOPER
New York


A WORD ON BEHALF OF THE PRONOUN
LEAD: While I agree with Mary Humphrey's article, ''Preserve the Preposition!''  [ Opinion Page, Nov. 1 ] , I would like to point out an omission in grammar.
She states that ''our language is made up of seven parts of speech.''


Streetscapes: The Audubon Theater; On Upper Broadway, the Genesis of the Fox Empire
LEAD: AFTER the completion of the city's first subway in 1904, Upper Broadway saw accelerated building of apartment houses, theaters and stores as the street became a sort of regional rialto.
The West Side's new housing and river views attracted more and more people from older neighborhoods who could still commute to the business districts on the clean, safe IRT subway extending down to City


Lisa Jayne Oppenheim To Wed R. D. Schultz
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
William Jay Oppenheim of Greenwich,, Conn., of the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Jayne Oppenheim, to Robert David Schultz, a son of Mrs.
David H. Schultz of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Schultz.
The couple plan to marry in February.


FUNK ROCK: DAVID MOSS'S DENSE BAND
LEAD: IN 1985, David Moss released ''Dense Band,'' an album that distilled downtown noise improvisation into song-length chunks and added a funk beat now and then.
It was a showcase for Mr.
Moss's precise, clattery drumming and his peculiar specialty: improvised vocal gibberish that can evoke anything from a newscast in


DATA BANK: November 22, 1987
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,831.2
$3,795.3
$3,683.3
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
3.8
2.5
2.0
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'87
I Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$134.5
$136.6
$138.0


Concert: The Atlantic Sinfonietta
LEAD: AS part of its program Wednesday evening in Alice Tully Hall, the Atlantic Sinfonietta presented two text settings by English composers, both written for soprano and orchestra and both completed while the composers were still in their 20's.


Jersey Finds No Link Between Ocean and Illness
LEAD: The first phase of a $1 million health study at the Jersey Shore has found no definitive links between ocean swimming and illness, state health officials reported today.


Redevelopment Regaining Momentum in Asbury Park
LEAD: EVEN for this depressed Shore city, it seemed a particularly cruel blow late last September when fire destroyed 16 town houses along Wesley Lake.


From the Start, the Rules Weren't Clear
LEAD: THE controversy at the Columbia University Business School is now big news.
It stems from an offer of $100,000 made by Adjunct Prof.
Asher B. Edelman to the students in his class who provide him with information that leads to a successful corporate takeover.
The offer, which the Columbia administration asked him to withdraw, presents an opportunity for ethical rumination.


State's Role in Religious Pluralism
LEAD: THIS bicentennial year of our Constitution comes at a time of sharp public debate over the appropriate role of religion in American life.
There is much discussion about the meaning of the First Amendment's religion clause.
Did it, as some say, merely prohibit the establishment of an official state religion, or did it erect an impenetrable wall between church and state?


YOUTH BRIGADES OF ANOTHER KIND ARE GAINING FAVOR
LEAD: PAST proposals for national service have languished in Congress, but the idea that young people could learn valuable lessons while serving their country seems irrepressible.


Tailback Leads Chaminade to C.H.S.F.L. Title
LEAD: Considering his performance in Chaminade's 28-6 victory over St.
John the Baptist in yesterday's Catholic High Schools Football League championship at St.
John's University, Ellery Roberts had little competition as the game's most valuable player.


A Killer Nurse?
LEAD: ''I had to prove myself to the staff and to myself,'' Richard Angelo was quoted as telling Suffolk County prosecutors last week as they began exhuming the bodies of patients he may have killed in the course of his duties at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Islip.
According to the authorities, the 25-year-old registered nurse admitted injecting powerful muscle-paralyzing drugs into patients, then working frantically to revive them.


Corrections
LEAD: A table on Oct. 25 comparing stock market averages misstated the percent change of the American Stock Exchange market value index from Aug. 12, 1982, to Oct. 22, 1987.
It was 127 percent.


John Schuyler Linen, Retired Banker, Dies
LEAD: John Schuyler Linen , a retired New York banker, died Thursday at his home in Lake Wales, Fla.
He was 93 years old.


BEFORE TURKEY, A SOUP COURSE
LEAD: ONE of the most convenient first courses to serve for Thanksgiving dinner is soup.
Most soups lend themselves to advance preparation, if not several days beforehand at least early in the day.
They can be reheated when dinner is ready to serve.


PACT LEAVES MIAMI BRACING FOR A NEW WAVE OF CUBANS
LEAD: The prospect that a quarter-million more Cubans may immigrate here by the mid-1990's has roiled emotions in a city still struggling to absorb earlier waves of refugees from that nation.


Choosing the Right Paintbrush
LEAD: MANY homeowners give little thought to choosing a paintbrush.
Others find the array of brushes confusing and the choice difficult.


A HUNGER FOR JUSTICE
LEAD:  WHERE SIXPENCE LIVES  By Norma Kitson.
Illustrated. 326 pp.
Topsfield, Mass.: The Hogarth Press/Salem House.
Paper, $7.95.


Salvador Rebel Returns Home, Asking 'Dialogue'
LEAD: A civilian leader of the Salvadoran rebels returned home today after seven years in exile and struck a conciliatory note, calling on his countrymen to work together ''to build a road to peace through dialogue.''


D-DAYS AND THE END OF WORLD WAR II
LEAD: Sarah Clayton's essay sharpened an indelible picture that has remained in my mind for many years.


DEMOCRATS ASSAIL O'ROURKE ON BUDGET PLAN
LEAD: DEMOCRATS on the Board of Legislators wasted little time last week in challenging County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke's proposed 1988 budget, which calls for a 10.3 percent increase in spending, as being ''wasteful'' and containing ''misleading'' information.


Tar Heels Knock Off Orange
LEAD: What a classic way to begin the college basketball season: Syracuse, last season's runner-up in the N.C.A.A tournament and the top preseason pick this season, against North Carolina, a glamour team acknowledged to have one of the best coaches in the business.


133 IN COUNTY FACE CRIMINAL CHARGES ON ABUSE
LEAD: THERE are 133 parents and care-givers facing criminal charges of child abuse in the county.


Injury-Riddled Giants Are Not Dead Yet
LEAD: A year ago, when the National Football League neared the middle of the season, the Giants were moving along smartly with a 5-2 record.
After that, they won every game they played -nine in the regular season and three in the playoffs - and became the Super Bowl champions.


Limit the U.N. to Be Monitor of the Persian Gulf
LEAD: To the Editor:


AN UGLY FEELING
LEAD: I believe I understand Sam Toperoff's ugly feeling and its source.
The key for me was his repeated use of the word ''umbilical.'' What could be more reminiscent of the fetal situation than his hard-hat dive, and what more evocative of primal fears of being left alone without a basic life support?


The Cost of Divided Government
LEAD: It is useful that Congressional negotiators and the White House have reached a two year, $76 billion deficit reduction plan.
The agreement, however, does not eclipse the problem of institutional frictions between the President and Congress that had deadlocked the talks.
Another more important part of the story is the persistence of divided Government: the condition that exists when one party holds the White House while the other holds a majority of one or both houses of


Lynda Clarizio, a Lawyer, to Marry Mark Foulon
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Attavio Clarizio of Verona, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lynda Clarizio, to Mark Foulon, a son of Janet Foulon of Spokane, Wash., and the late Max Foulon.


They're Still Cheating Housing
LEAD: A badly needed housing bill, the first in seven years, blew up in the Senate last week after passing the House, 391-1.
The charge of budget-busting did it.
Reducing the budget deficit is Washington's primary goal at the moment, but housing, whose share of Federal spending has shrunk substantially in the last eight years, is no place to look for residual extravagance.


Gay Groups Win Equal Privileges at Georgetown
LEAD: Georgetown University must provide homosexual student groups with the same privileges given other campus organizations, an appeals court here has ruled.


READING THE CARDS
LEAD: WHEN a worldclass player in a team match picks up his hand at the start of a deal and examines it, he is normally full of confidence.
He expects to outbid and outplay the opposition.


Penn State Stops Notre Dame, 21-20
LEAD: Blair Thomas rushed for 214 yards and a touchdown on 35 carries, and he set up two other touchdowns today as unranked Penn State upset highly ranked Notre Dame, 21-20.
The Irish missed a 2-point conversion attempt with 31 seconds left.


Rye Leads All the Way
LEAD: Rye defeated Kennedy, 34-20, in a Westchester B-Bowl game yesterday.
Rye opened the scoring early, when Trey Flood ran for a 9-yard touchdown on a trap play, and never lost the lead.


Before Turkey, a Soup Course
LEAD: ONE of the most convenient first courses to serve for Thanksgiving dinner is soup.
Most soups lend themselves to advance preparation, if not several days beforehand at least early in the day.
They can be reheated when dinner is ready to serve.


WHEN HE HITS THE BALL, BO JACKSON RIVALS BOGGS, IN THEORY
LEAD: BO JACKSON is just about as good a hitter as Wade Boggs - when he hits the ball.


SCHOOLS EXTENDING KINDERGARTEN DAY
LEAD: THE State Education Department thinks that for kindergartners, two and a half hours is not enough.
The department, with a grant of $1 million, has helped 17 local school boards to start or to expand a variety of extended kindergarten programs this year beyond the two and a half hours a day that many districts offer and plans to ask the legislature for more money to start or expand such programs next school year.


'KING OF NOSTALGIA': Joe Franklin; Television's Master of Memory Lane Goes Public
LEAD: THE company's plans are ambitious and more than a little curious.
There's the idea for a ''Nostalgicize'' exercise video, featuring young women performing aerobic routines to a 1940's beat.
There's the Memory Lane Club of America, ''a basic service'' for collectors of old records and movies, to be specially marketed to retirement communities in Florida and other parts of the nation.


Genteel Playwright, Angry Voice
LEAD: IN CARYL CHURCHILL'S VITRIOLIC NEW COME-dy, ''Serious Money,'' greed, corruption and self-interest share equal billing.
Venality is a way of LIFFE (an acronym for the London International Financial Futures Exchange).
Money is the key to more money - and to power - and on this boardroom battlefield even sex takes a holiday.


Interpreting A Russian Poet's Cosmic Language
LEAD: DAVID WARRILOW, WHO HAS made a career of interpreting the compressed poetry of Samuel Beckett's minimalist dramas, is currently assuming the challenge of a play by a Revolutionary-era Russian poet that has words enough to spare, including those of the author's invented language.


Correction
LEAD: A report in ''Headliners'' last Sunday about former Gov.
Marvin Mandel of Maryland misattributed a quotation about his 1977 conviction in a case of mail fraud and racketeering.
After the conviction was set aside on Nov. 12, Breckinridge Willcox, the United States Attorney in Baltimore, said, ''Whatever the decision, the man is guilty.


Bradley Proposes Cut In U.S. Sugar Subsidies
LEAD: WHAT this country needs, says Senator Bill Bradley, is a good 5-cent candy bar, and to get one he has written legislation that would slash price supports for United States sugar production and allow more sugar to be imported.


F.A.A. Begins Review of Standards for Pilots
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration is reviewing its pilot certification rules and looking at the flight experience of airline pilots.


WHAT'S NEW IN ELECTRONIC MUSIC
LEAD: AMERICANS will spend nearly $3 billion this year on musical instruments and equipment, from million-dollar violins to 25-cent guitar picks.
But in 1987, for the first time, more than half the money will be spent on electric and electronic instruments, as opposed to acoustic instruments.


James E. Folsom, Colorful Politician and Twice Governor of Alabama, Is Dead at 79
LEAD: James E. Folsom, a Democrat who served twice as Governor of Alabama, died yesterday at his home in Cullman, Ala.
He was 79 years old and had been in failing health in recent years.


BANKERS OFFERING A PERSONAL TOUCH
LEAD: WHEN the Country Bank opens its doors for business in the ShopRite Plaza Mall in Carmel after the first of the year, its president, Ross M. Weale, intends to have his desk on the banking floor, in full view and accessible to customers.


Bruce Goes Out a Winner
LEAD: Matt Frantz made a 26-yard field goal with 5 minutes 18 seconds remaining today to give Ohio State a 23-20 victory over error-prone Michigan that sent out dismissed Coach Earle Bruce as a winner.


Dispute on Taxing College Sports
LEAD: STRAPPED for funds, Morgantown, W. Va., moved to levy a 2 percent amusement tax on big-time football, basketball and public concerts at West Virginia University.
The result was a legal battle between the state university and the city.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  MIXED BLESSINGS: Marriage Between Jews and Christians.
By Paul Cowan with Rachel Cowan. (Doubleday, $18.95.) After 15 years of marriage, Rachel Cowan converted to Judaism, her husband's religion, and she is now studying to be a rabbi.
Paul Cowan, a reporter for The Village Voice, is the author of ''An Orphan in History,'' an exploration of his Jewish identity.


U.S. Policy on Panama Faces Key Tests on Aid and Joint Exercises
LEAD: United States policy toward Panama will soon face two key tests whose outcome is certain to affect the deepening political crisis here, Panamanian political leaders and foreign diplomats say.


Q AND A
LEAD:  Mitchell-Lama Rents  Question: I have requested the rent history of my apartment, but I was told by the district rent office that since Ruppert-Yorkville Towers is a Mitchell-Lama building the managment is not required to give it to me.
Are increases on these buildings limited as they are for rent-stabilized housing?


GOONS AND GINKS AND COMPANY FINKS
LEAD: I fail to see much humor in William Safire's column ''Goons and Ginks and Company Finks'' (On Language, Nov. 1).
Perhaps Mr.
Safire is not aware that Fink is also a surname - one, I might add, not always easy to live with.
In the Manhattan telephone directory alone, you'll find almost 200 people listed, to say nothing of the Finck or Finke variety.


Danny Kaye's Widow Backs Theater
LEAD: The plaster is discolored and crumbling and the seats are worn thin, but Sylvia Fine Kaye sees a brilliant future for the Hunter College Playhouse.


Can the Giants And the Jets Still Make The Playoffs?
LEAD: The owners' use of replacements and the counting of substitute games has raped and ruined the reputation of the N.F.L.
Their arrogance is sickening.
Therefore, I don't care if the Jets or the Giants make the playoffs.
Nor do I care if there are playoffs or the Super Bowl.
There is as much integrity in the N.F.L.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. The red brick floor in our sunroom is 11 years old and has become soiled.
How should we clean this brick and what can we do to keep the bricks clean without painting?


Cover-up of Spill Is Charged
LEAD: A tape recording proves that officials at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base tried to cover up a radioactive spill at the base, Ohio's two Senators said today.


Jazz Injustice: Genius in the Shadows
LEAD: MUSICIANS TEND TO dislike being categorized and labeled; many resist it strenuously.
How harmful can such pigeonholing be?
Consider the cases of two composer-pianists, men of extraordinary talent and originality who were misperceived, dismissed as derivative early in their careers and lived out the remainder of their lives in frustrating obscurity.


In the Right Case, Jury Duty Can Pay
LEAD: WHEN Mark Lesly learned that he had been selected to serve as a juror in the trial of Bernhard H. Goetz, he decided to dictate his daily impressions of the case into a tape recorder.


Elections in Haiti: A Struggle and a Feud
LEAD: Holding elections in Haiti, after nearly 30 years of dictatorship, was expected to be a difficult task.
But it has become even more difficult because of a feud between Lieut.
Gen.
Henri Namphy, the head of Haiti's provisional Government, and the nine-member Electoral Council that has been trying to organize the elections.


For the Macy's Parade, the Work Never Stops
LEAD: IN A cavernous warehouse and four support buildings just off the entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel here, a group of artisans and craftsmen have the Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays on their minds 365 days a year, even though their work is on display for only a few hours.


Verbatim; A Proper Process
LEAD: ' There has been considerable criticism over the perceived excesses of the confirmation process; without in any way deprecating that criticism I think that in the United States, at any rate, we recognize that there is apt to be some inquiry by the Senate as well as by the President into what may be called the ''judicial philosophy'' of a nominee to our Court.


STAMFORD ADS IRK BORWALK
LEAD: A MAN, presumably an executive, is at his desk crying.


CHILDREN
LEAD:  Classic Tales Retold  Hi-Tops Video. 90 minutes. $29.95.
This is an amiable collection of a dozen animated (and in some cases abridged) familiar stories, originally produced by BFA Educational Media.
The voiceover narrator credits the origin of the individual stories - ''Jack and the Beanstalk'' is English, ''The Little Match Girl'' and ''Thumbelina'' come from Hans Christian Andersen, ''Hansel and Gretel'' from the Brothers Grimm, and so on.


Wagner and Philip Glass: Two of a Kind?
LEAD: IN THE SUMMER OF 1986, THE AMER-ican conductor Dennis Russell Davies ruffled a few feathers by pairing the music of Richard Wagner and Philip Glass on the Philadelphia Orchestra's programs at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center in upstate New York.
Taking our cue from this illustrious maestro, let us discuss the two composers together once again, this time by reviewing new recordings of Wagner's ''Lohengrin'' and ''Parsifal'' along with the first recording of Mr.


PLAZAS, LIKE COMPUTERS, ARE BEST IF USER-FRIENDLY
LEAD: NO BUILDING IS STATIC; ALL OF them change over time, both in their physical reality and in our perceptions of them.
And buildings take a long time to settle in, to find their natural relationship to their users and to their surroundings.
Sometimes years of use can bestow a depth and a resonance to a building that had seemed thin and facile when new, and just as often those years can see initial promise turn sour.


Data Update: November 22, 1987
LEAD: MEDIAN HOUSE PRICES
Aug. 87
July
Aug. 86
Nation
$85,100
$86,200
$82,000
Northeast
$134,800
$143,200
$107,500
Midwest
$66,200
$65,900
$63,700
South
$79,700
$78,400
$79,700
West
$104,700
$106,700
$102,900
Source: National Association of Realtors.


Catherine Grant Keggi Plans to Marry Howard Hunter of New Orleans in June
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Kristaps J. Keggi of Middlebury, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Catherine Grant Keggi to George Howard Hunter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Hunter Jr. of New Orleans.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Keggi, a career counselor at the A. B. Freeman School of Business of Tulane University, was formerly the director of Ithaka, a cultural program in Greece for high school students.


BRINGING FORTH A DEFICIT 'MOUSE'
LEAD: IT was no grand design for Federal budget deficit reduction that was brought forth after four grueling weeks of top-level negotiations.
It was, as some members of the team themselves dubbed it, a ''mouse.''


The Aulenti Uproar
LEAD: GAE AULENTI WAS THE last person to arrive.
It was midnight on a balmy September evening in Milan, and guests clad in fashionable short silk dresses and tailored suits were finishing their gelato or strolling through the grand 17th-century palazzo home of their host, the furniture designer Mario Bellini.


Partch Recordings
LEAD: To the Editor:


All-Year Schools: Complex Debate in Los Angeles
LEAD: A nearly full moon still hangs heavily over Los Angeles at dawn as Tommy Pinon, Bol Puth, Glen Pambuena and about 35 classmates gather at the bus stop on Temple Street, just opposite the Good Time Donuts shop, on the edge of downtown.
The yellow bus picks them up and lumbers onto the Hollywood Freeway and over the hill for the half-hour ride into the San Fernando Valley to the Ulysses S.


How I Was Rescued, Like It or Not
LEAD: I HAVE discovered that if you fall down and knock yourself out in a public place on Long Island, you become part of a rescue system.
You are a cog in a wheel, and you can't escape until the system is finished.


Women Advised to Seek State Posts
LEAD: Women aspiring to political power would do best right now to pursue state, not national, office, if they want to work at the cutting edge of public policy.


Hofstra Is Upset by Fordham in Playoff
LEAD: It took Fordham 60 minutes today to rid itself of nearly 46 years of frustration as the Rams stunned eighth-ranked Hofstra, 41-6, in a National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III playoff game.


WHAT'S DOING IN ALBUQUERQUE
LEAD: After travels in greener climes, flying back into Albuquerque always gives a high-desert dweller a feeling that must parallel the thrill of a landlocked sailor suddenly whisked to the oceanside and offered a boat.


Stephanie Flagel Is Engaged to Andrew Serowitz
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald P. Flagel of Dayton, Ohio, have announced the engagement of their daughter Stephanie E. Flagel to Andrew J. Serowitz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney Serowitz of Jericho, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.


IT'S TIME TO TEACH CONNECTICUT HISTORY AGAIN
LEAD: THIS year, as America has celebrated the bicentennial of the Constitution, the people of Connecticut have been made aware of the significant contributions their state made in that process.


Social Events
LEAD: A Time for Thanksgiving  Notables at the Waldorf  Nov. 23 - Paul A. Volcker is scheduled to present an award to Jimmy Carter, Henry A. Kissinger will make a presentation to Gerald R. Ford, and Patti LuPone and Robert Merrill will entertain at the 33d annual Humanitarian Awards Dinner of United Cerebral Palsy of New York at the Waldorf-Astoria.


Teletext Use Is Growing
LEAD: TELETEXT INFORMA-tion services, long established in Europe, are now being carried on an increasing number of cable TV systems in this country, and American viewers can now, for the first time, buy television sets with built-in teletext decoders at virtually no added cost.
Until now, consumers had to buy a separate decoder to gain access to these news and feature services, which present pages of print and graphic displays on the screen.


On the Road to Biloxi
LEAD: AS DAWN BREAKS on New Year's Day, a new, customized GMC medium duty truck is scheduled to tool southward past sleeping cities on Interstate 95, en route from New York to Winter Park, Fla., carrying precious cargo.
In the truck's pristine environment, climate-controlled at 68 to 72 degrees Fahrenheit and 50 percent humidity, will nestle two bulky, nine-foot bundles, snugly wrapped in form-fitting, padded canvas covers, trussed securely against sudden shocks, weighing in at a thousand pounds apiece and insured for a total of $87,400 - the current market price of a couple of


Choosing the Right Paintbrush
LEAD: MANY homeowners give little thought to choosing a paintbrush.
Others find the array of brushes confusing and the choice difficult.


Milosz and the Polish-Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Melissa Lighthill Wed in Greenwich
LEAD: Melissa Duncan Lighthill and Elliston Perot Bissell 4th were married yesterday at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Sydney Wood-Cahusac performed the ceremony.


Official Tells How Social Security Was Spared
LEAD: The White House and Congressional leaders who negotiated the $76 billion Federal budget compromise were constantly fearful of the financial markets' judgment of their agreement and would have preferred cuts in spending for Social Security to produce a bigger reduction, the President's budget director said today.


Paying Attention To Fighting
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Gina Capella Has Wedding
LEAD: Gina M. Capella, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Rafael F. Capella of Tuxedo Park, N.Y., and Palm Beach, Fla., and Michael E. Martin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Martin of San Francisco, were married yesterday at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Roman Catholic Church in Tuxedo, N.Y.
The Rev.
John F. Breen performed the ceremony.


A FORUM FOR ISSUES ON YOUTHS
LEAD: ''THE Children's Association has been focusing on topics relating to young people for several years,'' said Eve Landau. ''In part, the topics for our conferences, come out of the interests of people who have attended previous programs and in part from our desire to hear from young people again as we've done in the past.


Junk Bonds - A Positive Force in the Market
LEAD: To the Editor:





Dance Archivists Meet To Discuss Field's Crisis
LEAD: Dance organizations moved into the technological age with varying degrees of enthusiasm.
But there has been a growing sense that technology could be used to preserve the ephemeral art of dance, an awareness suggested in the Martha Graham Dance Company's recent bid for direct Federal subsidy of its archival programs.


Music Noted in Brief; Westfield Plays Mahler And Tchaikovsky
LEAD: The Mahler Fourth Symphony and the Tchaikovsky Violin Concerto, which made up the Westfield Symphony Orchestra's program Saturday afternoon in Carnegie Hall, pursue different routes heavenward.
Mahler's symphony takes roughly an hour wending its way toward a gentle fourth movement for soprano and orchestra that is a child's vision of paradise.


Olympic Notebook; China Looks Past Its Asian Games
LEAD: Chinese Olympic officials are well along in their plans for staging the 1990 Asian Games in Beijing, an event they expect to enhance their chance of winning a bid to become host for the Summer Olympic Games in 2000.


Economic Calendar
LEAD:  Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday


4 Trapped in an Apartment Are Killed in a Cleveland Fire
LEAD: A woman and three children died early today in a fire that gutted a two-story apartment building.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD:  Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Nov. 22, 1987:  MONDAY American Express...Detroit Edison BellSouth Corp...Walt Disney Co Connecticut Nat Gas...NWA Inc Continental Ill Corp...San Diego Gas &amp; Elec  TUESDAY Angelica Corp...Interlake Corp BRE Properties...Kansas Gas &amp; Elec Bank of Boston...Medtronic Inc Becton, Dickinson &amp; Co...Merck &amp; Co Brush Wellman...Morgan Keegan Inc Certain-teed Corp...J.C.


Soccer; Women's Final To North Carolina
LEAD: North Carolina's reign as the top team in women's college soccer continued today.


Lapse on AIDS Is Conceded
LEAD: Wisconsin insurance regulators have confirmed that they granted two insurance companies permission to market policies that limited or denied payments to state clients who have AIDS or AIDS-related illnesses.


Midway Finds a Niche By Trial and Error
LEAD: Just three years ago, Midway Airlines seemed on the verge of succumbing to the forces that have swallowed almost all the airlines that sprang up after the industry was deregulated in 1978.


Howard Beach Defense Taking Over
LEAD: Two of the four defendants in the Howard Beach murder trial will not testify in their own behalf and a third is unlikely to, their lawyers say as they prepare to call their own witnesses in the two-and-a-half-month-old trial.


Music: Bream Guitar Recital
LEAD: JULIAN BREAM'S recital at the 92d Street Y Saturday evening found the famed guitarist in something less than his top form.
Both fallibility of finger and a certain muted quality to the interpretations worked against appreciation of playing that was at best thoughtful, caring and expert.


Bank Board Sees Hope In Texas
LEAD: After organizing the largest Federal liquidation of a thrift institution - the $1.3 billion shutdown of the Vernon Savings and Loan Association of Dallas - thrift regulators do not intend to close any other large Texas institution in the near future, said M. Danny Wall, the chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank


Brazil Exporters Move To Stop U.S. Sanctions
LEAD: Major Brazilian exporters, alarmed by an American threat to impose punitive tariffs on their products, are quietly urging the Government to find ways of dealing with United States objections to this country's controversial computer policy.


Advertising; Australian Sign Joins Times Sq.
LEAD: SOME important Australian brewery officials made a stop in Times Square on Friday to light up a sign for Foster's.


Boxing; Chavez Finally Commands the Spotlight
LEAD: When he climbed into the ring Saturday night at the Las Vegas Hilton outdoor stadium, Edwin Rosario had a conspicuous addition to his entourage.


Hanging on Yeltsin's Unheard Words
LEAD: The most persistent popular demand resounding in this capital, aside from the never-ending search for basic foodstuffs, is for the Government to make public the words of Boris N. Yeltsin, the outspoken politician who swept into control of the city two years ago only to fall from grace in a severe test of the


Budget Plan Expected To Leave Investors Cold
LEAD: Investors are expected to be unimpressed with a tentative agreement to trim the budget deficit by $76 billion over two years, Wall Street experts said yesterday.


New York Shifts Debate on Homeless Problem
LEAD: After years of frantic scrambling for beds and blankets, New York City's system of shelters for the homeless has grown into a vast bureaucracy that city officials and critics alike say is becoming increasingly competent in providing at least the bare necessities to all who need it.


Throgs Neck Bridge Closed After a Call About Dynamite
LEAD: The Throgs Neck Bridge was closed to traffic last night between 9:31 and 11:40 after a man called the police and said 125 sticks of dynamite had been placed on the bridge and were set to explode, the authorities said.


Dance: LaFosse in 'Baiser de la Fee'
LEAD: LIKE many ballets by George Balanchine, ''Divertimento from 'Le Baiser de la Fee' '' is named after its music.
Yet it is a far from typical Balanchine ballet, as was vividly reaffirmed Friday night when Robert LaFosse made his debut in the work's only male role.


Horse Racing; Cup Only Increases Title Speculation
LEAD: The championships remain unsettled, but almost all of the champions will be back.


Stage: Elizabeth Ashley In 'Milk Train' Revival
LEAD: INCH for inch, measure for measure, there is, proportionately, more acting on stage at the small WPA Theater than in any other theater in New York - and most of it is being done by Elizabeth Ashley.
The play is ''The Milk Train Doesn't Stop Here Anymore,'' and the stars are Ms.
Ashley, Marian Seldes and Amanda Plummer.


BAKER DENIES SEEKING FORUM FOR GORBACHEV
LEAD: The White House chief of staff, Howard H. Baker Jr., denied today that he formally asked Congressional leaders to allow the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, to address a joint meeting of Congress next month.


School Football; Saturday to Forget For Staten Island
LEAD: The Staten Island division might have been the toughest in the Public Schools Athletic League this football season.
At one point or another, it qualified four of its six teams for the A League playoffs.
But after last Saturday's P.S.A.L. quarterfinals, none remained.


Nicaragua, Complying With Peace Plan, Frees 985 Prisoners
LEAD: A political prisoner, pardoned by the Sandinista Government, receiving a certificate of liberty yesterday from an official of the Interior Ministry.
Most of the prisoners had been accused of backing the contras.
Page A6. (Agence France-Presse)


Victor J. Herwitz, Manhattan Lawyer, Dies
LEAD: Victor J. Herwitz, a Manhattan lawyer for more than 50 years and former chief assistant Corporation Counsel of New York City, died Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital Center after a long illness.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Iranian Boats Are Reported To Hit 2 Greek-Flagged Ships
LEAD: Iranian naval gunners fired on two Greek-registered vessels in the Persian Gulf over the weekend in apparent retaliation for Iraqi attacks on shipping bound for Iran.


From Tiny Cuban Port to Rampage in Louisiana
LEAD: The odyssey of the Cuban refugees who went on a rampage Saturday at a Federal detention center in Oakdale, La., began at a quiet fishing port near Havana seven years ago.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption Saturday about a speech in Washington by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel misidentified the man with Mr.
Shamir.
He is Avi Pazner, the Prime Minister's media adviser.


100 Layoffs At Drexel
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. dismissed about 100 employees late last week, a spokesman for the company said yesterday.
The privately held securities firm has about 11,000 employees.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Fitness


Ranger Parts Mesh for Once
LEAD: Many players were limping, and several faces were marked by cuts and bruises, souvenirs of connections with the opponents' sticks.
But the Rangers, who had lately taken an emotional battering as well, flew home from Winnipeg without the hangdog demeanor they had worn for the last three weeks.


On Your Own: Running; Finding Out That Less Can Sometimes Be More
LEAD: JIMMY BEHR is not one to talk, but the fact is, he is running less and enjoying it more.
Like so many other runners, Behr, a 40-year-old A.T.&amp;T. supervisor from Staten Island, got caught up in the mileage mania of the 1970's and at one point was training twice a day.
He ran - rather, consumed - over 100 miles a week.


JETS STUMBLE; PLAYOFF CHANCES VIRTUALLY GONE
LEAD: Lawrence Taylor, injured hamstring notwithstanding, played today for the Giants - not a lot, but enough to help and inspire.
But it was not enough to win the game, and the playoff hopes of the Super Bowl champions vanished.


Advertising; TV Guide Retirement And a Promotion, Too
LEAD: As Eric G. Larson announced his planned retirement as publisher of TV Guide last week, he also announced the promotion of William Deitch, a longtime magazine research specialist, to the position of general manager of TV Guide.
By tradition at Triangle Publications, the job outranks publisher.


ARMS INSPECTION FOR 13-YEAR SPAN IS SEEN BY SHULTZ
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that he had received encouraging signs that the Soviet Union wanted to resolve the main differences remaining over a new missile treaty.


Market Place; Stocks of Fund Managers
LEAD: PUBLICLY owned companies that manage mutual funds shared handsomely in the fund industry's swelling popularity during the 1980's.
But they have been battered more severely than most stocks since the market reached record highs in late August.


Bruce Files Suit Against Ohio St.
LEAD: Earle Bruce has sued Ohio State and its president, Edward Jennings, because of the anguish his family felt after his dismissal as football coach, his attorney said today.


No Discussion, Period!
LEAD: The White House has refused to discuss the possibility of pardons in the Iran-contra affair, no matter how many ways reporters bring it up.


Heeding Eastern Europe Now
LEAD: For decades, Eastern Europeans who wanted reforms found the Soviet Union standing in the way.
Now Moscow takes the lead and beckons, while Eastern Europe's leaders balk.
Their economies are in crisis, their people dispirited.
Most of the leaders are old or ailing and to them, the future looks uncertain and reform risky.


Let Banks Sell Securities
LEAD: Does the stock market crash undermine the case for allowing commercial banks to compete in the securities business?
No, say two financial heavyweights, William Proxmire, chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, and Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve.
They conclude that the potential benefits of a careful liberalization far outweigh the risks to the stability of the banking system.


Metro Matters; After 15 Years, Housing Message Is Still the Same
LEAD: In 1972, Oscar Newman criticized the overwhelming scale of a proposed public housing project in Forest Hills, Queens.
But he concluded that while its neighbors might have some reasonable grievances, their concerns were greatly inflated.


Broker Dies in Apparent Leap From Balcony on 32d Floor
LEAD: A stockbroker who suffered heavy losses on Wall Street last month apparently leaped to his death from the 32d-floor balcony of his Upper East Side apartment yesterday, the police said.


Found Art: Pollock's Floor
LEAD: In the converted barn here that for years was Jackson Pollock's studio, something resembling one of his famous drip paintings has been unexpectedly discovered - under some floorboards.


Bridge: A 'Consistent Partnership' Wins Men's Championship
LEAD: The American Contract Bridge League celebrated its 50th birthday here Saturday night with a party honoring a long list of people who have played a role in the game as players and administrators.


Bush Envisions Hands-On Presidency
LEAD: Vice President Bush says he would adopt a hands-on management style if elected President and would focus on a limited set of objectives including sharp reductions in Soviet conventional forces.


5 Said to Die in Lagos Rioting
LEAD: Five people were killed last week in Lagos when gangs of youths fought street battles with riot policemen, national newspapers reported on Saturday.


Pretoria Ousts 47 Black Troops
LEAD: The South African Defense Force acknowledged today that 47 members of a black battalion with previous service in Angola were discharged last month but denied that there had been a mutiny.


Special Train Brings Gifts to Appalachia
LEAD: Bundled-up crowds in Appalachia, one of the nation's most economically depressed regions, got an early Christmas on Saturday when the Santa Claus Special chugged through, the 45th year the region has received candy, school supplies and toys from the back of a train.


Homeless Man Stabs 5, Then Is Injured, In a Texas Church
LEAD: A homeless man panhandling for money stabbed at least five worshipers who tried to stop him from approaching a priest today during a mass.


In Memory of President Kennedy
LEAD: Visitors pausing at President John F. Kennedy's grave in Arlington National Cemetery.
Yesterday marked the 24th anniversary of his assassination as he rode in a motorcade in Dallas. (AP)


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: There have been two Heisman Trophy winners from Yale, Larry Kelley in 1936 and Clint Frank in 1937.
Which professional football teams did they play for?


REAR PASSENGERS SURVIVED AIR CRASH
LEAD: None of the 20 passengers in the last four rows of Continental Airlines' Flight 1713 died when the DC-9 crashed just after takeoff a week ago today, a survey shows.


Why Break In? Magruder Offers Answer
LEAD: The three conferences here on the Nixon Presidency produced a tantalizing moment when Jeb Stuart Magruder, the deputy director of Mr.
Nixon's 1972 campaign, offered a clear explanation of why Nixon loyalists ordered the break-in at Democratic National Committee headquarters in the Watergate building in


Recapturing the High School 'Glory Days'
LEAD: In an old mill town that makes lifetime heroes of its high school sports stars, Michael Considine was a quarterback on the football team, co-captain of the basketball team and captain of the baseball team.


The Dance: 'Torn' From Mark Dendy, at P.S. 122
LEAD: MARK DENDY choreographs as if he were devising kinetic comic strips.
Some of his images are witty.
Others are crude.
Yet, for all his bumptiousness, he is a serious choreographer.


FILE ON SEIZED NAZI RECOUNTS HORRORS
LEAD: An elderly Austrian arrested this month on a remote ranch in Argentina has emerged as one of the most brutal commandants of the Nazi labor camps, according to Austrian police files now made public.


World Trade: Wary Outlook
LEAD: United Nations economists said Friday that the world would risk a recession if cuts in the United States budget deficit were not combined with moves by Japan and West Germany to stimulate demand for imports.


New Leader in Washington
LEAD: Two years ago, in a Monday night game, Lawrence Taylor of the Giants hit the Washington Redskins' quarterback, Joe Theismann, with a clean but jarring tackle that broke Theismann's leg.
The young, strong-armed Jay Schroeder came off the bench to lead the Redskins to a victory and to win the job as the starting quarterback.


Amoco Seems on Verge Of Finishing Dome Deal
LEAD: After seven months of legal wrangling and secret negotiations, the Amoco Corporation appears close to wrapping up the biggest corporate takeover in Canada's history.


Going Out Guide
LEAD:  Cultural Affairs


A Theater Changes Direction
LEAD: THE Second Stage has begun its ninth season with a 17-year-old play, which seems par for the course laid out in 1979 by its artistic directors, Robyn Goodman and Carole Rothman.
Their mission was to give a second chance to works by major playwrights that were unsuccessful or little-noticed the first time out.


Carolyn Pomerantz Weds
LEAD: At Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I., Carolyn Sue Pomerantz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Pomerantz of Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday to Michael Elliott Rosenbaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Rosenbaum of Valley Stream, L.I.
Rabbi Robert Widom, assisted by Cantor Henry Weintraub, performed the ceremony.


Commercial Broadcasters' Services (and Duties)
LEAD: To the Editor:


On Your Own: Running; Right Kind of Knee Bends Help Prevent Wrong Kind
LEAD: PITY the poor downhill skier's knee, so vulnerable to twisting and tearing.
Here comes its owner, clad in the latest pants and parka and armored by the best technology in boots and bindings.
He's plunging recklessly through the moguls, skiing on the ragged edge with too much speed and too little control.


Call for Extradition
LEAD: Alois Brunner, the Nazi fugitive who has lived in Syria for the last 30 years was quoted earlier this month in The Chicago Sun-Times as saying he ''would do it again'' and that Jews ''deserved to die because they were the devil's agents and human garbage.''


Korea's Growth Survives a Summer of Strikes
LEAD: Despite ample hand-wringing here last summer about the potential harm created by a surge of labor unrest, South Korea's economy has weathered the crisis with aplomb.


Dr. Jeffrey L. Bishop, Lecturer, 29
LEAD: Dr.
Jeffrey L. Bishop, a lecturer in astronomy at Columbia University, died Nov. 13 when a car struck him as he jogged near his home in Rockland County.
He was 29 years old.


Quick-Change Mugging
LEAD: A man was waiting to buy a plant at the counter of an Upper West Side store when another approached asking for a $20 bill in exchange for four fives.
Yes, the plant buyer said, he did have a twenty, and handed it over.


Graf Wins Virginia Slims
LEAD: Steffi Graf serving to Gabriela Sabatini as she won in four sets yesterday at Madison Square Garden.
SportsMonday, page C1. (NYT/Ruby Washington)


Schroeder and Politics: The Problems of Gender
LEAD: Five months ago, Representative Patricia Schroeder set out to see if the country was ready to accept a Presidential contender ''who was not the woman's candidate, but a candidate who happened to be a woman.''


Harcourt Sells 3 Units
LEAD: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. will sell its History Book Club and two smaller clubs for $25 million to the Book-of-the-Month Club, a division of Time Inc., Harcourt's chairman, William Jovanovich, said Friday.
The sale, which includes the Pre-School and Instructor book clubs, will be concluded Tuesday, he said.


College Football; Syracuse Gets Some Big Help
LEAD: When Michael Owens ran into the corner of the end zone for a 2-point conversion with 10 seconds left to give Syracuse a thrilling 32-31 victory over West Virginia Saturday night, he enabled the Orange to complete an undefeated season and kept alive the team's chances for the final No. 1 ranking.


94% of Reservists Are Reached in a National Drill
LEAD: Reserve and National Guard units across the country managed to reach almost 94 percent of their members in an emergency readiness test last month, the Pentagon said.


Dollar Down In Pacific
LEAD: The United States dollar lost ground in both Australian and New Zealand trading early today as foreign exchange dealers expressed disappointment over the American deficit-reduction package.
There was no trading in Tokyo because of a national holiday.


Advertising; Former Ogilvy Official Joining Bozell, Jacobs
LEAD: Jay Schulberg, an Ogilvy &amp; Mather 20-year man who quit last April as executive vice president, creative head, is joining Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt.


Schomburg Center Acts to Halt Loss of Black History
LEAD: Bright with morning sunlight and adorned with photographs of a black leadership long past, the archives search room of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture bustled with the business of history over the weekend.


7 Poems by Dickinson to Be Sung at 92d St. Y
LEAD: Seven poems by Emily Dickinson that have been set to music by six composers are to be sung by the soprano Dawn Upshaw on Dec. 2 at 8 P.M. at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.


JETS STUMBLE; SEVEN PASSES DROPPED IN LOSS
LEAD: The Jets lost another game today to the team that seems to give them the most trouble: themselves.


Nigeria Trying to Start Over Amid Recession and Turmoil
LEAD: Through a car window, a Lagos ''go slow,'' or traffic jam, offers a snapshot of the diminished fortunes of Nigeria, the giant of black Africa.


COURTS ACTING TO FORCE CARE ON THE UNBORN
LEAD: Ayesha Madyun, a 19-year-old Washington woman, had been in labor two days when she arrived at D.C.
General Hospital to give birth to her first child.
Eighteen hours later, her labor had not progressed and the doctors decided that Mrs.
Madyun needed an immediate Caesarean section: the baby's likelihood of developing a fatal infection was steadily rising.


Sports of The Times; Jets Need a New Leader
LEAD: ABOUT the only nice thing to be said about the American Conference East is this: it's so bad, it's good.
With the Indianapolis Colts losing to the New England Patriots yesterday, the Jets had an opportunity to take over sole possesion of first place.
But when the Jets lost to the Buffalo Bills, 17-14, and the Miami Dolphins defeated the Dallas Cowboys last night, 20-14, a five-way tie at 5-5 was created.


From Hideout to Hideout for Survival
LEAD: ''Amigo, look out, tonight it will be bad.''


Dance: Beverly Blossom
LEAD: BEVERLY BLOSSOM is one of those rare solo performers who can indicate the most complex of situations and emotions with the simplest and most purely physical of moves and gestures.
And ''Beverly Blossom, Again,'' a program seen on Saturday night at the Nikolais-Louis Choreospace, was the performer and choreographer at her best.


Advertising; Spin Magazine Finds Investor and Chairman
LEAD: Camouflage Publishing, publisher of Spin magazine, of which Robert Guccione Jr. is president and chief executive, has welcomed David H. Horowitz, 58, as an investor and chairman.


Nixon Revisited
LEAD: A three-day conference on the Presidency of Richard Nixon was drawing to a close at Hofstra University when Roger Wilkins of the Institute for Policy Studies spoke up during a panel on the Nixon record in civil rights.


Keeper of the Federal Purse for 50 Million People
LEAD: He is 39 years old, presides over one-tenth of the Federal budget and supervises health programs that serve more than 50 million people.


Peter Norman Ruben And Miss Benson Wed
LEAD: The marriage of Karen Hilary Benson and Peter Norman Ruben took place yesterday at the Pierre Hotel in New York.
Rabbi Joel Gore performed the ceremony.


The Tenpak Peril
LEAD: Shove a $10 bill at a New York City subway token clerk and he's likely to shove back a Tenpak, a little plastic bag containing 10 tokens.
The Transit Authority likes to promote this modest gesture toward efficiency.
But riders participate at their peril.


Nynex Names Chief For Directory Unit
LEAD: Donald B. Reed is stepping into a competitive slot at the Nynex Corporation.
The company has named him president of the Nynex Information Resources Company, which publishes white and yellow page directories.


Lost Dole Documents
LEAD: The Federal Election Commission has lost internal documents that would shed light on why it dropped a case against Senator Bob Dole's 1980 Presidential campaign and Mr.
Dole's wife, Elizabeth Hanford Dole.


TV Review; 'Lena: My 100 Children,' a Post-Holocaust Drama
LEAD: OUT of television's often murky ''based on fact'' catalog comes ''Lena: My 100 Children,'' the movie on NBC at 9 tonight.
Linda Lavin plays Lena Kuchler-Silberman, who after World War II dedicated herself to helping the surviving children of Holocaust victims in Poland.
As might be expected, the story of the children is explored for maximum heart-tugging.


Argentina Seeking Private Help on Oil
LEAD: The administration of President Raul Alfonsin has abandoned Argentina's decades-old policy of state domination of the oil industry and is appealing to private enterprise, both foreign and national, to help exploit the country's energy potential.


Lynn Robin Friedrich Is Wed to K. E. Librot
LEAD: Lynn Robin Friedrich, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Friedrich of Clifton, N.J., was married yesterday at Edgewood Country Club in River Vale, N.J., to Kenneth Edward Librot, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Irwin E. Librot of New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Joseph Herman, assisted by Cantor William Lieberman, performed the ceremony.


Deficit Plan Impact Assessed
LEAD: The announcement Friday of a compromise plan on the Federal budget deficit removed one uncertainty from the credit markets, but many analysts said it was not enough to cause a quick, substantial decline in interest rates.


''Total War' Doesn't Justify Killing Civilians
LEAD: To the Editor:


Holmes at Age 38: Confident as Ever
LEAD: ON a Wednesday night earlier this month, at the Larry Holmes Commodore Inn on United States Route 22 in Phillipsburg, N. J., friends and relatives of the proprietor gathered in a ballroom there to throw him a surprise birthday party.


Gregory Muhlin, Scientist, 42
LEAD: Gregory Muhlin, a research scientist at the New York State Psychiatric Institute at the Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan, died at the hospital Tuesday after suffering a cerebral hemorrhage.
He was 42 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Pilot of Jetliner Fatally Stricken While Landing
LEAD: An American Airlines pilot suffered a fatal heart attack while his jetliner was landing Saturday night, but the co-pilot brought the plane safely to a stop, the authorities said yesterday.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


Outdoors: Time for Waterfowling
LEAD: ALTHOUGH it might seem ludicrous to some nonhunters, this is the time of year when grown men devote considerable time, money and physical energy attempting to outwit ducks and geese.


Hawks Smash Chargers
LEAD: Dave Krieg passed for two touchdowns and ran for another, and Curt Warner had his second straight 100-yard rushing game today as the Seattle Seahawks routed San Diego, 34-3, ending the Chargers' eight-game winning streak.


Visitors to Park Find Cold Snap to Their Taste
LEAD: A pair of penguins, Pete and Penny, making their skateless but sure- footed way across the ice at the Wollman Rink in Central Park yester day.
The penguins, visiting from Sea World, are here for the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade, which will be held on Thursday. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on Nov. 7 about organizations that prepare students for Scholastic Aptitude Tests misstated the policy of the Stanley H. Kaplan Educational Center.
Students in the Kaplan preparatory course may retake the course free for up to a year regardless of their scores on the test.


Hanover's Mutual Fund Role
LEAD: The Manufacturers Hanover Corporation is expected to announce today that it will begin distributing some 20 different mutual funds, including products from Dreyfus, Federated, Franklin and Putnam, through 10 of its New York area branches.


Greek Cypriot Women Cross Turks' Line
LEAD: Hundreds of Greek Cypriot women bearing white banners stormed and scrambled across the line dividing their country today, scuffling with armed Turkish soldiers in protest against the division of the island.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It is like running a town.
The only difference is, rather than providing normal municipal services, we are also providing food, clothing, shelter and all the basic necessities of life.''  William J. Grinker on New York City's homeless shelter program.  [ B6:3. ]


Beyond the Budget Compromise
LEAD: The world economy is headed in the right direction.
Galvanized by the stock market plunge, the Administration and Congress have begun to agree on cuts in the budget deficit.
American and West German interest rates have fallen.
Domestic demand in Japan had already turned up smartly.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 1987
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL A3-12  George Shultz received signs that Moscow wants to resolve the main differences remaining over a new missile treaty when the Soviet Foreign Minister, Edward A. Shevardnandze, meets him for two days of talks in Geneva.
Page A1  El Salvador's President criticized returning rebel civilian leaders and demanded that they break their links with the military wing of the guerrilla front.


Reslts Plus
LEAD:  Auto Racing


Luanda Aide Asserts South Africa Still Has 3,000 Troops in Angola
LEAD: A high Angolan official says 3,000 South African soldiers remain in southern Angola after the fiercest fighting in a decade between Angolan troops and South African and guerrilla forces.


A 'Silly' Sock Idea Makes Millions
LEAD: Four years ago, a 27-year-old named Sophie Mirman had a silly idea for a new business here: shops that sold only women's tights, stockings and socks.


Concert: Alvin Lucier
LEAD: ALVIN LUCIER, who opened the Alternative Museum's music series Wednesday night, composes scores that combine true Minimalist austerity (devoid of the kinetic impetus of a Philip Glass or Steve Reich) with conceptual-art ingenuity and a fascination for acoustical experimentation.
The results can range from the meditatively compelling to the downright alluring to the academically arid, and


Sihanouk to Meet Cambodian Official in Peace Bid
LEAD: Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian head of state, plans to meet Prime Minister Hun Sen, the most powerful figure in the Vietnamese-backed Communist Government in Phnom Penh, around Dec. 10 in Paris in a new peace effort, according to Cambodian and other Asian diplomats.


La Rochelle Journal; The Anti-Monarchist: His Majesty the Mayor
LEAD: More than three centuries ago, La Rochelle's turreted city hall was a genuine fortress besieged by an army led by Cardinal Richelieu, the stern incarnation of the centralizing French state.
Mayor Michel Crepeau today likes to show visitors the crease in a marble table top where in 1628 Admiral Jean


Struggling to Survive Amid Despair And Violence at Care Center for Men
LEAD: Near the shadows of the neon glare on lower Broadway in Manhattan, the will to survive drives men without homes and sometimes without hope to a dingy building on East Third Street.


Advertising; Scali Losing A Partner
LEAD: Alan Pesky will leave Scali, McCabe, Sloves at the end of the year - the third of the five founding partners to do so.


State Attorney General Seeks to Abolish Westchester Child Abuse Prevention Society
LEAD: Charging that members of the Westchester County Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children have abused their powers as peace officers, State Attorney General Robert Abrams is seeking a court order to dissolve the society.


Sports World Specials; No Stopping Him
LEAD: Most skiers are happy if they can ski every day during a week-long vacation or every day for a few weekends each season.
Paul Schipper was not content with that.
Every day that Sugarloaf/USA in Maine was open over the past six seasons, he has skied.
On Saturday, a week into a seventh season, his streak reached 1,000 days.


NICARAGUA FREES 985 FROM PRISONS
LEAD: The Government freed 985 political prisoners nationwide today as one of its moves to comply with a regional peace plan.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 23, 1987
LEAD: GENERAL ASSEMBLY  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Political and Security Committee - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Special Political Committee - 10 A.M.
Social, Humanitarian and Cultural Committee - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Administrative and Budgetary Committee - 10 A.M.
Legal Committee - 3 A.M.


Graf Hold Off Sabatini
LEAD: There was an occasional sign of frustration as Steffi Graf muttered to herself in German, swatted a ball or two in annoyance and all but abandoned attempts to coax her backhand slice over the net.
For one of the few times during a remarkable year, the 18-year-old West German appeared vulnerable, and the prospect of an Agatha Christie ending to the tennis season filled the air at Madison Square


Cetus Gene System
LEAD: The Cetus Corporation, a biotechnology company based in Emeryville, Calif., has introduced an automated gene amplification system as part of its joint venture with the Perkin-Elmer Corporation.
The system, which represents the first commercial introduction of Cetus-developed technology, relies on an enzyme to make as many as a million copies of a specific gene sequence, allowing the amplification of a DNA sequence in hours rather than the days or weeks typically required.


Only Morality Will Effectively Prevent AIDS From Spreading
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nussbaum Withdraws Right to Boy
LEAD: Hedda Nussbaum said yesterday that she was surrendering all rights to custody of the 17-month-old boy she and Joel B. Steinberg had raised as Mitchell Steinberg.
She said the child's place was with his biological mother, Nicole Smigiel.


Dear Judge Kennedy
LEAD: When Federal judges have questions about their ethical duties they ask the ''Dear Abby Committee,'' the informal name for the Committee on the Codes of Judicial Conduct of the Judicial Conference of the United States.


Business and the Law; A Green Light In Boesky Suit
LEAD: A MAMMOTH civil lawsuit by shareholders against Ivan F. Boesky, the fallen Wall Street speculator, is expected to proceed expeditiously now that the United States Supreme Court has decided a securities case that had threatened to delay the Boesky matter.


Music Noted in Brief; Seraphim Trio Offers Bela Varkonyi Works
LEAD: Bela Varkonyi was a much-played young composer in turn-of-the-century Hungary, but this early reputation seems to have been swallowed up by his move to and subsequent life in the United States.
Even as exhaustive a reference as the New Grove Dictionary of Music makes no mention of him.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD:  American Home Products Corp. named John D. Feerick, dean of Ford-ham University's Law School, a direc-


Republican Is Louisiana Lieutenant Governor
LEAD: Paul Hardy, a Republican who campaigned as a reformer in the mold of Governor-elect Buddy Roemer, ousted Lieut.
Gov.
Bobby Freeman in the Louisiana runoff election Saturday, while the state's Attorney General, William Guste, won a fifth term.


U.S. Leader Is Picked By Asea Brown Boveri
LEAD: A newly formed electrical equipment company called Asea Brown Boveri has named Klaus E. Agthe president and chief executive for United States operations.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A report in the Company News column of Business Day on Thursday, about Chrysler's 1988 model cars, misstated their price change from the previous year.
Prices have been cut 1 percent, on average, on comparably equipped cars made in the United States.


Nixon Skips Conference, but the Enigma Attends
LEAD: The issue under debate here for three days was one of the central political questions of the age: What was the true meaning of Richard M. Nixon's Presidency and how will he be judged before the bar of history?


Music: Schiff and Oslo Philharmonic
LEAD: PIANOPHILES were especially well represented in the audience that gathered for the Oslo Philharmonic concert at Carnegie Hall Friday evening: Andras Schiff, guest soloist for the Grieg Piano Concerto, has established a real following among the listeners who know and care most about the piano literature.


Mexico's Border Plants Thrive on Weak Peso
LEAD: The rapid spread of foreign-owned assembly plants along the Mexican border will likely be sustained because of the latest plunge in the peso's value, industry officials here said.


Homeless Man Found Frozen to Death on S.I.
LEAD: A 66-year-old homeless man living under an oceanfront boardwalk on Staten Island died, apparently of exposure, in the frigid temperatures over the weekend, the police said.


Cerrillos Journal; A Prospector's Search For an Elusive Dream
LEAD: For perhaps 1,000 years, the windswept mesa here has drawn dreamers.
First came the Indians, then the Spanish explorers, then 19th-century American miners, all drawn by what the Indians called ''the sky in the stone,'' the delicate turquoise mined here.


A Better Place for the Cyclist to Sit
LEAD: One bane of a bicyclist's existence - the seat that begins to feel like a concrete slab 15 minutes into a ride - may not be worth complaining about anymore.
A marriage of technology between the Spenco Medical Corporation and Avocet Inc., a producer of cycling components, has come up with a bike saddle that has thick gel at its core.


Reinstated '84 Plan Provided For Return of 2,700 to Cuba
LEAD: The immigration agreement that set off the riot by Cuban inmates at a detention center in Louisiana reinstated an understanding between the two countries that was reached in December 1984.
The State Department announced the reinstatement Friday.


S.A.S. May Bid For Caledonian
LEAD: The Scandinavian Airlines System is expected to make a counter offer for the British Caledonian Group, which received a revised offer of $:147 million (about $262 million) on Friday from British Airways P.L.C.


George L. Perry Wed To Dina Needleman
LEAD: Dina Needleman and George L. Perry were married yesterday at the Lotos Club in New York by Acting Justice Richard Lee Price of State Supreme Court.


Few New Airlines Survive
LEAD: When the airline industry was deregulated in 1978, the unfettered market was expected to give rise to scores of low-cost carriers that would create a bonanza for consumers, put the existing companies on the defensive and even run some of them out of business.


Robert Lawrence Judson Weds Robin Ellen Platzer
LEAD: Robin Ellen Platzer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Platzer of New York, was married yesterday to Robert Lawrence Judson, the son of Mrs.
Morris Judson of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Judson.
Rabbi Morris Goldberg officiated at the Harmonie Club in New York.


A Survey of the Troubled
LEAD: A new survey of the single men and women in the city's shelter system conducted for the city by the New York State Psychiatric Institute, and based upon interviews with a cross section of shelter residents, depicts a deeply troubled population, in which most people may never be capable of living entirely on their own.


Mother May Not Have Saved Lone Survivor of Plane Crash
LEAD: Documents made available during a hearing on the Aug. 16 crash of a Northwest Airlines jetliner suggest that its sole survivor, 4-year-old Cecelia Cichan, was not saved by her mother, as had been believed.


Advertising; McCann and Others Win More Accounts
LEAD: A bunch of bouncing business.


Concert: Orchestra Of 18th Century at Tully
LEAD: LIKE the early-music movement as a whole, the Orchestra of the 18th Century is fast outgrowing its name.
Frans Bruggen's Amsterdam-based, internationally assembled ensemble played a concert yesterday afternoon in Alice Tully Hall that marked the most significant advance thus far in this city of highly skilled, large-scaled playing of the standard repertory.


Rumors Abound of Thanksgiving Pardons
LEAD: For months, there have been rumblings that President Reagan might pardon Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter and Robert C. McFarlane, key participants in the Iran-contra affair.


Susan Rosenholtz Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Susan I. Rosenholtz and Assemblyman Arthur J. Kremer were married last evening at the Plaza in New York.
Rabbi Morris Friedman and Cantor Charles Ritter officiated.


What Congress Didn't Ask
LEAD: Lieut.
Colonel Oliver L. North said during the Congressional hearings into the Iran-contra affair that he has fought in two American wars, Vietnam and Angola.
During his examination by the Iran-contra committees, he proudly offered information about his service in Vietnam but never mentioned what he was doing in Angola.


Music: Stern, Ax and Ma at Carnegie
LEAD: THOUGH it hardly seems possible, Emanuel Ax, Isaac Stern and Yo-Yo Ma were making their New York debut as a trio Saturday evening in Carnegie Hall.
They have played together elsewhere in this country as well as abroad, but they had not yet not done so here.


Music Noted in Brief; George Russell Sextet At Sweet Basil
LEAD: George Russell's music has had a pervasive influence in jazz circles since the 1940's, when compositions such as ''Cubano Be, Cubano Bop'' and ''A Bird in Igor's Yard'' pointed out intriguing parallels between Afro-Cuban rhythms, be-bop and Stravinsky.
His sextets of the 60's, which included musicians such as Eric Dolphy, made some innovative and enduring records, and the news that Mr.


'Rhapsody in Blue'
LEAD: A rare 1926 concert version of Gershwin's ''Rhapsody in Blue'' is among the works to be performed by the Harmonie Ensemble on Dec. 8 at 8 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
The program, called ''Americans and Paris,'' also features Ravel's ''Bolero''; Poulenc's ''Aubade for Piano and 18 Instruments''; Ibert's ''Paris Suite'' and Milhaud's ''Creation of the World.


Commercial Broadcasters' Services (and Duties)
LEAD: To the Editor:


17 Cubans Escape Texas Center; 14 Recaptured
LEAD: Seventeen Cuban inmates escaped from a detention center early today by climbing through a steel roof grating, but all but three were recaptured within hours.


Music: Chamber, at Merkin
LEAD: FOR THE LOVE OF MUSIC, a chamber music society directed by the violinist Richard Sortomme, gave four trios at Merkin Concert Hall yesterday afternoon.
One was a classic - Schubert's expansive Op. 100, attacked with big-boned vigor by Mr.
Sortomme, Semyon Fridman (cello) and John Klibonoff (piano).


DUARTE DEMANDS RETURNING REBELS DISOWN FIGHTERS
LEAD: President Jose Napoleon Duarte strongly criticized returning rebel civilian leaders today and demanded that they break their links with the military wing of the guerrilla front.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD:  AM International Inc. said it had reached a four-year standstill agreement with Komuri Printing Machinery Co., which holds 6.7 percent of AM's common stock.
Komori agreed to limit its ownership to less than 8 percent of AM's stock in the next six months and to less than 5 percent for the duration of the agreement.


Sports World Specials; Gambling Racquets
LEAD: No sooner had the high-stakes Skins Game become a golfing fixture than you could almost hear the wheels of copycat creativity grinding.
If it works for golf, why shouldn't it work for tennis?


Mexican Rightist Party Chooses Candidate
LEAD: In an unexpectedly decisive vote, Mexico's principal opposition party today chose a wealthy rancher with a reputation for aggressive oratory as its candidate for President in next July's general election here.


Elephant Kills Moped Rider
LEAD: A wild elephant trampled a school teacher riding a moped and sat beside the man's body until chased away by the police, the United News of India reported today.
The elephant, which had strayed from a herd in Orissa State in eastern India, killed the teacher, Prabhakar Sahu, 45 years old, on a highway Saturday then squatted beside the body until it was forced back into the forest.


A Push for International Market Rules
LEAD: In the wake of last month's stock market plunge, world financial regulators have intensified their effort to change outdated national regulations to cope with an increasingly global market.


College Football; Unfinished Business in East
LEAD: Although most of the East's college football players took their helmets off for the last time this season on Saturday, there are playoffs and bowl games ahead for some.


Sports World Specials; Update on Sticks
LEAD: Five years after the introduction of sticks with aluminum shafts ushered in the era of high-tech hockey, wood is still king in the National Hockey League.
Only about 80 players have adopted the aluminum sticks, but the number has been rising, for an obvious reason: several sharp-shooters claim that since switching to aluminum they are stick-handling better, shooting harder, and playing a more consistent game.


Deficit Pact Called a 'First Step'
LEAD: Some Congressional leaders today called the proposed deficit-reduction package a starting point, while others said they were disappointed and would seek modifications.


Tennis; Bueno Brings History Onto the Court
LEAD: She arrived on the junior tennis circuit in 1957, a 17-year-old from Sao Paulo, Brazil, who spoke no English and had only limited experience in competition.
Although she had captured the Brazilian national title at age 14, Maria Bueno was young and her style seemed too unorthodox to threaten tennis's elite: Maureen Connelly, Doris Hart and and Althea


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: PERESTROIKA: New Thinking for Our Country and the World.
By Mikhail Gorbachev. 254 pages.
A Cornelia &amp; Michael Bessie Book/Harper &amp; Row. $19.95.


Stamford Rail Center Opens, Off Schedule
LEAD: The Stamford Transportation Center, a structure often ridiculed by Amtrak and Metro-North rail commuters as a monument to miscalculation, started service today, three years after its first projected opening date and still only partly completed.


Pressmen Ratify Contract
LEAD: The pressmen of The New York Times voted yesterday to ratify the tentative contract settlement negotiated earlier this month by management and their union, New York Printing Pressmen's Union Local 2.
The president of the union, Lenny Higgins, said that the pressmen voted 216 to 44 to accept a 33 percent increase in wages over six years and a 10-year agreement on staffing levels.


Montana and Rice: A Winning Recipe
LEAD: Joe Montana threw for 304 yards and Jerry Rice caught three touchdown passes today to lead the San Francisco 49ers to a 24-10 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.


How Families Cope With the Terminally Ill
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cuban Inmates Riot in Louisiana Over New Threat of Deportation
LEAD: More than 1,000 Cuban inmates, outraged at the prospect of being deported under a new immigration agreement, took over a Federal detention center here Saturday night, seized about 30 hostages and set fire to most of the prison.


LURIA, L &amp; SON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LURIA, L &amp; SON INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
36,926,000
33,279,000
Net inc
322,000
255,000
Share earns
.06
.05
9mo rev
118,543,000
95,805,000
Net inc
983,000
b857,000
Share earns
.18
.16


Trainer Appeals
LEAD: An appeal hearing sought by Peter Ferriola, the thoroughbred racing trainer, of a 120-day suspension imposed by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board began yesterday in the board's offices in Manhattan.
Earlier this month, three of Ferriola's horses tested positive for Lasix, a diuretic thought to improve performance.


SITTING LESSON
LEAD: When the wearer is standing or striding down the street, above-the-knee skirts look great.
Sitting, when the skirt is at midthigh, can be another matter.
One of the sidelights of the recent showings of 1988 spring styles in Milan, Paris and New York was watching the audience of fashion professionals and celebrities deal with sitting in short skirts.


A NEW YORK LAW TO SUPPLY ROOMS FOR POOR IS UPSET
LEAD: A New York City law that ordered the owners of vacant single-room-occupancy hotels to rehabilitate them and rent the rooms to low-income tenants is unconstitutional, a State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan ruled yesterday.


Officials See Harshness of Iran Panel's Finding as a Blow to Meese
LEAD: The criticism of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d in the majority report of the Congressional Iran-contra committees is a serious blow to the Attorney General, Justice Department officials say.


Western Cities Move Aggressively to Clear Up Smoggy Skies
LEAD: It is that time of year again in the West.


William L. Cooper Jr., Film Producer, 65
LEAD: William L. Cooper Jr., a documentary-film producer, died of a heart attack at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J., Friday.
He was 65 years old.


J &amp; J SNACK FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*J &amp; J SNACK FOODS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Sales
16,347,400
7,822,200
Net inc
874,700
465,100
Share earns
.29
.16
Yr sales
47,666,600
25,419,300
Net inc
2,741,500
1,607,600
Share earns
.92
.61


BRITTON LEE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRITTON LEE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,696,000
7,815,000
Net loss
328,000
b132,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
18,708,000
22,468,000
Net loss
6,548,000
b59,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income and includes a tax credit of $10,000 for both the quarter and 9 months.


SHOREWOOD PACKAGING reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHOREWOOD PACKAGING (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
28,039,000
19,370,000
Net inc
3,688,000
b1,272,000
Share earns
.28
.14
6mo rev
48,873,000
35,131,000
Net inc
6,018,000
b1,906,000
Share earns
.47
.22


Koch Plan Foe Agrees to Live In Group Home
LEAD: The first person picked up under a new Koch administration program to involuntarily hospitalize severely mentally ill homeless people has decided not to return to the East Side sidewalk where she lived for most of the last year, her lawyers said yesterday.


Feminism Goes Beyond Civil Libertarianism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Left: A Shopworn Cliche With Built-In Prejudice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brokaw of NBC Plans To Interview Gorbachev
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev is to be interviewed by Tom Brokaw, the anchor for the ''NBC Nightly News,'' for a one-hour program to be broadcast on NBC from 8 to 9 P.M.
Monday, the network announced yesterday.


Washington Talk: Military Forces; Army Chief's Order of the Day: Teach Them Well
LEAD: The Army's new Chief of Staff, Gen.
Carl E. Vuono, has begun to put his imprint on the service and, subtly, to rebut critics of the military.


MAXWELL LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAXWELL LABORATORIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,205,000
14,638,000
Net inc
852,000
632,000
Share earns
.33
.25


How Two Become a Social Institution
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Tests on Joints Sought for Booster Before a Launching
LEAD: The redesigned joints of the space shuttle's booster rockets should undergo a new series of tests before being declared ready for flight, but the additional testing need not delay resumption of flights next year as planned, an expert panel said today.


PACE MEMBERSHIP WAREHOUSE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACE MEMBERSHIP WAREHOUSE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
209,570,000
125,018,000
Net inc
b703,000
c345,000
Share earns
.06
.03
9mo rev
576,972,000
363,630,000
Net inc
b591,000
d1,517,000
Share earns
.05
-


COPELCO FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COPELCO FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,851,000
7,494,000
Net inc
1,404,000
1,675,000
Share earns
.26
.41
Shares outst
5,331,000
4,000,000
Yr rev
35,548,000
23,659,000
Net inc
4,106,000
3,839,000
Share earns
.92
.92
Shares outst
4,398,000
4,000,000


Parcells and Morris in Tune
LEAD: The whispers are incessant.
They say that Bill Parcells hates Joe Morris and Joe Morris hates Bill Parcells, that the Giants' coach has lost confidence in Morris as a running back and so the Giants are passing rather than running, that Parcells says Morris uses small injuries as an excuse not to play.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


The U.N. Today: Nov. 24, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


Strong Quake Jolts California; Damage Held Slight
LEAD: A powerful earthquake jolted Southern California and parts of Arizona and Nevada today, cracking windows and knocking items off shelves in some areas, the authorities said.


VITA PLUS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VITA PLUS INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,076,246
761,133
Net inc
11,420
b303,248
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
2,003,057
1,833,718
Net loss
111,442
334,856
b-Net loss


Joseph C. Palamountain Jr., 66, Ex-President of Skidmore College&gt;
LEAD: Joseph Cornwall Palamountain Jr., who retired in June after 22 years as the fourth president of Skidmore College, died of cardiac arrest yesterday in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Dr.
Palamountain, who had triple bypass surgery within the last year, lived in Saratoga Springs and was 66 years old.


FPA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FPA CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,928,000
20,457,000
Net loss
1,104,000
1,756,000


Steinberg Won't Try to Maintain Custody of Boy
LEAD: Joel B. Steinberg said yesterday that he would not try to seek custody of the 17-month-old boy he had been raising as Mitchell Steinberg, who was returned last week to the baby's biological mother.


Futuristic Treatments For the Hair and Skin
LEAD: DERMATOLOGISTS are developing futuristic treatments for some widespread and distressing conditions previously thought to be beyond their help.
The experimental treatments may restore natural color to graying hair, prevent poison ivy rashes and restore even skin tone to patients with the pale patches of vitiligo.


Historic Ships Rotting At Maritime Museum
LEAD: The world's largest assembly of historic ships lies rotting and covered with rust along the waterfront here, a victim of inadequate maintenance that officials attributed to insufficient Federal financing.


FLEXWATT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLEXWATT CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
423,843
204,850
Net loss
116,688
277,222
9mo sales
1,007,875
464,092
Net loss
667,504
797,468


PHH GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHH GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
392,582,000
319,842,000
Net inc
10,159,000
8,348,000
Share earns
.61
.50
6mo rev
784,672,000
655,383,000
Net inc
20,210,000
17,174,000
Share earns
1.20
1.03


OXFORD ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OXFORD ENERGY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
221,604
2,403,331
Net loss
92,645
b971,512
Share earns
-
.17
9mo rev
814,572
2,897,851
Net loss
255,796
b901,453
Share earns
-
.16
b-Net income and includes a gain of $2,190,000 on the sale of interest in a waste-to-energy project.


ROYAL GOLD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROYAL GOLD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
688,582
53,935
Net loss
b357,891
b286,449
b-Includes a gain from discontinued operations of $78,029 and $20,167 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Spurs Accurate in Stretch As Knicks' Defense Fails
LEAD: The San Antonio Spurs, a team with one of the league's worst records on the road, defeated the Knicks at Madison Square Garden last night, 117-112, because they have all the pieces to the puzzle that the Knicks are still searching for.


GEN-PROBE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEN-PROBE INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,032,000
668,000
Net loss
2,000,000
1,100,000
9mo rev
3,076,000
1,707,000
Net loss
5,900,000
3,200,000


Narrowing The Search For a Printer
LEAD: IF you think computers are confusing, take a peek at the choices in printers.
More than 100 new printers have been introduced in the past year, and they join more than 250 older models still on the market.


CHAPMAN ENERGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAPMAN ENERGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,540,000
3,026,000
Net loss
622,933
1,942,254


'Fatal Vision' Lawsuit Settled
LEAD: Jeffrey MacDonald, a former Army captain convicted of killing his pregnant wife and two daughters, agreed today to settle a $15 million civil fraud lawsuit against the author of ''Fatal Vision'' for $325,000.


XYTRONYX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XYTRONYX INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
304,971
23,135
Net loss
195,994
286,040
6mo rev
319,003
52,989
Net loss
662,426
680,882
The company is in the development stage.


ALPINE INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALPINE INTERNATIONAL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
867,000
834,000
Net inc
b366,000
c228,000
Share earns
.11
-
b-After a gain on disposal of a manufacturing segment of $649,000 and a loss from discontinued operations of $204,000.


PROFESSIONAL INVESTORS INURANCE GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROFESSIONAL INVESTORS INURANCE GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,826,000
6,421,000
Net inc
562,000
1,367,000
Share earns
.20
.48
9mo rev
29,509,000
16,378,000
Net inc
576,000
b1,723,000
Share earns
.20
.32


NEW RULES CONSIDERED FOR MARKET By NATHANIEL C. NASH
LEAD: David S. Ruder, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, said today that Wall Street firms need a system to provide large infusions of cash in times of excessive market activity.


TV Review; 'Super Dave' on Showtime
LEAD: ACTIVELY pursuing offbeat sitcom forms, pay cable's Showtime service has already come up with ''The Garry Shandling Show'' and is now unveiling another promising entry in ''Super Dave.''


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.85
6.74
5.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.92
5.72
5.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.55
6.25
5.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.60
8.58
6.92
30-YR.


HACH CO reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HACH CO
(
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
11,347,000
10,475,000
Net inc
758,000
547,000
Share earns
.24
.18
6mo sales
22,842,000
20,568,000
Net inc
1,426,000
1,034,000
Share earns
.46
.34


MEDTRONIC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDTRONIC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
152,176,000
120,106,000
Net inc
21,677,000
17,799,000
Share earns
1.55
1.27
6mo sales
296,814,000
236,320,000
Net inc
41,935,000
35,606,000
Share earns
2.99
2.53


NORTHGATE EXPLORATION LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHGATE EXPLORATION LTD
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,013,000
16,239,000
Net inc
b2,516,000
c1,639,000
Share earns
.15
.12
9mo rev
41,451,000
43,415,000
Net inc
b1,351,000
c2,370,000
Share earns
.08
.17


Verification Still Focus of Geneva Arms Talks
LEAD: American and Soviet officials worked into this evening in an effort to resolve verification issues holding up a missile treaty that is supposed to be signed at a summit meeting in Washington in two weeks.


New York Starts Effort To Slow Cesarean Rate
LEAD: New York State health officials yesterday announced a joint effort with the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists to try to reduce the number of Cesarean deliveries in New York.


PHOTON TECHNOLOGY INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHOTON TECHNOLOGY INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,118,887
660,648
Net loss
257,731
b6,995
b-Net income


NOVAMETRIX MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOVAMETRIX MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 1
1987
1986
Revenue
5,061,000
3,992,000
Net inc
b279,000
c20,000
Share earns
.08
.01
6mo rev
9,883,000
7,639,000
Net inc
b552,000
c224,000
Share earns
.15
.06


With Calmer Markets, Pacific's Head Resigns
LEAD: A week before the stock market collapsed on Oct. 19, James S. Gallagher, the president of the Pacific Stock Exchange, informed the chairman that he planned to quit.


HARPER GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARPER GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
56,605,000
45,553,000
Net inc
2,496,000
1,861,000
Share earns
.27
.20
9mo rev
151,029,000
140,756,000
Net inc
6,427,000
6,749,000
Share earns
.69
.72


MICHAELS STORES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICHAELS STORES (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 1
1987
1986
Sales
49,414,000
29,652,000
Net inc
695,000
583,000
Share earns
.07
.06
9mo sales
92,913,000
71,425,000
Net inc
1,559,000
1,115,000
Share earns
.16
.12


RESOURCE EXPLORATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RESOURCE EXPLORATION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,123,830
1,281,650
Net inc
105,798
b85,113
Share earns
.02
-
Yr rev
5,230,229
7,307,441
Net inc
588,988
821,264
Share earns
.13
.17


Our Towns; In Zofia's Story, A Real American Refuses to Hide
LEAD: Ronald Marmo, assistant Passaic County prosecutor, figures 10 people saw Jose Disla, a bakery worker, stabbed to death at the Golden Arrow Cafe. ''Right through the aorta,'' said the prosecutor. ''It made a big pool of blood.''


Cuban Hints Leniency To 2,500 U.S. Deports
LEAD: A Government official suggested today that 2,500 Cubans who are to be deported from the United States will be treated leniently on their return.


ELEXIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELEXIS CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,766,411
3,683,788
Net loss
105,944
b373,632
Share earns
-
.26
9mo sales
7,951,092
7,076,485
Net inc
87,492
c846,052
Share earns
.04
.59
Shares outst
2,207,098
1,438,152


Carlucci Is Sworn In
LEAD: Frank C. Carlucci 3d, praised by President Reagan as someone who could work with Congress and the bureaucracy, was sworn in today as Secretary of Defense.
Mr.
Carlucci, 57 years old, had been Mr.
Reagan's national security adviser, taking over the National Security Council in January after disclosure of its covert role in the Iran-Contra scandal.


Gorbachev's Visit: Handle With Care
LEAD: The approaching visit by General Secretary Mikhail S. Gorbachev to sign an agreement on intermediate-range nuclear weapons comes at a perplexing, even dangerous time for the Administration.


ALBERTSON'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALBERTSON'S INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 29
1987
1986
Sales
1,469,253,000
1,356,948,000
Net inc
27,097,000
21,372,000
Share earns
.40
.32
9mo sales
4,348,681,000
3,974,679,000
Net inc
85,057,000
69,402,000
Share earns
1.27
1.04


AMERICAN DYNAMICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN DYNAMICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
716,571
974,453
Net loss
78,211
230,945
9mo net loss
b896,068
204,299
b-Includes a loss of $333,140 from discontinued operations.


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


TRANS WORLD MUSIC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANS WORLD MUSIC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
40,764,000
28,771,000
Net inc
1,879,000
1,229,000
Share earns
.21
.14
9mo sales
110,763,000
77,577,000
Net inc
4,399,000
2,574,000
Share earns
.49
.31
Shares outst
9,002,000
8,244,000


The Stage: '3 Lives of Lucie Cabrol'
LEAD: IN the Talking Band's theatrical collage ''The Three Lives of Lucie Cabrol,'' the usually demure Tina Shepard plays the title role of a dwarflike French peasant woman whose family cruelly nicknames her ''the cocadrille,'' after a mythical animal born in a dungheap.
Ms.
Shepard strikingly transforms herself into a hunched, thick-skinned beast of burden who speaks in harsh, guttural cadences and survives through a combination of native shrewdness and a mystical attunement to the natural world.


Contra Fund-Raisers: Dispute Over Payment
LEAD: Just how much is a meeting with President Reagan worth?


Collisions on Foggy Road
LEAD: Dozens of vehicles collided today in separate accidents on a fog-bound stretch of Interstate 215, and at least seven people were injured, a California Highway Patrol commander said.
Estimates ranged from 30 to 40 vehicles involved in the crashes, said Capt.
Ralph Limon.
He said several accidents had occurred, some involving six to eight vehicles and another with as many as 15 to 20.


JACOBSON STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACOBSON STORES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
78,073,000
71,745,000
Net inc
2,707,000
2,910,000
Share earns
.47
.51
9mo sales
220,422,000
203,491,000
Net inc
4,848,000
4,174,000
Share earns
.84
.73


DENNING MOBILE ROBOTICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DENNING MOBILE ROBOTICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
747,736
489,913
9mo net loss
1,801,744
1,572,843
The company, which is in the development stage, has not yet had revenue to report.


DOW ADVANCES 9.45 IN SLOW TRADING
LEAD: The stock market moved higher in desultory trading yesterday that was enlivened only by renewed takeover speculation, particularly among brokerage stocks.


STEP-SAVER DATA SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STEP-SAVER DATA SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,196,672
2,005,181
Net loss
520,281
b77,038
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


ARNOX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARNOX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,383,000
820,000
Net loss
560,000
482,000
9mo sales
17,342,000
1,620,000
Net loss
974,000
1,225,000


Superfund Cleanups Termed Lax
LEAD: The Reagan Administration was charged today with violating the tough toxic cleanup and human health requirements of the 1986 law that was intended to revive the ''Superfund'' program.


FASHION: PATTERNS
LEAD:  Azzedine and Jacqueline


Clues Seen That Link Magnetism To Bacteria
LEAD: GEOLOGISTS have discovered fresh evidence that bacteria may play important roles in making certain kinds of sedimentary rock magnetic.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Pianist's Lament
LEAD: Since his arrival in the United States from Moscow after years of waiting to emigrate, Vladimir Feltsman, the concert pianist, seems to have had a charmed life.


AMERICAN GUARANTY FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN GUARANTY FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
57,000
141,000
Net loss
126,000
1,000
9mo rev
789,000
454,000
Net inc
281,000
b88,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


Brother of Top Afghan Is Said to Defect to Rebels
LEAD: The younger brother of Afghanistan's Soviet-backed leader has defected to the Afghan rebels, according to American intelligence reports and foreign diplomats.


IIS INTELLIGENT INFORMAION SYSTEMS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IIS INTELLIGENT INFORMAION SYSTEMS LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,149,000
2,530,000
Net inc
759,000
628,000
Share earns
.19
.16
9mo rev
9,260,000
7,761,000
Net inc
2,185,000
1,872,000
Share earns
.56
.48


Washington Talk: Briefing; Tax Expert's Exit
LEAD: David H. Brockway, perhaps the single most influential Congressional staff member, is leaving his job at the end of the year.
Mr.
Brockway is chief of staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation, which is not really a committee at all but rather a collection of lawyers, economists and accountants who provide expertise on tax policy for both the Senate Finance Committee and the House Ways and Means


Shalala Successor Is Named
LEAD: The trustees of the City University named Tilden J. LeMelle as acting president of Hunter College yesterday.
Dr.
LeMelle, provost and vice president of Hunter, will succeed Donna E. Shalala, when she resigns Jan. 1 to become chancellor of the University of Wisconsin.
Dr.
LeMelle is not a candidate for the Hunter presidency.


INTERFACE FLOORING SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERFACE FLOORING SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,353,257
4,000,504
Net inc
678,191
578,368
Share earns
.16
.13
Yr rev
18,016,545
16,955,042
Net inc
2,333,622
2,726,526
Share earns
.54
.63


RANGAIRE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RANGAIRE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
20,001,000
21,959,000
Net inc
1,209,000
888,000
Share earns
.31
.15
Shares outst
3,854,563
5,879,827


PARIS BUSINESS FORMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARIS BUSINESS FORMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,107,000
6,887,000
Net inc
679,000
386,000
Share earns
.19
.11
Shares outst
3,591,574
3,602,135
Yr sales
35,428,303
26,934,524
Net inc
2,178,000
b2,410,000
Share earns
.61
.71
Shares outst
3,597,949
3,273,250


Tar Heel Women A Soccer Dynasty
LEAD: Mention collegiate dynasties, and we tend to think of John Wooden's U.C.L.A. basketball teams, which captured seven consecutive championships from 1967 through 1973.
Or perhaps we recall the greatest success streaks in college: Iowa's nine consecutive wrestling titles from 1978 through 1986, or Southern


Golden Oldies for Gifts
LEAD: NOW that the official Christmas shopping season is upon us, the computer industry, like just about every other industry, is straining for a holiday angle.
Among the more successful and economical efforts are the Holiday Stocking Software Classics packages from Thunder Mountain.


RULE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RULE INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,935,000
10,519,000
Net inc
395,000
383,000
Share earns
.16
.16
Yr rev
36,340,000
31,070,000
Net inc
1,806,000
1,327,000
Share earns
.74
.55


Hugs for Teacher With AIDS
LEAD: A teacher who has AIDS was welcomed back to school today with hugs and flowers from his hearing-impaired students after winning a court battle to return to the classroom.


GENERAL SCIENCES reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL SCIENCES
Year to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,034,070
7,135,909
Net inc
534,845
372,526
Share earns
.27
.26
Shares outst
1,953,641
1,441,233


Advantage for Karpov
LEAD: The 16th game of the world chess championship was adjourned today with the challenger, Anatoly Karpov, a pawn ahead in an endgame.


Outside the Prison, Sobbing Wives
LEAD: While Cuban detainees held hostages inside the Federal penitentiary here today, the families of several inmates gathered outside the prison walls to follow the course of the siege and plead with Representative John Lewis, Democrat of Georgia, to be allowed to assist in the negotiations with the authorities.


Koch Seeks Bigger School Board To Allow for a Hispanic Member
LEAD: Mayor Koch said yesterday that he would seek permission from the State Legislature to appoint two more members to the seven-member Board of Education.
He said that would allow him to keep a member of the Board of Education whom he described as ''maybe the best'' and at the same time appoint a Hispanic member.


WESTERN TELE-COMMUNICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN TELE-COMMUNICAIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
29,007,000
12,365,000
Net inc
557,000
c3,341,000
Share earns
.07
.39
9mo rev
70,927,000
34,771,000
Net inc
b4,351,000
c11,328,000
Share earns
.51
1.33


AMERICAN PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN PACIFIC CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,555,000
4,074,000
Net inc
692,000
322,000
Share earns
.20
.08
Yr rev
15,795,000
17,674,000
Net inc
1,125,000
873,000
Share earns
.30
.22
The company is listed on the Pacific Stock Exchange.


NATIONAL FUEL GAS CO reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL FUEL GAS CO (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
737,000,152,000
905,811,000
Net inc
b42,492,000
43,407,000
Share earns
1.76
1.75
b-Includes net proceeds from an insurance claim of $6,570,000.
Share earnings reflect a 2-for-1 stock split paid in June.


CELLULAR PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CELLULAR PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
465,902
233,507
Net loss
213,594
444,513
6mo rev
894,413
470,666
Net loss
544,287
758,858


Flames Overwhelm Devils
LEAD: Mike Bullard scored two goals to guide the Calgary Flames to a 9-2 romp over the Devils tonight.


ZIMMER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZIMMER CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
19,076,000
36,740,000
Net loss
b1,230,000
c37,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
86,073,000
107,485,000
Net inc
b698,000
d978,000
Share earns
.15
-
b-Includes for the quarter a gain on disposal of businesses of $2,224,000, a gain of $756,000 on inventory writedowns and additions to reserves for closed plants and after an extraordinary charge of $625,000; the 9 months includes a tax credit of $270,000.


Haydon Burns Is Dead; Ex-Governor of Florida
LEAD: Former Gov.
Haydon Burns, who served a special two-year term in the 1960's, died Sunday at Regents Park Nursing Home here.
He was 75 years old and lived in Jacksonville.


WEBB, DEL E INVESTMENT PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEBB, DEL E INVESTMENT PROPERTIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
812,000
752,000
Net inc
133,000
177,000
Share earns
.06
.08
9mo rev
2,437,000
2,102,000
Net inc
424,000
504,000
Share earns
.19
.23


Client Sues Kidder, Charging Insider Trading
LEAD: The Maxus Energy Corporation, formerly part of the Diamond Shamrock Corporation, said today that it was suing Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company for what it called the firm's link to insider trading activities during Diamond Shamrock's acquisition of the Natomas Company in 1983.


Herman Miller Goes Outside the Family
LEAD: Herman Miller Inc., a leading designer and manufacturer of office furniture, has named a new chief executive, Richard H. Ruch, marking the first time in its 65-year history that the company will be led by someone outside the founding family.


Bright Comet Heading for Earth Rendezvous
LEAD: THE brightest comet to light up the skies of the Northern Hemisphere since the encounter with Halley's Comet last spring is approaching its closest passage of the Earth.


Tracking the Common Cold: Two Theories
LEAD: While sharing a room with Benjamin Franklin at an inn here one night in the fall of 1776, John Adams said he was fearful that the damp air would give him a cold and asked his roommate to shut the window.


Teacher Quits in Race Dispute
LEAD: A teacher who told two black students they would not get the leading roles in a high school play because of their race has resigned, officials said.


ASA INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASA INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,895,125
3,313,153
Net inc
18,689
c88,988
9mo rev
12,886,942
10,931,563
Net inc
b665,249
c239,336
b-Includes a tax credit of $196,900.
c-Net loss


FIRST FAMILY GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FAMILY GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,300,000
13,000,000
Net inc
b602,593
c2,541,975
Share earns
.17
-
b-Includes a benefit of $130,000, or 3 cents a share, from an accounting change put into effect July 1.


MARIETTA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARIETTA CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,642,281
3,218,700
Net inc
455,693
310,660
Share earns
.19
.13
Yr sales
16,060,000
12,041,530
Net inc
1,402,849
985,038
Share earns
.59
.59
Shares outst
2,376,959
1,681,500


NORTH AMERICAN GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH AMERICAN GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,840,387
64,921
Net loss
b31,138
c153,618
9mo rev
13,969,243
234,027
Net loss
b1,676,138
c39,083
b-Includes an extraordinary loss of $32,806 and $80,438 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Joseph W. Stehn, General Manager, 66
LEAD: Joseph W. Stehn, retired general manager of the Breezy Point (L.I.) Cooperative, an association of homeowners on the Rockaway Peninsula, died of a stroke Saturday at Peninsula Hospital Center in Queens.
He was 66 years old and lived in the co-op.


AMERICAN FIRST CORP (OKLAHOMA)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FIRST CORP (OKLAHOMA)(O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b667,051
c504,865
Share earns
-
.09
9mo net loss
b8,781,291
c926,885
Share earns
-
.17
b-Includes realized investment losses of $3,610 for the quarter and $1,290,097 for the 9 months.


SIZZLER RESTAURANTS INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 18
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIZZLER RESTAURANTS INTERNATIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 18
1987
1986
Revenue
68,301,000
53,927,000
Net inc
4,478,000
3,034,000
Share earns
.26
.17
6mo rev
134,830,000
106,947,000
Net inc
8,959,000
6,459,000
Share earns
.51
.38


Taiwan Plan On Exports
LEAD: Taiwan, which has been under pressure from Washington, has set a five-year target to reduce its trade surplus with the United States to less than $10 billion, a leading Taipei newspaper said today.


CONSOLIDATED PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
23,065,781
20,491,908
Net inc
726,163
c697,386
Share earns
.22
.21
Yr sales
89,430,905
84,822,261
Net inc
b2,362,553
c877,867
Share earns
.72
.27


Soviet Jews Ponder Exit-Visa Denials
LEAD: About 100 Soviet Jews, united by their inability to emigrate, crowded into a two-room apartment today to discuss state secrets: the secrets that keep them from leaving the Soviet Union, the secret process by which the holders of secrets are identified, and the reason the secrets themselves are secret.


How Two Become a Social Institution
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Stand on Tibet Helps Pervert Rights Battle
LEAD: To the Editor:


Authors on Beginnings
LEAD: The way Harold Brodkey sees it, ''The question of the beginning really has a great deal to do with the question of the middle.'' Robert Towers says the idea is ''not to begin with an epigram but with an image.'' And Joyce Carol Oates says finding the inspiration to begin is ''like walking out in the middle of a field and waiting to be hit by lightning - it doesn't happen very often.


Designers Reveal the Woman Behind the Fashions
LEAD: ''I could talk for hours about women,'' Emanuel Ungaro said. ''Why are they so incomprehensible?''


PLESSEY CO PLC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLESSEY CO PLC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 2
1987
1986
Sales
492,400,000
567,700,000
Net inc
b35,700,000
c39,400,000
Share earns
.48
.53
6mo sales
977,600,000
1,112,900,000
Net inc
b72,300,000
c84,000,000
Share earns
.98
1.14


Treasury Rates Up Modestly
LEAD: Interest rates on Treasury securities rose modestly in extremely quiet trading yesterday as traders and investors waited for fresh economic data and actions by central banks around the world to give a clearer direction to interest rates.


JLG INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JLG INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,351,557
9,649,066
Net inc
927,015
b485,186
Share earns
.27
-
b-Net loss


REDKEN LABORATORIES INC(0) reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REDKEN LABORATORIES INC(0)
(
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
30,617,000
29,355,000
Net inc
1,393,000
1,259,000
Share earns
.47
.42


LITTLE PRINCE PRODUCTIONS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LITTLE PRINCE PRODUCTIONS LTD
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
500
-
Net loss
6,181
6,833
6mo rev
17,993
1,991
Net loss
150
10,550


Topics of The Times; Village Life in the Big Apple
LEAD: The mother of a family that recently moved to New York City from a smaller city in the heartland finds herself defending the Big Apple to folks back home.
To them, New York means bustle, crime, noise and anonymity. ''Not true,'' the new immigrant protests. ''We've found that family life in New York comes closer to old-fashioned small-town America than little-city life does - at least in some ways.


Precious Metals Rise; Signs of Inflation Cited
LEAD: Gold led a modest increase in the prices of precious metals futures yesterday as investors interpreted a weaker dollar and higher crude oil prices as signs of future inflation.


New York Housing Chief Quits; Finance Head Named Successor
LEAD: Paul A. Crotty, New York City's Housing Commissioner, resigned yesterday, and Mayor Koch appointed the Finance Commissioner, Abraham Biderman, to succeed him.


'88 Japan Car Limits Debated
LEAD: Skirmishing over next year's limits on Japanese car exports to the United States is already under way.
Some top executives of Detroit's auto companies are arguing that the Japanese Government should take into consideration the increasing output from Japanese-owned plants in the United States in setting the limits.


U.S. BEGINS SEARCH OF WAR CRIME FILES
LEAD: The war crimes archives of the United Nations were fully opened to a member nation for the first time yesterday as Justice Department historians began methodically poring over files containing 40,000 names of accused or suspected war criminals.


INTERNATIONAL SEAWAY TRADNG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL SEAWAY TRADNG CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,996,000
8,008,000
Net loss
71,000
b686,000
Share earns
-
1.02
9mo rev
12,710,000
15,765,000
Net loss
145,000
b854,000
Share earns
-
1.27


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''We aren't just a little hick town and I didn't come in off a turnip truck.
We are real peo-ple in a real world.''  - Mayor C. Scott Parker  of Liberty, Tex., on bank plan  to liquidate a local company.  [ A21:1. ]


Helen G. Scott, 72, Writer for Truffaut And Other Directors
LEAD: Helen G. Scott, an American writer and translator who was a close associate of Francois Truffaut and other French New Wave film directors, died of a heart attack Friday in Paris, where she had lived for many years.
She was 72 years old.


NORTH AMERICAN HOLDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH AMERICAN HOLDING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,982,010
13,548,864
Net loss
517,066
b41,558
6mo rev
17,982,010
13,548,864
Net loss
195,663
b765,812
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income


AIR FILLED WITH FOOTBALL
LEAD: If ever there was a day for channel-hopping, Saturday was it.


Walton Is Silent to Jets
LEAD: If a clenched fist could speak, it would sound like Coach Joe Walton did today in a tirade against his players.


IDC SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IDC SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,210,000
11,203,000
Net loss
167,000
b164,000
Share earns
-
.06
9mo rev
33,818,000
34,288,000
Net loss
331,000
b711,000
Share earns
-
.27
b


REALTY REFUND TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REALTY REFUND TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,637,000
1,810,769
Net inc
410,986
b26,697
Share earns
.40
.02
9mo rev
4,903,962
6,356,759
Net inc
1,221,413
b738,705
Share earns
1.20
.72


DATAPOINT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATAPOINT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
70,150,000
71,398,000
Net inc
b886,000
c4,473,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $487,000.
c-Net loss and after a tax credit of $333,000.
The company said the latest quarter net includes a charge of $828,000 pretaining to net realized gains and unrealized losses from the companies investment portfolio and a gain of 42,966,000 from the termination of a pension plan and settlement of related liabilities.


RJR's Choice For Tobacco
LEAD: Dolph W. von Arx, an executive at Thomas J. Lipton Inc., has been named president and chief executive of R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco U.S.A., which is RJR Nabisco Inc.'s domestic tobacco unit.
The appointment of Mr. von


Music: Jersey Symphony in Bernstein
LEAD: LEONARD BERNSTEIN is becoming 70 years old for an awfully long time this season.
The actual birthday isn't until late next summer, but the list of celebrations is long.
Nearly at the head of the queue stands the New Jersey Symphony, which played an all-Bernstein program at Carnegie Hall Sunday night.


Stock Plunge Expected To Cut Banks' Income
LEAD: A month after the stock market collapse, a growing number of banking analysts believe that commercial banks will suffer from its impact.


Role Seen For Boron In Curbing Bone Loss
LEAD: BORON, a mineral long considered inessential to nutrition, apparently affects blood levels of certain hormones and may play a major role in preventing bone loss, Government scientists have reported.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Mining Under the Sun
LEAD: There may be strippers in Nevada, but the last time anyone looked there were few, if any strip mines.
That did not stop the Interior Department's Office of Surface Mining, which regulates strip mining, from holding its semi-annual conference for state and Federal regulators at a hotel outside Reno last week.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
BancTexas Group Inc., Dallas, elected as directors Anthony J. Gumbiner, chairman of the Hallwood Group, a merchant banking firm, and James G. Cairns, managing director of Hallwood.


A Shultz Puzzle on Arms
LEAD: What a strangely confusing message Secretary of State Shultz sends from Geneva about a strategic nuclear arms treaty.
He says he wants one next year to cut long-range missiles and bombers.
But then he also opposes the best way of moving in that direction, an interim agreement in principle.


ADVANCED MAGNETICS reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANCED MAGNETICS
(
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,108,802
2,773,785
Net inc
1,065,830
803,870
Share earns
.35
.34
Shares outst
3,089,949
2,386,669


ORIENT-EXPRESS HOTELS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORIENT-EXPRESS HOTELS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
19,500,000
18,807,000
Net inc
1,718,000
c912,000
Share earns
.18
-
9mo rev
48,647,000
42,503,000
Net inc
b14,617,000
c26,309,000
Share earns
1.50
-


SUNSTATES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNSTATES CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,468,000
1,999,000
Net inc
b506,000
c874,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
11,246,000
8,989,000
Net inc
b6,619,000
d2,503,000
Share earns
5.10
1.11
b-Includes tax credits of $575,000 for the quarter and $1,348,000 for the 9 months; the 9 months also included a $430,000 credit from payment of debt of 50 percent-owned affiliate.


Town Duels Bank to Save Sole Plant
LEAD: Anxious and confused by a New York bank's apparent decision to liquidate a local company, leaders of this rural town of 10,000 people have used some big-city tactics to protect their sole manufacturing plant.


William H. Callahan, Geologist, 84
LEAD: William H. Callahan, a geologist and former manager of exploration for the New Jersey Zinc Company, died Thursday at Newton (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Franklin, N.J.


Tax Watch; Party and Gift Deductibility
LEAD: WITH the holiday season approaching, tax practitioners have been trying to sort out how the Tax Reform Act of 1986 affects business gifts, office Christmas parties and other festivities.
It is no simple matter.


E.F. Hutton, Losing Two-Year Struggle, Is Looking for Buyer
LEAD: Losing a two-year struggle to remain independent, E. F. Hutton, for years a pre-eminent name on Wall Street, has put itself up for sale.


DRESS BARN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DRESS BARN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 24
1987
1986
Sales
50,345,000
43,345,000
Net inc
4,195,000
3,296,000
Share earns
.19
.15


Students Take a Fanciful Mystery Tour in the South Bonx
LEAD: They pointed out the home of the goat that ate the South Bronx, and the plastic cover factory that accidentally covered the world in plastic one day, and the driving school on East 138th Street where the teachers teach you to stop at green lights and signal left when you really want to go right.


TRUMP TURNS DOWN DEMOCRATS' DINNER
LEAD: Donald J. Trump, the New York real estate magnate who is an enrolled Republican, said yesterday that he would decline an invitation by the House Speaker, Jim Wright, to be the host at the 25th annual Democratic Congressional dinner in Washington next March.


UNO RESTAURANT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNO RESTAURANT (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Revenue
6,245,000
4,949,000
Net inc
410,000
294,000
Share earns
.10
.08
Yr rev
22,177,000
16,687,000
Net inc
1,521,000
685,000
Share earns
.41
.20


Teen-Age Risk-Taking: Rise in Deaths Prompts New Research Effort
LEAD: Alarmed by the rising toll of accidents and violence among teenagers, the Federal Government and private foundations have embarked on a major new program of research on why teen-agers take so many foolish risks - and how such dangerous behavior can be curbed.


Dickenson Mines
LEAD: An investment group led by Pamour Inc., a gold mining concern based in Timmins, Ontario, has purchased a 8.2 percent stake in Dickenson Mines Ltd.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Pamour said it ''may decide that it is desirable to seek control'' of Dickenson, a gold mining concern in Toronto.


Specialty Health Care Booms
LEAD: Just as doctors did before them, hospital chains are discovering the attractions of hanging out a shingle that says specialist.


EMONS HOLDINGS reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMONS HOLDINGS
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,812,012
4,066,618
Net inc
b473,742
b358,042
Share earns
.09
-
b-Includes tax credits of $151,597 for the latest quarter and $161,119 for the year-earlier period.


BEN &amp; JERRY'S HOMEMADE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEN &amp; JERRY'S HOMEMADE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,234,449
5,991,197
Net inc
629,606
340,203
Share earns
.24
.13
9mo sales
23,885,809
14,407,473
Net inc
1,254,489
852,542
Share earns
.49
.33


HELMERICH &amp; PAYNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HELMERICH &amp; PAYNE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
35,095,000
30,241,000
Net inc
b2,667,000
cd2,666,000
Share earns
.11
-
Yr rev
153,915,000
160,368,000
Net inc
b22,016,000
d7,025,000
Share earns
.91
.28


METHODE ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*METHODE ELECTRONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
28,035,000
23,976,000
Net inc
1,346,000
521,000
Share earns
.12
.05
6mo sales
52,578,000
46,759,000
Net inc
2,179,000
1,178,000
Share earns
.20
.11


BRT REALTY TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRT REALTY TRUST (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,244,000
2,585,000
Net inc
3,181,000
1,023,000
Share earns
.61
.44
Shares outst
5,227,601
2,453,429
Yr rev
19,783,000
10,976,000
Net inc
b10,441,000
3,935,000
Share earns
2.40
1.75
Shares outst
4,344,076
2,251,936


Careers; Job Plight Of Middle Managers
LEAD: THE plight of middle managers who are at least 50 years old and face dismissal because companies are reducing staffs continues to be sad.


RAINBOW TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAINBOW TECHNOLOGIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
757,510
289,116
Net inc
149,215
30,829
Share earns
.12
.03
9mo sales
1,857,980
740,241
Net inc
361,622
62,425
Share earns
.33
.07


GV MEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GV MEDICAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
274,705
150,042
Net loss
1,032,094
812,989
9mo sales
1,040,943
413,603
Net loss
2,593,794
2,404,066


MERET INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERET INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 25
1987
1986
Revenue
3,562,025
3,085,918
Net inc
54,059
141,737
Share earns
.01
.02


CAESARS NEW JERSEY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAESARS NEW JERSEY INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
90,681,000
81,542,000
Net inc
12,012,000
5,931,000
Share earns
.74
.36


Fairness of Seoul Election Campaign Questioned
LEAD: Many South Koreans say they are worried that their country's democratic progress could be endangered if next month's presidential election appears tainted by vote-buying and other dubious campaign tactics.


Columbus Journal; Code of Highway: Finders Keepers
LEAD: At 9:30 A.M. on Oct. 28, a miracle happened here.
It was the kind of thing people pray for or dream of but figure will never in a million years happen to them.


Reagan Refuses to Discuss Issue of Pardon for Ex-Aides
LEAD: President Reagan refused today to rule out pardons for key participants in the Iran-contra affair, saying ''that's a question no one can answer.''


AMPAL-AMERICAN ISRAEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMPAL-AMERICAN ISRAEL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
33,471,000
28,139,000
Net inc
2,322,000
2,047,000
Share earns
.10
.09
9mo rev
91,509,000
81,061,000
Net inc
5,176,000
4,607,000
Share earns
.22
.20


Equitable to Sell Part of Unit
LEAD: The Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States plans to sell almost one-quarter of its money management affiliate, the Alliance Capital Management Company, in a public offering next year.
It will also sell an 18 percent stake to 70 Alliance employees by year-end.


Towers to Make Bid For Pan Am Stake
LEAD: The Towers Financial Corporation said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing yesterday that it planned to make a tender offer worth about $250 million to gain a 50.1 percent stake in Pan American World Airways.


AGOURON PHARMACEUTICALS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AGOURON PHARMACEUTICALS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
171,600
114,100
Net loss
532,300
75,700


BRANDON SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRANDON SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,404,000
4,531,000
Net inc
484,000
324,000
Share earns
.21
.19
Shares outst
2,302,501
1,746,930
Yr rev
22,128,000
17,800,000
Net inc
1,560,000
1,164,000
Share earns
.74
.67
Shares outst
2,099,982
1,746,930


INNOVEX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INNOVEX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,377,353
4,253,347
Net inc
266,743
253,770
Share earns
.06
.06
Shares outst
4,341,428
3,779,953
Yr rev
20,459,283
18,242,754
Net inc
1,304,706
1,666,811
Share earns
.31
.48
Shares outst
4,184,081
3,456,201


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a computer error, an article on Friday from Tooele, Utah, about the visit of a Soviet delegation to a chemical weapons installation misattributed a quotation in some editions.
It was Yuri K. Nazarkin, the chief Soviet negotiator on chemical weapons, and not Max L. Friedersdorf, the American representative at the Disarmament Conference in Geneva, who said: ''It's a confidence-building measure.


INTELOGIC TRACE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTELOGIC TRACE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 24
1987
1986
Revenue
31,555,000
34,809,000
Net loss
2,789,000
b2,486,000
Share earns
-
.14
b-Net income


Alternatives to Social Security Urged
LEAD: Representative Jack F. Kemp of upstate New York says any candidate for President who suggests fiddling with the Social Security system is also ''a candidate for a frontal lobotomy.'' Vice President Bush agrees.
Tampering with Social Security is not a new idea, Mr.
Bush said in the Houston debate among Republican candidates, but it is still ''a nutty idea.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Progress at Arms Talks


DEVCON INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEVCON INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,370,000
14,562,000
Net inc
b3,127,000
c2,268,000
Share earns
2.29
1.73
9mo rev
34,855,000
35,287,000
Net inc
b6,696,000
c5,511,000
Share earns
4.91
4.19


Steel Output Up 0.6%
LEAD: Steel production rose to 1.809 million tons in the week ended last Saturday, an increase of six-tenths of a percent from the previous week's 1.798 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute reported yesterday.
The industry's production amounted to 83.8 percent of capacity during the week, compared with 83.3 percent in the previous week.


Dance: A Finn Makes His Debut With City Ballet
LEAD: THE New York City Ballet surprised dancegoers on Saturday afternoon at the New York State Theater by offering an unscheduled debut in a major work.
Jukka Aromaa, a young Finnish dancer, took over the leading male role in the ''Tema con Variazioni'' movement of George Balanchine's ''Tchaikovsky Suite No.


2 Met Museum Officers Elected to New Posts
LEAD: Two executives at the Metropolitan Museum of Art have been elected to new positions, the trustees of the museum announced yesterday.


PEOPLES SAVINGS BANK (MICHIGAN) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES SAVINGS BANK (MICHIGAN)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
649,000
849,000
Share earns
.30
-
Year-ago share earnings are not available; the bank converted to stock form May 21.


PRIMA ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIMA ENERGY CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
407,000
323,000
Net inc
4,000
87,000
Share earns
-
.06


City's New Commissioner of Cultural Affairs Sworn In
LEAD: Mary Schmidt Campbell applauding her son, Sekou, after Mayor Koch introduced him during a City Hall ceremony in which Dr.
Campbell was sworn in as the city's Commissioner of Cultural Affairs, replacing Bess Myerson, who was indicted for conspiracy in a divorce case, among other charges. (NYT/Sara Krulwich)


DETOMASO INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DETOMASO INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
44,631,579
43,698,496
Net loss
3,818,796
4,491,729
9mo sales
154,240,602
167,979,699
Net loss
5,814,286
7,879,699
The company said results are translated in U.S.


Secrets of The Mongoose
LEAD: ARCHIE MOORE, born Archibald Lee Wright, a k a The Old Mongoose, was seated at breakfast yesterday at the Downtown Athletic Club and was reminded of a line that was attributed to him years ago.


SPHINX MINING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPHINX MINING (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
915,000
-
Net inc
227,000
b73,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo sales
1,286,000
-
Net inc
252,000
b132,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss  Comparable 1986 sales figures are not available because the company was in the development stage during that year.


Out-of-State Picks Lift Pacers
LEAD: ''The Indiana Pacers select Chuck Person.''


Bid for Telex May Be Cut
LEAD: Asher B. Edelman, the New York financier, said yesterday that a group he heads would probably reduce the price later this week of an $880 million hostile offer for the Telex Corporation.


German Panel Urges Stimulus
LEAD: The nation's Council of Economic Advisers said today that the recent worldwide fall in stock prices would dampen economic growth in West Germany, and it called for measures to increase domestic output.


EDGCOMB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EDGCOMB CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
138,031,000
135,795,000
Net inc
1,141,000
c647,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
415,020,000
436,185,000
Net inc
b3,960,000
1,129,000
Share earns
.25
.02


Cliffs Board Considers Sale
LEAD: The board of Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. has decided to try to sell or recapitalize the company that has been the object of a proxy fight by David F. Bolger, the New Jersey investor, officials said.


Chestnut Blight Called Threat to Live Oaks
LEAD: The fungus that almost wiped out the American chestnut is threatening the live oak tree in the South.


NAFCO FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NAFCO FINANCIAL GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
491,000
112,000
Per share
.14
.03
Year net inc
4,170,000
1,986,000
Per share
1.23
.59


Music: American Symphony in Strauss
LEAD: PERHAPS it is the upshot of enduring decades of serialist music, but audiences today look on Richard Strauss's orchestral works with a more sympathetic eye than did many listeners when they were written.
The American Symphony Orchestra's concert Sunday afternoon in Carnegie Hall, which concluded with Strauss's ''Also Sprach Zarathustra,'' put one in a bygone frame of mind.


Rams Turn Back Redskins by 30-26
LEAD: Ron Brown returned a kickoff 95 yards for a touchdown and caught a 26-yard scoring pass from Jim Everett as Los Angeles held off a late Washington threat tonight for a 30-26 victory.
It was the Rams' first regular-season triumph over the Redskins since 1969.


COMPUTER POWER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER POWER
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,918,577
2,074,260
Net inc
115,240
93,749
Share earns
.08
.07
Shares outst
1,488,800
1,693,900
9mo sales
8,444,711
6,736,904
Net inc
311,787
325,184
Share earns
.21
.30
Shares outst
1,493,700
1,097,970


Large Deficit For October
LEAD: The Federal Government started its 1988 fiscal year with a $30.7 billion deficit in October, the largest monthly imbalance since May, the Treasury Department said today.
The deficit was 21.6 percent higher than last year's imbalance.
The report indicated that the


SHELDAHL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHELDAHL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 28
1987
1986
Sales
19,901,000
13,903,000
Net loss
b1,180,000
cd319,000
Share earns
-
.08
Yr sales
79,878,191
54,212,221
Net inc
b676,738
d620,778
Share earns
.16
.15
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $1,415,000 and $1,788,612 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Feminism Goes Beyond Civil Libertarianism; Two Cases Not Alike
LEAD: To the Editor:


Going Out Guide
LEAD:  A Busy Day


NORTHWESTERN STEEL &amp; WIRE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHWESTERN STEEL &amp; WIRE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
107,135,000
98,285,000
Net inc
b5,078,000
b2,459,000
Share earns
.68
.33
b-Includes a tax credit of $1,930,000 and $1,229,000 for the latest and year- ago quarters, respectively.


Badges for Godfathers
LEAD: Over at the United Nations, the states that specialize in murder and kidnapping are working out a particularly bizarre and dangerous piece of political strategy.
The idea is to legitimize international terrorism.


QANTEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QANTEL CORP
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,299,000
23,349,000
Net inc
b2,400,000
c1,909,000
Share earns
.14
.12
6mo rev
41,814,000
47,315,000
Net inc
b4,402,000
c3,731,000
Share earns
.26
.23


BROWN-FORMAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROWN-FORMAN CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
309,017,000
310,288,000
Net inc
37,073,000
26,222,000
Share earns
1.15
.81
6mo sales
556,353,000
567,609,000
Net inc
55,873,000
44,381,000
Share earns
1.73
1.38


CAESARS WORLD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAESARS WORLD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
223,608,000
195,503,000
Net inc
29,617,000
14,984,000
Share earns
.90
.50


Betis Journal; The Wealth of a Nation: Its 400,000 Absent Men
LEAD: On holy days, the women of Betis stand their tape recorders side by side on the altar of the local church so that their husbands, contract workers in the Middle East, will be able to hear the music and the sermon.


Nautica Apparel Unit Chooses McCaffery
LEAD: McCaffery &amp; Ratner has become agency for the Nautica apparel division of State-O-Maine Inc., which makes outerwear, activewear and sportswear for ''the active and affluent.'' It plans to spend $2 million for advertising.


Stage: 'Zangezi,' Russian Futurism at Next Wave
LEAD: AS a visionary artist and thinker, Velimir Khlebnikov was obsessed by words, regarding them ''like minute building blocks'' that serve ''as the construction units of a story.'' In his play ''Zangezi: A Supersaga in 20 Planes,'' he extended that definition to include bird sounds, noises and an invented language called ''beyonsense'' (''zaum'' in


Corrections
LEAD: A television review on Nov. 14 of ''Likely Stories,'' a program carried by the Learning Channel, misstated the availability of that cable service in New York City.
It is available to some cable subscribers in Queens and Brooklyn.


INTERAND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERAND CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,507,757
1,853,803
Net loss
689,290
80,688
9mo rev
3,529,551
3,711,121
Net loss
2,517,175
1,458,623


New Violence Rocks Haiti as Vote Nears
LEAD: With the Haitian presidential election six days away, a new wave of violence apparently intended to disrupt the voting swept through the capital today.


TRANS-NATIONAL LEASING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANS-NATIONAL LEASING INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,460,017
1,770,686
Net loss
21,364
212,923


Macmillan Filing On Bell &amp; Howell
LEAD: Macmillan Inc., the publishing concern, said it was seeking Federal clearance to join the bidding for Bell &amp; Howell Company.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Macmillan, which holds 7.9 percent of Bell &amp; Howell's shares, said it had filed notice with the Federal Trade Commission and the Justice Department of its intention to buy enough additional shares that ''may result in Macmillan holding more that 50 percent'' of Bell &amp;


Giant May Sell Cement Business
LEAD: Giant Group Ltd., a cement and investment company headed by Burt Sugarman, the television and film producer, said it was holding talks with more than one unidentified party about selling its cement operations.
Giant Group, based in Los Angeles, was the fourth-largest percent gainer on the New York Stock


ON TO CALGARY
LEAD: Muhammad Ali holding the Olympic torch yesterday during ceremony in Halifax, Nova Scotia. (Canadian Press)


GEORESOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEORESOURCES INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
766,000
433,000
Net inc
162,000
b132,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
1,948,000
1,602,000
Net inc
62,000
b1,962,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


GALAXY CHEESE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GALAXY CHEESE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,876,261
3,635,793
Net loss
433,805
32,491
6mo sales
6,672,736
6,567,856
Net loss
587,840
131,048
The company went public Sept. 16.


Reagan's Strength
LEAD: Next month's Soviet-U.S. summit meeting is coming at a time of strain for both leaders.
President Reagan's sins of omission and commission have been piling up.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q.What makes leaves change color in the fall?
A.The bright colors of an autumn woods result from growth-regulating hormones in leaves, said Anne Dorrance, a plant pathologist at the Vermont State Department of Agriculture.
These hormones regulate respiration, food production and other functions related to the metabolism of the tree.


U.S. Laws Put Imprisoned Cubans In Legal Limbo With Few Rights
LEAD: Behind the riots by Cuban prisoners in Atlanta and Louisiana lie months or years of frustration at being in a state of legal limbo, with very few rights under American law.


First, a First-Rate Chancellor
LEAD: Mayor Koch of New York rightly feels impatient with the Board of Education: it is taking far too long to name a successor to Schools Chancellor Nathan Quinones, who retires on Jan. 1.
But the Mayor's proposal for an acting chancellor is unacceptable.
The board's first priority ought to be the selection of the best permanent chancellor a rigorous national search can provide.


AMERIHEALTH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERIHEALTH INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,371,000
8,653,000
Net loss
b137,000
c170,000
9mo rev
31,402,000
24,997,000
Net inc
b619,000
c328,000
Share earns
.05
.02
b-Includes a reversal of a tax loss carryforward of $55,000 for the quarter and a $247,000 tax credit for the 9 months.


HILLS DEPARTMENT STORES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HILLS DEPARTMENT STORES (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
410,802,000
359,220,000
Net inc
9,700,000
5,055,000
Share earns
.51
.34
9mo sales
1,006,641,000
887,581,000
Net loss
13,447,000
63,379,000


MILTOPE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MILTOPE GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
15,502,000
13,775,000
Net loss
761,000
b108,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
44,083,000
48,348,000
Net inc
121,000
3,429,000
Share earns
.02
.56
Shares outst
5,961,000
6,102,000


GROW VENTURES reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROW VENTURES
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,140,000
337,000
Net loss
5,446,000
3,660,000
The company said that major product start-up costs, the phasing out of its Pennsylvania facility, European manufacturing start-up costs and a writeoff of $1,715,000 of enviro-spray assets no longer useful to the company were the primary reasons for the wider loss.


Cuban Riots and Human Rights
LEAD: It's not hard to understand why Cubans held prisoner by U.S. immigration officials would run amok at sudden news they are to be deported.
Reasonably or not, many believed they would remain here, whatever their problems with the immigration and criminal justice systems.


AMERICAN INTEGRITY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN INTEGRITY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,601,000
18,870,000
Net inc
b1,044,000
2,248,000
Share earns
.16
.34
9mo rev
58,145,000
50,814,000
Net inc
b3,818,000
c7,879,000
Share earns
.58
1.19


REAGAN REAFFIRMS 'STAR WARS' STAND
LEAD: Two weeks before his summit conference with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, President Reagan vowed today to deploy the space-based antimissile system that the Soviet Union adamantly opposes.


INFORMATION INTERNATIONL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INFORMATION INTERNATIONL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,558,251
9,202,209
Net inc
338,516
547,895
Share earns
.13
.23
6mo rev
16,635,935
17,642,092
Net inc
b1,230,823
b1,710,921
Share earns
.50
.72


Oslo Oil Chief Offers to Quit
LEAD: The head of Norway's scandal-ridden state oil company, Statoil, has offered to resign, apparently steering the Government out of a political crisis.


4 Coaches Dismissed
LEAD: Because Idaho State finished 3-7-1 with a 53-37 loss Saturday to Weber State, Jim Koetter, the coach, was dismissed yesterday, barely a year after being inducted into the school's sports hall of fame.
With him went his five assistants.
Koetter, 49, compiled a 23-32-1 record in five seasons.
He was not aware of the decision when he attended the weekly luncheon with fans earlier in the day.


LIONEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIONEL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
59,825,000
46,412,000
Net loss
2,590,000
2,289,000
9mo rev
155,802,000
124,551,000
Net loss
7,035,000
5,446,000


Infants' Sense of Pain Is Recognized, Finally
LEAD: Newborns do feel pain.


E.P.A. Dropping Key Program on Toxic Exposure
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency, in a reflection of its ongoing budget problems, is dropping a key program for measuring the exposure of humans to toxyc substances, agency officials said today.


N.A.A.C.P. to Honor Leona Mitchell, Soprano
LEAD: The soprano Leona Mitchell will give her only New York recital of the season at a benefit performance next Tuesday at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
The concert is a benefit for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and Miss Mitchell will be presented the organization's first Great Black Artist Award.


Ballet: Balanchine by Purchase Troupe
LEAD: WATCHING the young performers of the Purchase Dance Corps in ''Serenade'' on Friday night at the Performing Arts Center of the State University College at Purchase, N.Y., it seemed appropriate that the earliest performances of this first American ballet by George Balanchine should have been presented at an estate in nearby White Plains by a troupe of performers about as young and new as the Purchase dancers.


Tennis Notebook; Graf and Sabatini Win Fans' Respect
LEAD: Although they are already two of the dominant players in the world, Steffi Graf of West Germany and Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina are relatively new to tennis fans in the United States.
As recently as a year ago, they faced each other in the opening round of the Virginia Slims championships at Madison Square Garden.


FIRST OF MICHIGAN CAPITAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST OF MICHIGAN CAPITAL
Qtr to Sept 25
1987
1986
Revenue
11,287,289
10,253,379
Net inc
352,963
224,493
Share earns
.15
.10
Yr rev
48,350,425
45,210,612
Net inc
2,215,495
2,610,465
Share earns
.92
1.08


SEITEL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEITEL INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,563,715
864,865
Net inc
167,148
c280,840
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
3,992,991
5,551,029
Net inc
b7,288
292,868
Share earns
-
.03
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $127,943 from early extinguishment of debt.


Labor Pact Could Foil United Bids
LEAD: United Airlines and its machinists' union have reached an unusual contract agreement under which the machinists and two other unions would have the right to match or top any takeover bid for the company, a United official said yesterday.


Dollar Edges Lower; Gold Has Strong Gain
LEAD: The dollar inched lower in light trading yesterday, as dealers, particularly in Europe, reacted negatively to the Federal deficit-reduction package announced in Washington Friday.


BRADY, W H CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRADY, W H CO (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
34,871,000
29,474,000
Net inc
2,506,000
2,561,000
Share earns
.34
.35


ROSS STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROSS STORES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
136,203,000
140,871,000
Net inc
b1,394,000
c1,203,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo sales
389,715,000
359,688,000
Net inc
b1,950,000
c8,015,000
Share earns
.07
-


An Oil-Fueled Fire Guts a Warehouse in Jersey
LEAD: Smoke billowing from an oil tank during a fire yesterday at a Bayonne warehouse used for repackaging oil and antifreeze.
The fire burned throughout the day, consuming a 38,000-gallon tank of fuel oil and releasing thousands of gallons of oil into the Kill van Kull, which separates Bayonne from Staten Island.


RENAISSANCE GRX reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RENAISSANCE GRX
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,271,000
-
Net loss
1,620,000
442,000
The company reported no sales in the year-ago period because it was in the development stage.


GROFF INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROFF INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,138,701
7,705,321
Net inc
429,057
148,917
Share earns
.46
.16
9mo sales
27,387,289
24,101,695
Net inc
922,003
1,008,161
Share earns
.98
1.07


Met Painting Traced to Nazis
LEAD: A famous 18th-century painting hanging in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, ''Boy Blowing Bubbles'' by Jean Baptiste Simeon Chardin, was confiscated by the Nazis from the home of a Dutch Jew in Rotterdam during World War II, according to a professor who has spent months studying World War II records of


Genetic Research Used on Tobacco
LEAD: Tobacco plants in the laboratory were able to resist the tobacco budworm with the help of an implanted gene that let them manufacture an insect poison, researchers report.


UNITRODE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITRODE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
30,503,000
37,995,000
Net loss
b5,520,000
c6,223,000
9mo sales
98,065,000
115,952,000
Net loss
b19,516,000
c5,226,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $2,980,000 for the quarter and a tax benefit of $10,500,000 for the 9 months, and the 9 months operating loss includes a pretax expense of $12 million for a reserve for anticipated severance costs, inventory writedowns and other expenses.


Adele Miller, Advertising Executive, 91
LEAD: Adele Miller, who with her late husband, Samuel, founded the Miller Advertising Agency in 1919, died last night of complications from Alzheimer's disease at Beth Israel Hospital.
She was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Chrysler to Raise Output and Layoffs
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation announced a cautious first-quarter production schedule today that slightly increases its output of cars and trucks but will raise the number of workers on indefinite layoff in this country by 1,600.


Planned 'City of God' Unsettles a Jersey Town
LEAD: A realtor here recently got a call from a West Virginia man who said he would like to come up and look at a good-sized plot of land, 300 acres or so, for building purposes.
That was hardly unusual.
But when the man arrived a few days later, his head shaved and his body draped in saffron robes, and announced that he wanted the land to build a walled ''City of


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Adams-Russell Co., Waltham, Mass., a maker of microwave products, said its shareholders had approved its acquisition of Cablevision Systems Corp., based in Woodbury, L.I.
Under the agreement, each Adams-Russell shareholder would receive $43.075 per share in cash.


Corections
LEAD: A music review on Saturday about the Dresden Staatskapelle's Thursday night concert at Carnegie Hall gave incorrect dates for the orchestra's two remaining concerts in Manhattan.
They will be Dec. 3 at Carnegie Hall and Dec. 4 at Avery Fisher Hall.


Risks of 'Learning Disabled' Label
LEAD: CHILDREN, like adults, have individual ways of learning, and educators who do not recognize them can undermine their chance for success or even wrongly label them as learning disabled, according to a new book by Thomas Armstrong, a psychologist. ''We're shutting the door to millions more who possess untold inner riches,'' he said.


CROWN RESOURCE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROWN RESOURCE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
185,915
19,179
Net inc
b46,434
cd270,726
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
394,014
64,369
Net loss
b462,930
d747,781
b-After net from discontinued operations of $145,517 and $170,837 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


James Secrest, Actor, 51
LEAD: James Secrest, a stage and television actor, died of cancer on Wednesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.


New Appreciation Of the Complexity In a Flock of Birds
LEAD: NOTHING in the motion of a single bird or a single fish, no matter how graceful, can prepare a scientist for the sight of 10,000 starlings wheeling in formation over a cornfield, or a million minnows, threatened by a predator, snapping into a tight, polarized array.


COMVERSE TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMVERSE TECHNOLOGY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
985,000
1,349,000
Net loss
439,000
375,000
9mo rev
2,169,000
3,043,000
Net loss
2,159,000
1,259,000


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-15


4 New York Transit Officers Accused of Unlawful Arrests
LEAD: Four New York City transit police officers made scores of false or improper arrests on the Lexington Avenue subway and other lines during 1983 and 1984 but were not disciplined, according to a former police official who investigated the cases.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Bulls 107, Celtics 102: Michael Jordan scored 31 points and Scott Pippen scored 7 of his 20 points in the final four minutes as Chicago rallied last night in Hartford. (AP)  Horse Racing  Yankee Affair Wins by a Length: Yankee Affair, the odds-on favorite, raced to a one-length victory yesterday in the $55,000 Endurance-By-Name Handicap for 3-year-olds and up at Aqueduct.


OPTELECOM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OPTELECOM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
836,288
730,080
Net loss
118,379
39,027
9mo rev
2,623,807
2,410,444
Net loss
94,872
148,637


GUARDIAN PACKAGING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GUARDIAN PACKAGING (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,113,000
11,194,700
Net inc
406,800
380,000
Share earns
.24
.23
9mo sales
35,769,800
32,274,500
Net inc
1,377,700
1,201,800
Share earns
.83
.74


OVERLAND EXPRESS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OVERLAND EXPRESS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
24,500,000
26,300,000
Net loss
2,200,000
6,400,000
9mo rev
71,300,000
75,800,000
Net inc
b3,200,000
c10,900,000
Share earns
1.65
-
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $8.7 million from a gain relating to the refinancing of debt and a $1.7 million loss from the sale of property.


MOOG INC reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOOG INC (AMEX)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
307,069,000
268,464,000
Net inc
b11,831,000
b10,193,000
Share earns
1.33
1.15
b-After gains of $2,620,000 for the latest year and $201,000 for 1986, both from discontinued operations.


In Remote Laos, Soviet Changes Trickle Down
LEAD: In the early morning, when temple gongs and roosters are the only sounds to be heard on this side of the Mekong, Laos seems to be living in a timeless world of its own.


Carbon Dioxide Census
LEAD: The rate of increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere matches the rate of global population growth with precision that is ''amazing,'' two paleontologists have found.
Dr.
Norman D. Newell and Dr.
Leslie Marcus, both of the American Museum of Natural History in New York City, cited data gathered from 1958 to 1983 for their study.


Washington Talk: Social Affairs; Tales of a Black-Tie Town
LEAD: Robert Keith Gray, a fixture on the Washington political and social scene since the Eisenhower Administration, wears out one each year.
Ambassador Allan E. Gotlieb of Canada is on his second since coming here.
Many senators keep one at home and one in the office.


CITIPOSTAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIPOSTAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,609,008
2,429,880
Net inc
342,003
302,450
Share earns
.07
.07
Shares outst
4,781,933
4,138,172
The company said the first quarter reflects the mergers of both Sky Courier Network Inc.


AMERICAN CONSULTING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CONSULTING
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,813,805
3,977,361
Net inc
675,287
72,612
Share earns
.16
.02
Shares outst
4,199,925
3,600,000
9mo sales
19,083,217
8,704,275
Net inc
1,380,498
187,379
Share earns
.36
.05


Bruce Bid Rejected
LEAD: A judge in Columbus, Ohio, turned down yesterday a request for a temporary restraining order to block the dismissal of Earle Bruce, the Ohio State football coach.


LIPOSOME TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIPOSOME TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
664,000
894,000
Net loss
1,117,000
716,000
Yr rev
4,198,000
3,890,000
Net loss
2,527,000
1,291,000


Advertising; Some New Celebrities For BVD
LEAD: AMONG kids of a certain age group - very young - the easiest way to get a laugh is just mention the word ''underwear.'' It's joke and punchline both in a single word.


INSECTICIDE ASSIGNED
LEAD: S. C. Johnson, after a five-agency competition, is assigning Raid insecticide to Mingo-Jones Advertising, specialists in advertising to the black community.
It is the first time the brand will be getting such advertising, and the budget, according to the agency, is about $1 million.


Overnight Line for 'Phantom' Tickets
LEAD: ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' the new Andrew Lloyd Webber musical, doesn't open until late January and is nearly sold out to groups and mail-order ticket buyers through September.
Nevertheless, at 10 P.M.
Sunday, people began lining up outside the Majestic Theater on West 44th Street, blanket-wrapped against subfreezing temperatures and eager to invest $50 each (no one seemed interested in anything less than the top tickets) in a show they wouldn't see for nearly a year.


ECI TELECOM LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ECI TELECOM LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,335,000
4,416,000
Net inc
290,000
b1,590,000
Share earns
.06
-
9mo rev
17,623,000
13,425,000
Net inc
510,000
b6,185,000
Share earns
.10
-
b


Banco de Bilbao
LEAD: Spain's banking community speculated that Banco de Bilbao might revise its takeover offer for the nation's second-largest bank, Banesto, which Friday rejected its first offer.
In announcing that the bid by the smaller bank had been turned down, a spokesman for Banesto, whose formal name is Banco Espanol de Credito, said that the bank was prepared to consider another offer if one were made.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Success of Fruits
LEAD: Every Thursday morning at 9 o'clock, the House Democratic whip holds a meeting of his deputy and regional whips to plan for the next week's floor votes.
That's early by Congressional standards, so a succession of whips have developed various enticements to promote regular attendance at these sessions.


CUSHMAN ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CUSHMAN ELECTRONICS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,152,000
1,914,000
Net loss
1,514,000
295,000
Yr sales
6,870,000
7,745,000
Net loss
b1,987,000
642,000
b-After a gain of $142,000 from the termination of a pension plan.


Market Place; Higher Returns Found Abroad
LEAD: THE five-year bull market that scaled record heights by the end of August proved a bonanza to United States investors.
But in hindsight, these investors would have fared considerably better had they ventured abroad with their dollars, especially to the Tokyo stock market.


Books of The Times
LEAD:  HUNAN HAND AND OTHER AILMENTS.
Letters to The New England Journal of Medicine.
Compiled and edited by Shirley Blotnick Moskow.


ACME-CLEVELAND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACME-CLEVELAND CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
45,439,888
47,907,673
Net loss
b3,628,053
d1,815,802
Yr sales
176,527,586
186,050,158
Net inc
b11,317,293
cd12,530,392
Share earns
1.74
-
b-Includes a reversal of a tax loss carryforward of $832,000 for the quarter and the year includes a tax credit of $6,543,000.


THERAPEUTIC TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THERAPEUTIC TECHNOLOGIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
378,000
173,000
Net loss
b591,000
658,000
Yr sales
2,268,000
893,000
Net loss
b863,000
2,226,000
b-Includes a $335,000 one-time charge for prepaid royalties.


Olympia &amp; York Stake in Campeau
LEAD: Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the Canadian real estate and investment company, has purchased the equivalent of a 10.48 percent stake in the Campeau Corporation, for $82.29 million (Canadian).
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Olympia &amp; York said that it had bought the Campeau shares for investment purposes only, but added that it ''intends to continue to review and monitor'' its investment in the department store chain, which is based in


Separated Twins May Have a Vision Problem
LEAD: Siamese twins separated in a 22-hour operation two and a half months ago have a potentially serious vision problem, doctors said today.


WASHINGTON HOMES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON HOMES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
24,216,066
17,506,275
Net inc
2,685,000
1,800,000
Share earns
.55
.37
Shares outst
4,904,217
4,838,020


Year-Old Girl Dies; Police Questioning The Baby's Mother
LEAD: A 1-year-old Brooklyn girl died yesterday shortly after she was taken to the Brookdale Hospital Medical Center by the police, who said they were questioning the mother of the baby in connection with her death.


ALL AMERICAN TELEVISION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALL AMERICAN TELEVISION
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,525,000
1,204,000
Net inc
31,000
13,000
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
1,925,000
1,917,000


GEO INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEO INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
41,058,000
16,239,000
Net inc
b2,448,000
c38,584,000
Share earns
.15
-
Yr sales
107,688,000
101,572,000
Net inc
b4,466,000
c57,978,000
Share earns
.27
-


U.S. to Pay $90 Million Owed To U.N. to Ease Budget Crisis
LEAD: The Reagan Administration promised today to give at least $90 million to the United Nations next month so that it could avoid insolvency and continue to pay its 6,500 employees in New York.


NATIONAL SECURITIES reports earnings for Year to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL SECURITIES
Year to Sept 25
1987
1986
Revenue
12,263,988
8,551,644
Net inc
541,273
202,087
Share earns
.30
.16


Drug-Case Extradition Put Off by Colombia
LEAD: Colombia's Justice Minister said today that a man believed to be a major cocaine smuggler will not be extradited immediately to the United States, where he is wanted on drug charges.


U.S. Asked to Release Secret Nuclear Report
LEAD: Representative Ted Weiss of New York said today that a secret Congressional report on the deployment of nuclear weapons aboard ships at a naval center under construction on Staten Island should be made available to a Federal court that is hearing a lawsuit against the project.


AT LEAST 14 DEAD IN ALASKA CRASH
LEAD: A commuter aircraft crashed while landing at Homer, Alaska, tonight killing at least 14 people and injuring seven others, the authorities said.


SPECIALTY EQUIPMENT COS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPECIALTY EQUIPMENT COS (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
75,730,000
58,061,000
Net inc
4,246,000
1,890,000
Share earns
.41
.22
Shares outst
10,385,100
7,425,400
9mo sales
218,455,000
173,371,000
Net inc
10,897,000
4,095,000
Share earns
1.11
.51
Shares outst
8,968,100
7,425,400


Duarte Accuses a Rightist Leader In Killing of Archbishop in 1980
LEAD: President Jose Napoleon Duarte today accused the rightist political leader Roberto d'Aubuisson of responsibility for the 1980 assassination of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of San Salvador.


AMERICAN NETWORK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN NETWORK INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
33,648,247
22,674,082
Net loss
6,044,073
b67,617
9mo rev
106,063,553
55,513,558
Net loss
20,177,412
b9,230,439
Share earns
-
.60
b-Net income and the 9 months includes a net gain of $8,951,234 from settlement of litigation.


James Atherton Dies; A Tenor and Director
LEAD: James Atherton, a Metropolitan Opera tenor and, more recently, an operatic stage director, died of an AIDS-related illness last Friday, according to his manager, Dorothy Cone.
He was 44 years old and lived in St.
Louis, where he served as artistic director of the opera studio at the St.
Louis Conservatory.


JOHNSON WORLDWIDE ASSOCITES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSON WORLDWIDE ASSOCITES
Qtr to Oct 2
1987
1986
Sales
41,659,000
29,362,000
Net inc
432,000
b1,316,000
Yr sales
206,384,000
157,303,000
Net inc
6,813,000
3,690,000
Share earns
1.08
-
b-Net loss


Lasers 'Weld' Damaged Arteries
LEAD: RESEARCHERS in California have successfully tested a new method to repair damaged blood vessels, closing the ripped arteries with lasers, rather than the traditional stitches.
Dr.
John Crew of the Seton Medical Center in San Francisco and Dr.
Rodney White of Harbor U.C.L.A.
Hospital in Los Angeles reported at a recent meeting of the American Heart Association that they had successfully used ''laser welding'' in 15 patients.


Concert: U. V. Khan, Sitarist
LEAD: ONE of North India's most distinguished sitarists, Ustad Vilayat Khan, gave his first New York performance since the late 1970's on Saturday at the Triplex Theater.
Mr.
Khan, who is 59 years old, brought exultant technique and a playful spirit to the occasion.


Corrections
LEAD: An article from Geneva yesterday about arms negotiations involving Secretary of State George P. Shultz misstated his assessment of the prospects for an agreement on long-range nuclear weapons.
He has said such an accord could be concluded and approved next year, not this year.


ANDAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANDAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
23,740,000
17,895,000
Net loss
b2,405,000
c18,710,000
Share earns
-
2.60
Yr rev
74,564,000
63,225,000
Net loss
b7,558,000
c23,665,000
Share earns
-
3.42


POPE, EVANS &amp; ROBBINS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POPE, EVANS &amp; ROBBINS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
47,989,000
19,986,000
Net inc
b1,117,000
b132,000
Share earns
.17
.02
Shares outst
6,733,599
7,819,646
b-Includes a tax credit of $388,000 and $74,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


People
LEAD: *
Kenneth P. Donnellon has been named vice president, advertising and communication, for John Blair Communications.


Sports Station's First Ratings
LEAD: WFAN, the all-sports radio station that made its debut in New York City on July 1, earned a 2.3 share of the market in its first quarterly ratings, according to the Arbitron Ratings Company.


AMERICAN EDUCATIONAL COMUTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN EDUCATIONAL COMUTER INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
227,000
210,000
Net loss
152,000
b65,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
697,000
830,000
Net loss
296,000
b134,000
Share earns
-
.02
b


Linguists Dig Deeper Into Origins of Language
LEAD: PALEONTOLOGISTS ponder their fossils, archeologists turn over ancient stones, and now scholars of linguistics are joining the search for human origins with a systematic analysis of the roots of the world's known languages.
They are seeking ultimately to reconstruct the primordial language, the mother tongue of all humans.


UNITEL VIDEO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITEL VIDEO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,314,000
5,628,000
Net inc
b517,000
cd258,000
Share earns
.22
-
Yr sales
26,772,000
19,900,000
Net inc
b2,263,000
d172,000
Share earns
1.01
.08


2 Cycle Magazines Unite Sales Operations
LEAD: Diamandis Communications, formerly CBS Magazines, has decided to unify the sales and marketing departments of its Cycle and Cycle World magazines.
So it has named James A. Hansen, vice president and publisher of Cycle World, to head the joint effort, while Larry M. Little, who is ad director of Cycle


ROANOKE ELECTRIC STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROANOKE ELECTRIC STEEL CORP
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
30,284,009
31,232,041
Net inc
1,571,146
1,856,042
Share earns
.45
.52
Yr sales
108,097,991
122,166,777
Net inc
3,152,203
5,194,162
Share earns
.89
1.46


Lost Score By Liszt To Be Sold
LEAD: A major and previously unknown score by Franz Liszt is to be auctioned at Sotheby's in London on Friday.
The work for piano bears no title, date or signature but has been identified by Liszt experts as having been written by the composer between 1830 and 1832, when he was in his late teens and early 20's and was active throughout Europe as a concert pianist.


ATLANTIC RESTAURANT VENURES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTIC RESTAURANT VENURES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,690,605
2,924,828
Net inc
b116,634
106,979
Share earns
.03
.05
Shares outst
3,389,013
2,209,817
9mo sales
7,520,514
6,801,120
Net inc
b169,242
c98,995
Share earns
.05
-


ONCOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONCOR INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
346,766
142,686
Net loss
486,306
296,048
9mo sales
624,833
434,426
Net loss
1,437,022
516,685


WINJACK reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WINJACK (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Sales
11,147,000
13,750,000
Net loss
4,964,000
b501,000
Share earns
-
.14
9mo sales
31,288,000
35,938,000
Net loss
7,848,000
b1,662,000
Share earns
-
.46
b-Net income and includes a tax credit of $194,000 and $630,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Dance: The Mimi Garrard Company
LEAD: THE works the Mimi Garrard Dance Theater offered Sunday night at La Mama were certainly diverting.
But they did not strike this viewer as being rich in choreographic events to savor or ponder.


FISHER FOODS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FISHER FOODS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 10
1987
1986
Sales
136,953,000
170,525,000
Net loss
b4,743,000
2,469,000
9mo sales
382,383,000
450,487,000
Net loss
b22,172,000
2,305,000
b-Includes a special charge of $1,235,000 related to closing costs of a company-owned bakery in Columbus, Ohio for the quarter and a special charge of $12,955,000 related to the closing of 19 supermarkets and other non-recurring charges for the 9 months.


Iran Shells 2 Ships in Gulf; Three in Crew Are Wounded
LEAD: The Iranian Navy opened fire on two ships in the gateway to the Persian Gulf today, setting both ablaze and wounding three crewmen, gulf-based salvage executives said.


Elizabeth Kray, Patron and Friend Of Poets and Their Art, Dies at 71
LEAD: Elizabeth Kray, a friend and patron of poets for more than 30 years, died of cancer Saturday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
She was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.


GOODEN CONTRACT TALKS
LEAD: The Mets will open contract negotiations with Dwight Gooden today in West Palm Beach, Fla., with preliminary talks between James Neader, the pitcher's agent, and Al Harazin, senior vice president of the team.
The Mets have said that money will not be discussed until the length of the contract has been set, but they are expected to suggest one year in the vicinity of the $1.5 million that Gooden is being paid this year.


MEDMASTER SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDMASTER SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
675,451
620,818
Net inc
34,470
88,650
Share earns
.01
.03
6mo rev
1,271,023
1,189,115
Net inc
66,566
147,143
Share earns
.01
.05


HOME FREE VILLAGE RESORTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME FREE VILLAGE RESORTS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
371,900
594,200
Net inc
63,500
180,400
Share earns
.01
.03
Shares outst
7,372,700
6,886,400
6mo rev
623,700
1,061,600
Net inc
112,100
320,600
Share earns
.02
.05
Shares outst
7,509,000
6,731,500


MYLEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MYLEX CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,806,000
344,000
Net inc
124,000
b656,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
3,553,000
1,751,000
Net loss
126,000
1,272,000
b-Net loss


PRIME CAPITAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIME CAPITAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,126,000
4,253,000
Net inc
305,000
191,000
Share earns
.07
.04
9mo rev
20,483,000
11,117,000
Net inc
98,000
407,000
Share earns
.02
.10


Topics of The Times; Banner Therapy in Moscow
LEAD: First-time travelers to Moscow or Leningrad are always struck by the banners.
Huge letters, usually red, are strung across the road or hung from windows proclaiming love of party and country: ''Glory to the Communist Party!'' ''Our Policy, the Policy of Peace!'' But recent visitors found a new variation on the upper-floor windows of the unfinished United States Embassy office building.


Letter to State Democrats Suggests They Find Alternatives to Cuomo
LEAD: Governor Cuomo, who has been criticized by some Democrats and political analysts as being disingenuous when he says he is not seeking the Presidency, has taken a number of steps recently to discourage talk of his candidacy, including rejecting out-of-state political appearances.


SPEC'S MUSIC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPEC'S MUSIC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,557,000
5,228,000
Net inc
192,000
106,000
Share earns
.05
.02
Year-ago figures are restated to reflect a 3-for-2 stock split paid in October.


Commercial Rent Control as Community Drag
LEAD: To the Editor:


SENECA FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SENECA FOODS
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
72,985,000
63,075,000
Net inc
779,000
b488,000
Share earns
.23
-
b-Net loss


CELINA FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CELINA FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b170,443
cd680,885
Share earns
-
.41
9mo net inc
b381,383
d1,044,206
Share earns
.23
.63
b-Includes investment gains of $119,341 and $154,801 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Knight Apologizes
LEAD: A contrite Bob Knight apologized over the weekend for letting his temper get the best of him again.
Knight, the Indiana Univesity basketball coach, took his team off the floor last Saturday night after he was ejected with 15 minutes 5 seconds remaining in an exhibition game with the Soviet national team.


HERITAGE ENTERTAINMENT YEAR reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HERITAGE ENTERTAINMENT YEAR (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,040,000
3,639,000
Net loss
285,000
b617,000
Share earns
-
.13
6mo rev
3,963,000
8,511,000
Net inc
244,000
1,573,000
Share earns
.04
.35
Shares outst
5,129,000
4,011,000


Bridge: New York Player Is Leading In Try for 2d National Title
LEAD: A young expert from New York was well placed to win his second straight national team title here today.
The player, Brian Glubok, 28 years old, of Manhattan, who became a Spingold knockout team champion four months ago in Baltimore, was leading into the final two sessions of the men's Board-a-Match team championship.


VONS COS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VONS COS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
977,000,000
933,700,000
Net inc
100,000
c7,100,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
2,489,300,000
2,221,800,000
Net inc
b4,400,000
c33,700,000
Share earns
.16
-


Piniella Wears New Uniform And It Is Suiting Him Fine
LEAD: The man behind the desk is talking on the telephone.
He is talking trade, or at least it seems that way to a visitor standing outside in the empty hallway at Yankee Stadium.
But the conversation is not about names; it is about numbers - about batting averages, home runs, runs batted in, age.


U.S. Oil Rigs Fall by 22
LEAD: The number of oil drilling rigs operating in the United States fell by 22, to 1,152, in the latest week but was still above the 952 working in the comparable week a year ago, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.


Tournament Is Expanded to 12 Teams
LEAD: The national collegiate hockey tournament will expand this year from its Northeastern and Midwestern base in what Herb Hammond, the Brown coach, called an ''important step for college hockey.''


Raymond D. Mindlin, Engineering Professor
LEAD: Raymond D. Mindlin, professor emeritus of civil engineering at Columbia University, died after a long illness Sunday at Mary Hitchcock Hospital in Hanover, N.H.
He was 81 years old and lived in Grantham, N.H.


Military Bank Accord Signed
LEAD: Merchants National Bank of Indianapolis has signed a $26.8 million contract with the Defense Department to provide banking services to American servicemen in West Germany, the Netherlands and Greece for at least two years.


Gorbachev Meeting Is Seen
LEAD: The Soviet Union tentatively plans to invite leading United States business executives to meet with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, when he visits Washington next month, a group promoting American and Soviet trade said today.


AMERICAN VANGUARD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN VANGUARD
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,722,000
4,206,000
Net inc
107,000
241,000
Share earns
.06
.14
9mo sales
12,808,000
12,578,000
Net inc
689,000
875,000
Share earns
.40
.50


11 Are Hurt As Verdict Spurs Melee
LEAD: Three defendants, after hearing a jury find them guilty of murder charges, pulled out hidden razor blades and a sharp piece of metal and battled with court officers in Brooklyn yesterday, leaving 11 of them injured, none seriously.


Peso Firm, Stocks Fall In Mexico
LEAD: The Mexican peso strengthened somewhat against the dollar today in light trading here, but an incipient stock market rally came to an end as investors showed continuing caution under uncertain economic conditions.


KEITHLEY INSTRUMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEITHLEY INSTRUMENTS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
17,784,000
14,410,000
Net inc
858,000
1,379,000
Share earns
.25
.41
Yr sales
57,652,000
47,681,000
Net inc
3,280,000
2,909,000
Share earns
.97
.87


CUBANS IN 2D JAIL RIOT OVER FEARS OF DEPORTATION
LEAD: Cuban inmates fearing deportation seized hostages and set fires in a riot that left one person dead at a Federal prison in Atlanta yesterday, while a tense siege of other Cubans holding 28 hostages at a riot-scarred detention center in Louisiana continued for a third day.


PEREGRINE ENTERTAINMENT LIMITED reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEREGRINE ENTERTAINMENT LIMITED (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,345,505
1,756,135
Net inc
27,065
c247,098
Share earns
.01
.10
9mo rev
6,916,169
6,070,955
Net loss
687,622
bc666,258
Share earns
-
.28


Contras, Defying Ortega, Plan Managua Visit
LEAD: The main group of anti-Sandinista rebels announced today that two of its leaders were planning to travel to Managua on Tuesday to deliver their first official reply to a cease-fire plan proposed by President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua.


NATIONAL COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
47,673,000
55,988,000
Net inc
b11,250,000
c2,552,000
Share earns
.61
.13
9mo rev
152,682,000
146,610,000
Net inc
b19,149,000
c10,952,000
Share earns
1.01
.59


Major Renovation Planned at Midtown Altman's
LEAD: The owners of the landmark building that houses B. Altman's department store in midtown Manhattan announced plans yesterday for a multimillion-dollar renovation that would include adding six floors of office space to part of the structure.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-13  Agreement on an arms treaty banning medium- and shorter-range missiles was reached between the United States and the Soviet Union in negotaitions in Geneva.
The treaty is scheduled to be signed in two weeks in Washington.
Page A1


ALL-AMERICA HONOR DOES NOT APPEASE OHIO STATE LINEBACKER
LEAD: Chris Spielman of Ohio State has always been an emotional football player, one who relied on extreme intensity more than physical prowess to become one of the best inside linebackers in college football.
But this last week has been an emotional roller coaster that has had too many turns even for Spielman.


CSM SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CSM SYSTEMS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,428,201
1,104,044
Net inc
18,019
7,146
Share earns
.02
.01
9mo rev
4,475,040
2,864,724
Net inc
93,658
b107,920
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss


Rock: Aztec Camera
LEAD: AZTEC CAMERA, a group led by the singer and songwriter Roddy Frame, brought a brisk, surprising show to the Ritz last Friday.
The fragile, introspective lyricism that has been such a fundamental ingredient in Mr.
Frame's recordings was overshadowed by slick, unsubtle pop-soul arrangements and relentless pacing.


E&amp;B MARINE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*E&amp;B MARINE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
23,767,254
23,149,912
Net loss
557,130
252,311
9mo sales
68,254,325
64,490,402
Net loss
1,260,339
b356,400
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


GREEN MOUNTAIN POWER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREEN MOUNTAIN POWER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
30,490,000
25,052,000
Net inc
1,752,000
1,520,000
Share earns
.45
.39
Shares outst
3,676,000
3,296,000
9mo rev
95,078,000
80,971,000
Net inc
7,496,000
6,913,000
Share earns
1.88
1.81
Shares outst
3,669,000
3,167,000


GREENMAN BROTHERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREENMAN BROTHERS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
56,309,000
58,042,000
Net loss
2,641,000
1,501,000
9mo sales
137,737,000
140,332,000
Net loss
8,555,000
6,938,000


Crash Near an Alaska Airport Leaves 17 Dead and 5 Injured
LEAD: A Ryan Air commuter plane crashed and skidded through a fence while trying to land, killing 17 people and injuring the four others aboard, the authorities said today.


Jacob Schulman, Accountant, 72
LEAD: Jacob Schulman, senior partner of the accounting firm of Jacob Schulman &amp; Co., died Monday at Albany Medical Center.
He was 72 years old and lived in Gloversville, N.Y.


Keeping Most Likely Dropouts in School
LEAD: For 95 dropout-prone students here, high school is in a hidden corner of a downtown department store and important lessons are as likely to come from a salesperson as from a teacher.


G.N.P. Rises 4.1%; Profits Up Sharply
LEAD: The economy expanded faster than had been thought in the months before the October stock market crash and corporate profits surged, the Commerce Department reported today.


WINE TALK
LEAD: WHAT is all the fuss over Burgundy?
According to an article in the Oct. 31 issue of The Wine Spectator, a paper for wine buffs, American consumers are boycotting Burgundy wines. ''Burgundy Boycott Is Working,'' the article's headline read.


Contras Give Cease-Fire Response to Papal Envoy
LEAD: Nicaraguan rebels delivered their first official response to President Daniel Ortega Saavedra's cease-fire plan today to the Papal Nuncio in Costa Rica, after two of their senior leaders were unable to fly to the Nicaraguan capital to hand over the document.


ETZ LAVUD LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ETZ LAVUD LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
18,238,000
14,261,000
Net inc
849,000
331,000
Share earns
.49
.19
6mo sales
33,540,000
26,277,000
Net inc
1,466,000
208,000
Share earns
.84
.12


Doubts on Rates Hurt Bonds
LEAD: Bond prices plunged yesterday, depressed by doubts that international interest rates would move much lower and worries about the stability of the dollar.


WASHINGTON TALK: The U.S.I.A.; Can the News Abroad Come Home?
LEAD: Edwin A. Smith, a shortwave radio buff from the state of Washington, loved listening to the Voice of America program ''Africa in Print.'' So when an announcer said he could send for a transcript of it, he did.


Hutton Said to Weigh Sale of Some of Its Parts
LEAD: The discussions about the sale of E. F. Hutton &amp; Company have grown more complex, with the investment firm contemplating a dismemberment and the sale of its capital markets division separately from its retail brokerage system, according to Wall Street professionals close to Hutton.


Books of The times
LEAD:  PSYCHOTIC REACTIONS AND CARBURETOR DUNG. By Lester Bangs.


Jack Lawrence Theater Is Sold to a Developer
LEAD: The Jack Lawrence Theater, a 499-seat house at 359 West 48th Street, has been sold to a commercial developer, the owner, Jack Lawrence, said yesterday.


CARTER HAWLEY HALE STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARTER HAWLEY HALE STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
610,565,000
709,785,000
Net inc
b10,725,000
c16,425,000
Share earns
.40
.44
b-Includes a gain of $10,100,000 from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting for capitalization of inventory.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; For Miller, a Move
LEAD: James C. Miller 3d, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, is likely to leave the Administration early next year, according to people close to him.


Ford Completes Divestment in South Africa
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company completed its disinvestment from South Africa today with a deal that involves donating a 24 percent equity interest in its former subsidiary to an employee trust.


ADVANCED GENETIC SCIENCES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANCED GENETIC SCIENCES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
772,000
2,217,000
Net loss
737,000
b156,000
9mo rev
5,346,000
2,516,000
Net loss
64,000
2,750,000
b-Net income


China Names Acting Prime Minister
LEAD: Li Peng, a 59-year-old Soviet-educated engineer, was named Acting Prime Minister of China today.
He succeeds Zhao Ziyang, who gave up the post to devote himself full time to his duties as head of China's 46-million-member Communist Party.


ANALYTICAL SURVEYS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANALYTICAL SURVEYS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
567,993
1,046,829
Net loss
183,014
b163,221
Share earns
-
.10
Yr sales
2,236,460
2,672,660
Net loss
183,796
b294,288
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


KIMBARK OIL &amp; GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KIMBARK OIL &amp; GAS CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,267,000
1,115,000
Net loss
180,000
513,000
9mo rev
3,905,000
3,557,000
Net loss
586,000
3,014,000


Advertising; Two More Agencies Get American Home Work
LEAD: Two more agencies have announced new assignments from the Boyle-Midway division of American Home Products, made possible by the resignation of several assignments by N. W. Ayer.


A Communist Long on Tradition: Li Peng
LEAD: For Li Peng, who was named Acting Prime Minister today, it is a question he has come to anticipate with metronomic regularity, and the answer, as it was earlier this month, is on the tip of his tongue.


BOSTON DIGITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOSTON DIGITAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,026,000
3,209,000
Net loss
431,000
100,000
6mo sales
7,963,000
5,365,000
Net loss
429,000
394,000


Webster Said to Be Planning To Keep Deputy at the C.I.A.
LEAD: The Director of Central Intelligence, William H. Webster, plans to keep Robert M. Gates as deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency, The Washington Post has reported.


INTERNATIONAL CONSUMER BRANDS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL CONSUMER BRANDS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,735,467
2,266,451
Net inc
b223,064
69,467
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
9,088,457
5,819,013
9mo sales
18,507,225
4,241,713
Net inc
b382,365
c173,495
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
8,303,671
5,589,239


Advertising; People
LEAD: William J. Liss is joining RJR Nabisco as senior vice president, public affairs.


CALGENE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALGENE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,583,000
3,712,000
Net loss
1,072,000
78,000
Yr rev
22,430,000
8,128,000
Net inc
237,000
b907,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Behind Accord, Adding Missiles to Subtract Them
LEAD: The groundwork for the impending treaty to eliminate American and Soviet medium- and shorter-range missiles was laid in 1979, when NATO decided to deploy new American medium-range missiles and at the same time open arms talks.


CULLINET SOFTWARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CULLINET SOFTWARE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
49,104,000
35,904,000
Net loss
5,810,000
6,778,000
6mo rev
98,126,000
69,139,000
Net loss
13,807,000
18,149,000
Year-ago results are restated to reflect acquisitions.


ENTERTAINMENT PUBLICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENTERTAINMENT PUBLICAIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,074,000
2,508,000
Net loss
2,825,000
b2,288,000
b-Includes a loss of $285,000 from discontinued operations.


Leaders Debating AIDS Tests
LEAD: The chairman of the American Medical Association and a member of the President's AIDS commission debated today the wisdom of widespread mandatory testing to determine if people are infected with the AIDS virus.


HECHINGER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HECHINGER CO (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
189,582,000
151,518,000
Net inc
9,437,000
6,270,000
Share earns
.27
.20
9mo rev
566,055,000
454,874,000
Net inc
29,199,000
19,617,000
Share earns
.89
.64


Unthinkable Pardons
LEAD: President Reagan, who doubts that any laws were broken in the Iran-contra affair and who disparages the Congressional investigating committees for producing a mouse, now won't even rule out the possibility that he's ready to pardon the main suspects.


AARON BROTHERS ART MARTS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AARON BROTHERS ART MARTS (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,348,000
12,385,000
Net inc
646,000
396,000
Share earns
.23
.19
Shares outst
2,864,000
1,898,000
9mo sales
39,512,000
34,734,000
Net inc
1,439,000
660,000
Share earns
.50
.30
Shares outst
2,864,000
1,938,000


Opera's Constellation Is Fading
LEAD: By all traditional measures except one, the Metropolitan Opera's new ''Trovatore'' with Joan Sutherland and Luciano Pavarotti is a bust.


Colleges' S.A.T. Lists Can Be Creative Works
LEAD: They are known in college admissions jargon as N.I.P.'s, for Not in Profile.
They are those members of the freshman class whose Scholastic Aptitude Test scores are not included in the class profile because they would pull down the class average.


Koch Pledges Inquiry on Arrests by Transit Police
LEAD: Likening the incident to a tale out of Kafka, Mayor Koch said yesterday that the New York City Police Department would investigate accusations that four transit police officers made scores of false or improper arrests on the Lexington Avenue subway and other lines during 1983 and 1984.


Open Positions on Nasdaq Short Sales Fall by 9%
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short, and not yet covered, in the month ended Nov. 13 fell by 21.1 million, or 9 percent, to 213.2 million shares, from a revised 234.3 million shares in the previous month.
The figures cover the late


First Options Lays Off 130
LEAD: First Options of Chicago Inc., the nation's largest options clearing firm, has laid off about 130 employees or 10 percent of its staff, cut salaries and slashed bonuses.
The layoffs occurred late last week, affecting floor brokers, runners and clerks on the floor of the Chicago Board Options Exchange.


LEXITECH INTERNATIONAL DOCUMENTAION NETWORK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEXITECH INTERNATIONAL DOCUMENTAION NETWORK
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,191,385
850,531
Net loss
197,877
96,943
9mo rev
4,183,942
2,922,325
Net loss
175,523
70,868


AMERICAN WOODMARK reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN WOODMARK (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
34,315,000
31,895,000
Net inc
2,388,000
2,312,000
Share earns
.33
.34
6mo sales
66,071,000
60,285,000
Net inc
3,703,000
4,142,000
Share earns
.54
.63


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''Today I'm doing great.''  - Susan Lazarchick, first recipient f a knee transplant.  [ B7:1. ]


NEWPORT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWPORT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,868,000
11,087,000
Net inc
b1,535,000
1,282,000
Share earns
.17
.14
b-Reflects a $500,000 reserve for losses in the company's securities portfolio in October.


Ron Wood, An Artist In 3 Media
LEAD: ''In the back of my head I always knew I'd be a musician first and an artist later,'' begins a recently published book of paintings, drawings and informal autobiography, ''Ron Wood by Ron Wood: The Works.'' But after spending five years playing in the Jeff Beck Group, seven years with Rod Stewart and the Faces, and 12 years as a member of the Rolling Stones, Mr.


China's New Premier
LEAD: Li Peng was named Acting Prime Minister of China, succeeding Zhao Ziyang, head of the Communist Party.
Page A3. (AP)


AMERICAN OIL &amp; GAS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN OIL &amp; GAS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
14,945,000
16,230,000
Net loss
236,000
b422,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
47,587,000
56,467,000
Net loss
2,394,000
459,000
b-Net income


Germany Finally Obeys Basic Economic Laws
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.73
6.89
5.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.77
5.76
5.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.14
6.26
5.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.72
8.60
6.99
30-YR.


NUI CORP reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUI CORP (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
287,552,000
285,900,000
Net inc
8,299,000
b11,895,000
Share earns
2.29
-
b-Net loss and includes writedowns of assets of $17,636,000 relating to oil and gas activities.


FINANCIAL BENEFIT GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FINANCIAL BENEFIT GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,458,000
17,057,000
Net loss
b607,000
c251,000
Share earns
-
.08
9mo rev
74,806,000
72,726,000
Net loss
b865,000
c78,000
Share earns
-
.04


Oilers Send Coffey to Penguins
LEAD: Paul Coffey, the all-star defenseman who refused to report to the Edmonton Oilers because of a contract dispute, was sent to the Pittsburgh Penguins today in a seven-player trade in which the Oilers obtained Craig Simpson, a promising young forward.


ALLIED RESEARCH ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIED RESEARCH ASSOCIATES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,483,000
5,601,000
Net loss
105,000
b59,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
42,119,000
19,731,000
Net inc
1,075,000
1,277,000
Share earns
.27
.32


DONALDSON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DONALDSON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
85,477,000
69,094,000
Net inc
b4,125,000
b3,623,000
Share earns
.79
.69
b-Includes extraordinary credits of $212,000 and $311,000 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


College Football Notebook; Fordham Sporting Philadelphia Look
LEAD: During the decade that Larry Glueck spent at Harvard as an assistant football coach, he was assigned the Philadelphia area for recruiting purposes and built contacts there.


Lynn Freeman Olson, Composer, Dies at 49
LEAD: Lynn Freeman Olson, a composer of works for children, college students and television, died of cancer last Wednesday in New York City.
He was 49 years old.


Davis Injuries Halt Jury Selection
LEAD: Jury selection was interrupted yesterday in the trial of Larry Davis while the defendant was treated for injuries he received in jail, the authorities said.


A Big Item In Tax Plan Is Dropped
LEAD: Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, today complicated the task of piecing together a $9 billion package of tax increases by setting new ground rules for the negotiations.


U.S.-Costa Rican Differences Are Friendly
LEAD: To the Editor:


Boxing Notebook; Early '88 Calendar Lists Big Title Bouts
LEAD: With pro football dominating television's sports calendar until the end of the year, the big fights are mostly deferred until early 1988.


Ethnic Albanians Suffer Under Yugoslav Rule
LEAD: To the Editor:


Thousands of Estates in New York Are Mismanaged, a Report Says
LEAD: The New York State Attorney General and the State Comptroller yesterday accused New York City's public administrators of ''significant deficiencies and questionable practices'' in handling the estates of people who die without wills.


Precious Metals Down; Short Covering Ends
LEAD: Prices of precious metals closed slightly lower yesterday, ending a brief rally.


Fruit Fly Quarantine Lifted
LEAD: The Agriculture Department has lifted an agricutural quarantine imposed in July to prevent the spread of Oriental fruit flies from parts of Los Angeles County and Orange County in California, the department said today.
Department officials said recent trapping surveys indicated that the areas were free of the flies, which can destroy fruit and vegitable crops.


RAX RESTAURANT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAX RESTAURANT INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 26
1987
1986
Revenue
31,660,000
31,141,000
Net inc
b785,000
329,000
Share earns
.11
.05
b-Includes a tax credit of $267,000.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Pass the Chablis
LEAD: At this stage of the Presidential competition, it is unclear which candidate will launch the most effective appeal for the support of the young upwardly mobile professionals.


Church Law and Spirit
LEAD: To The Living Section:


ENERGY SERVICE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENERGY SERVICE (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,462,000
8,639,000
Net inc
646,000
b1,094,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
24,603,000
29,920,000
Net inc
3,678,000
b4,267,000
Share earns
.06
-


Pact Reached On Project In Times Sq.
LEAD: New York State and city officials said yesterday that they had reached final agreement with the developer of four huge office towers that would anchor the controversial, long-delayed Times Square redevelopment plan.
They said demolition of buildings at the intersection of 42d Street, Broadway and Seventh


Adele Miller, Advertising Executive, 91
LEAD: Adele Miller, who with her late husband, Samuel, founded the Miller Advertising Agency in 1919, died Monday of complications from Alzheimer's disease at Beth Israel Hospital.
She was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.


AIDS Epidemic Won't Spare Asia, Parley in Manila is Told
LEAD: The worldwide AIDS epidemic, which so far has mostly spared Asia, is likely to spread through this continent in the coming years, according to doctors speaking at a conference on the disease today.


Another State Joins Right-to-Die Issue
LEAD: One day soon, perhaps in a month or two if all goes as the family and its lawyer have asked, the Cruzans may be released from an ordeal that has seemed more tormenting than an endless prison sentence and sometimes as restrictive.


The No-Panic, Cook-in-a-Day Thanksgiving Meal Plan
LEAD: IF the very thought of pies unbaked, sweet potatoes unpurchased and cranberry chutney uncooked is making you weak in the knees, don't panic.
In a single day you can prepare a splendid Thanksgiving dinner, making everything from scratch - and survive to enjoy it.


CRITICAL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRITICAL INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,953,752
2,636,703
Net inc
202,052
152,156
Share earns
.04
.03
9mo sales
12,572,903
6,560,279
Net inc
609,580
361,390
Share earns
.13
.08


Black Leader Freed by Pretoria Gives the Rebels' Terms for Talks
LEAD: A freed leader of the African National Congress, the main black nationalist rebel group, says the South African Government would have to drop all apartheid laws and its state-of-emergency powers before the group would be prepared to negotiate with it on the issue of political power.


RAVEN INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAVEN INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
19,697,000
17,480,000
Net inc
1,039,000
939,000
Share earns
.65
.59
9mo sales
49,600,000
39,738,000
Net inc
2,510,000
2,021,000
Share earns
1.56
1.28


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Bankers Wanted
LEAD: The World Bank, which has just laid off 10 percent of its staff in its deepest restructuring of the last two decades, is now putting out a ''help wanted'' sign to fill certain specialty posts, for example in environmental protection.
But, according to its president, the bank is having trouble filling vacancies.


Second Quake Hits California; Damage Slight
LEAD: A strong earthquake rocked residences and injured about two dozen people in Southern California near the Mexican border this morning, just hours after the desert region was hit by a comparable tremor Monday night.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 25, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


HERSHEY OIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HERSHEY OIL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,378,000
749,000
Net inc
85,000
b258,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
3,981,000
3,876,000
Net loss
8,000
c1,872,000
b-Net loss  c-Includes a $1.8 million writedown of oil and gas properties.


Rates Down a Bit At Citicorp's Sale
LEAD: Interest rates at Citicorp's regular weekly commercial paper auction yesterday were off only slightly.


How NBC Got Gorbachev Interview
LEAD: Tom Brokaw, the NBC anchor, said yesterday that Soviet officials had been telling his network for two years that it was ''at the head of the list'' in the quest by American networks for a one-on-one interview with the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
NBC announced Monday that Mr.
Gorbachev had agreed to be interviewed by Mr.


Essence of Catholicism
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Advertising; Sport Care Is Planning A New Trade Magazine
LEAD: Sport Care Inc. in Wilmington, Del., is planning a new trade publication called Sport Care and Fitness that will be sent free to 30,000 interested parties outside the health care field, such as coaches, trainers and operators of fitness clubs.


BROKERS SECURITIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROKERS SECURITIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
340,291
334,565
Net loss
93,117
b3,670
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
1,104,131
1,307,541
Net loss
240,631
b133,786
Share earns
-
.28
b-Net income


Ben C. Birdsall, Retired Arizona Judge, 64
LEAD: Ben C. Birdsall, a retired judge who presided over two of Arizona's most publicized criminal cases, died Sunday of cancer.
He was 64 years old.


Stage:'Puta Vida Trilogy,' One-Act Plays by Povod
LEAD: IT isn't as easy as it once was for white middle-class theatergoers to get a quick fix of guilt, so there may well be a crying need for ''La Puta Vida Trilogy,'' the Reinaldo Povod bill of one-act plays at the Public Theater.
In the evening's prologue, a hostile young Hispanic monologuist (Michael Carmine) waves a knife at the audience, accuses us of hating ''spics,'' and threatens to commit a random murder, possibly in our privileged neighborhoods, if his ailing offstage mother is allowed to die.


KIDDIE PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KIDDIE PRODUCTS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,647,534
5,418,839
Net inc
244,579
172,397
Share earns
.65
.46
9mo sales
18,228,481
15,984,423
Net inc
526,996
389,921
Share earns
1.41
1.03


Advertising; The National Enquirer Goes to D.M.B.&amp;B.
LEAD: The National Enquirer, which spends between $15 million and $20 million a year to sustain and increase its 4.5 million circulation, has put that advertising assignment in the hands of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, according to Patrick N. Linskey, the publisher.


Deaths of Unattended Children Spur Day Care Bills in Congress
LEAD: A year ago this month two Miami children, 3 and 4 years old, were left unattended at home while their mother worked.
They climbed into a clothes dryer with tumbling laundry, closed the door and burned to death.


BEARD CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEARD CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,504,000
3,411,000
Net loss
794,000
744,000
9mo rev
14,769,000
12,330,000
Net inc
b9,446,000
c2,681,000
Share earns
1.52
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $1,113,000.


FEDERAL RESOURCES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL RESOURCES CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,006,000
55,000
Net inc
b865,000
c254,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
20,586,000
566,000
Net inc
b1,381,000
c952,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-After tax credits of $483,000 for the quarter and $636,000 for the 9 months, and gains of $11,000 and $185,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, from the termination of a pension plan.


MAPLE LEAFS SLIP PAST ISLANDERS
LEAD: Bill Smith talks the same way he tends goal.
Language therefore is not much more than a stick with which to bluntly and effectively go about clearing away ambiguity.


ADELPHIA COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADELPHIA COMMUNICATIONS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
23,721,000
8,320,000
Net loss
10,841,000
2,300,000
6mo rev
47,067,000
16,378,000
Net loss
21,134,000
3,555,000
The company said the latest quarter and 6 months reflect certain acquisitions completed from October through December 1986.


DIGILOG INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGILOG INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,056,721
4,810,424
Net inc
317,940
261,416
Share earns
.12
.13
Yr rev
16,905,074
15,717,779
Net inc
1,248,736
175,656
Share earns
.56
.09


ANITEC IMAGE TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANITEC IMAGE TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
38,734,000
32,966,000
Net inc
5,618,000
3,868,000
Share earns
.50
.35


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 1987
LEAD:  International


Koch Nominee Backed For Chief of Tax Panel
LEAD: The New York City Council yesterday approved Mayor Koch's nomination of David Goldstein to be president of the city's Tax Commission.


DEVON RESOURCES INVESTORS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEVON RESOURCES INVESTORS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,451,000
1,706,000
Net loss
564,000
57,000
9mo rev
6,399,000
6,624,000
Net loss
2,073,000
b240,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


CALSTAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALSTAR INC
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,295,812
2,875,384
Net inc
b10,804
c79,992
Share earns
.01
.06
Shares outst
1,517,929
1,810,706
6mo net inc
b256,381
c411,381
Share earns
.17
.26
Shares outst
1,519,879
1,798,367


The Stage Is Bare as Iran-Contra Hearings Slip Into History
LEAD: Staff members preparing to leave the darkened office from which the Senate inquiry into the Iran-contra affair was conducted.
Boxes of copies of the report, at right, stood in mute testimony to the far-ranging investigation that evoked much drama as it traced arms deals and ideals from the White House to Nicaragua by way of Iran, uncovering a cast of characters even a playwright would be tested to invent.


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: WHILE I was away on a business trip, my husband introduced prayer in the home.
I returned to find that the bedtime routine had been altered, that sandwiched between the drink of water and the hugs and kisses was a short conversation with the Almighty.
It even included the sign of the cross, although as performed by my children, the sign of the cross looks more like one of those fraternal lodge handshakes.


Major Contributor to Cuomo To Testify at a Bribery Trial
LEAD: A major contributor to Governor Cuomo's 1982 election campaign, who is also a law client of the Governor's son Andrew, will play a key role in a complicated conspiracy and bribery trial that began in Manhattan yesterday, a defense attorney said in his opening statement to the jury.


U.S. Hints It Will Ease Cuban Deportation Plan
LEAD: Reagan Administration officials today signaled a willingness to relent on sending some Cuban prisoners back to Cuba.


Economic Scene; Opportunities And Dangers
LEAD: DID Black Monday plunge the economy into a black hole, or did it just represent the bursting of a speculative bubble that has not seriously impaired the business outlook?


ELECTROMEDICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTROMEDICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,964,168
3,535,203
Net inc
6,205
65,955
9mo rev
13,280,463
9,599,170
Net inc
10,031
106,552
The company said the latest quarter and 9 months include charges of $757 and $157,400, respectively, from the conversion of debentures.


GENEX CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENEX CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
374,000
1,058,000
Net inc
b1,608,000
c961,000
Share earns
.12
-
9mo sales
1,067,000
2,771,000
Net loss
b1,676,000
d2,414,000
b-Includes gains of $1.9 million from the sale of plant and $1.6 million from litigation settlement for the both periods.


About New York; For Boat Owner, An Ill Wind On the Hudson
LEAD: There is a theory that the two happiest days in a man's life are the day he buys a boat and the day he sells it.
Doug Ashley got only the first satisfaction.
His vessel sank.
Then, as he tried to raise it, the Government towed it off to be burned.


William King, Photographer, 48
LEAD: William King, a fashion photographer, died of AIDS on Thursday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 48 years old and lived in Manhattan and Paris.


Real Estate; Ad Firms' West Side Migration
LEAD: FOR decades advertising agencies were a mainstay in the office towers on the East Side of midtown Manhattan.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Company Briefs column of Business Day yesterday incorrectly described an acquisition involving the Adams-Russell Company and the Cablevision Systems Corporation.
Cablevision is acquiring Adams-Russell.


Gooden's Request Rejected by Mets
LEAD: The Mets opened contract talks with Dwight Gooden yesterday and immediately ruled out any long-term deal at this time.
They insisted on a one-year contract for next season but left the door open for negotiating a long-term contract after 1988.


License Is Suspended At Dorrian's Red Hand
LEAD: The New York State Liquor Authority voted yesterday to suspend the liquor license of an Upper East Side bar, Dorrian's Red Hand Restaurant, for 10 days and fine its owner $1,000 for serving alcohol to minors.


Antiques Shops Open With Period Buffet
LEAD: EDIBLE art objects in 18th-century French style were the center of attraction last week at a gala cocktail party for the opening of the Place des Antiquaires.


Film: 'Three Men and a Baby'
LEAD: IT'S even clearer in the big, splashy, good-humored American version of ''Three Men and a Baby'' that it was in the French original (entitled ''Three Men and a Cradle'') that this story is about four babies, not just one.
Aside from the infant girl left on their doorstep, the three fun-loving bachelors who grudgingly adopt her are children too.


Holiday Tomorrow
LEAD:  Thanksgiving is tomorrow and closings vary.
Following are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Parade: Begins at 9 A.M. at 77th Street and Central Park West.
Proceeds down Central Park West to Columbus Circle and then down Broadway to 34th Street.
Parking: Sunday rules in effect.


GROW VENTURES reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROW VENTURES
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
417,000
143,000
Net loss
b1,800,000
c1,032,000
b-Includes a charge for discontinued operations of $841,000.
c-Includes an income tax benefit of $424,000 under a tax sharing pact with its former parent and a charge of $66,000 for discontinued operations.


4 Aid Laos Against Bombis and Other Horrors
LEAD: There are only four of them, if you don't count the children.


Ex-Client Says He Was Disappointed With Deaver
LEAD: A former client of Michael K. Deaver testified today that he felt disappointed when he realized that as a private lobbyist Mr.
Deaver might not be able to work million-dollar miracles through his access to high Reagan Administration officials.


ERLY INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ERLY INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
60,346,000
34,715,000
Net loss
1,617,000
b3,915,000
Share earns
-
1.52
6mo sales
100,918,000
67,835,000
Net loss
1,600,000
b2,201,000
Share earns
-
1.01


Basic Costs Up For Cable Use
LEAD: Deregulation of cable television rates has resulted in higher prices for basic service and a small drop in the cost of premium channels, an industry group survey has shown.


Panel Says New York's System Of Hiring Teachers Is Archaic
LEAD: The procedures for hiring teachers for the New York City public schools are so archaic and bureaucratic that only a handful of new teachers started in the classroom last year fully licensed, according to a report by a civic group that monitors education.


PHILLIPS-VAN HEUSEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILLIPS-VAN HEUSEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 1
1987
1986
Sales
181,811,000
132,563,000
Net inc
b19,010,000
c9,903,000
Share earns
1.42
.63
Shares outst
11,928,399
15,786,430
9mo sales
345,388,000
278,286,000
Net inc
b29,498,000
c16,116,000
Share earns
1.90
1.02
Shares outst
14,456,679
15,826,677


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Senator Smoke
LEAD: Senator Pete V. Domenici of New Mexico, the top Republican on the Budget Committee, used to vow with each passing budget that he would give up smoking.
He hasn't yet, and during the four weeks of tense negotiations that led to the budget-cutting compromise last Friday, he blew his smoke into a tiny machine designed to suck up nasty fumes.


MOUS BRANDS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOUS BRANDS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,442,000
7,457,000
Net inc
200,000
102,000
Share earns
.10
.05
9mo sales
27,739,000
24,227,000
Net inc
743,000
472,000
Share earns
.36
.23


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Messrs. Chairman
LEAD: Most of the Democrats around the table at the deficit negotiations were chairmen of one committee or another.
That caused some confusion, because every time someone was addressed as ''Mr.
Chairman,'' half the heads in the room would turn.


Advertising; A New Woman For Chanel
LEAD: AFTER about eight years of doing without, Chanel No. 5 has a new woman.


INSIDE
LEAD:  The Education Page


Dollar Falls on Report of Deficit Plan Criticism
LEAD: The dollar ended lower in active New York trading yesterday after a West German central banker reportedly said the deficit-reduction plan reached Friday fell far short of American commitments to its trading partners.


EATING WELL
LEAD: TOMORROW'S Thanksgiving turkey could contain more than the bread stuffing with onions and herbs.
It could also have salmonella, a microbiological contamination that can be hazardous but is easily rendered harmless through sound food-handling methods and cooking techniques.


Of Time and Professors And the Cost of College
LEAD: Higher education in this country is a $124-billion-a-year industry built around the free exchange of ideas.
But there is one idea, frequently discussed by executives of other large industries, that is rarely debated in faculty clubs.
That is productivity.


In Italy, Walnuts Are Prized by Home Cooks
LEAD: Each fall, the harvesting of walnuts generates nearly as much excitement among Italians as the hunt for wild porcini mushrooms.


End of an Era Nears
LEAD: A Sky Crane helicopter dropping electronic gear onto the Ambrose Light tower off New Jersey.
The light, which has been manned for 164 years, will be run by computer starting in January. (Ralph Ginzburg)


Irving Levitas Is Dead; Jewish History Scholar
LEAD: Irving Levitas, a scholar and lecturer in Jewish history, died yesterday of lung cancer at the Rosary Hill Home in Hawthorne, N.Y.
He was 77 years old and lived in Yonkers.


Koch Asks Agencies to Prepare Budget Cuts
LEAD: Citing the recent stock market collapse and fears of a slowdown in the national economy, Mayor Koch yesterday asked the heads of all city agencies to propose budget cuts for the next fiscal year.


Bell Atlantic Makes Key Appointments
LEAD: The Bell Atlantic Corporation, wrapping up an extensive restructuring, named Raymond W. Smith yesterday to the newly created positions of president and chief operating officer and Philip A. Campbell as vice chairman and chief financial officer.


1987 Beaujolais Nouveaus: Sweet, Fruity and Ready to Go
LEAD: THE 1987 Beaujolais nouveau, a sprightly potion so tantalizingly scented that it deserves to be sold at perfume counters, is gushing all over the United States.


Judge Prohibits News Cameras At Murder Trial
LEAD: The judge in the Howard Beach trial yesterday said he would not allow television and still cameras at the trial when an experimental state program permitting cameras at trial begins next Tuesday.


First Chicago In Acquisition
LEAD: To strengthen its position in consumer banking, the First Chicago Corporation said today that it had signed a letter to acquire the Gary-Wheaton Corporation for $136.4 million in First Chicago common stock.


Safety First on Airlines
LEAD: To the Editor:


6 Concertgoers Injured, And 15 Are Arrested
LEAD: Six teen-agers were injured, one critically, and 15 youths were arrested in a melee that broke out during a rap music concert last night in New Haven, the authorities said.


ALFIN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALFIN INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,509,00
8,218,000
Net inc
1,066,000
b148,000
Share earns
.16
.02
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $855,000.


Service for Elayne Varian
LEAD: A memorial service for Elayne Varian, former director of the contemporary wing of the Finch College Museum of Art, will be held Tuesday at 2 P.M. at St.
James Episcopal Church, 865 Madison Avenue, at 71st Street.
Mrs.
Varian died Nov. 4 in Orlando, Fla.


AMERICAN REALTY TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN REALTY TRUST (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,900,000
5,700,000
Net inc
b6,500,000
1,300,000
Share earns
.30
.14
Shares outst
21,817,913
9,696,850
9mo rev
19,494,000
17,290,000
Net inc
b9,800,000
4,200,000
Share earns
.63
.43
Shares outst
15,557,584
9,696,850


Irving Bank Adopts 'Tin Parachutes'
LEAD: In its latest effort to fend off a hostile $1.2 billion takeover attempt by the Bank of New York, the Irving Bank Corporation has adopted a policy assuring all its employees substantial benefits in case they are laid off after an unfriendly takeover.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Picture captions on April 5 and Nov. 16, about the new United States Embassy compound in Moscow, misidentified the building shown at the left, behind the compound.
It is an apartment building, not the Hotel Ukraina.


OAKWOOD HOMES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OAKWOOD HOMES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
30,706,000
28,886,000
Net loss
b3,087,000
c2,599,000
Share earns
-
.46
Yr sales
95,121,000
93,285,000
Net inc
399,000
6,520,000
Share earns
.07
1.15


CUBAN PRISONERS IN ATLANTA TAKE 25 MORE HOSTAGES
LEAD: In less than an hour early today, rioting Cuban inmates released five hostages from a prison in Atlanta, then seized another 25.


AMES DEPARTMENT STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMES DEPARTMENT STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
512,669,000
472,409,000
Net inc
7,345,000
11,049,000
Share earns
.20
.30
9mo sales
1,454,750,000
1,293,224,000
Net inc
16,069,000
23,101,000
Share earns
.43
.62


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Aug. 14
Aug. 7
Aug. 15
1987
1987
1986
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
6.8
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
3.0
Gasoline stocks
219.1
218.3
223.3
Distillate stocks
125.3
127.3
150.2
Crude imports, daily
5.6
4.8
4.7
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.6
2.3
Crude stocks
358.0
353.6
343.9
Crude production, daily
8.3
8.3
8.4
Refinery utilization (%)
83.4
82.6
84.1


NEWPORT PHARMACEUTICALS INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWPORT PHARMACEUTICALS INTERNATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,687,000
2,252,000
Net loss
707,000
206,000
6mo rev
13,393,000
4,303,000
Net loss
1,998,000
254,000
The company attributed its increased operating revenue primarily to the acquisition of America's Pharmacy Inc.


NASA's Gargantuan Riveter
LEAD: THERE are some wondrous machines under the 43-acre roof of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Michoud assembly complex here.
In pursuit of its contract to assemble space shuttle fuel tanks that are almost 28 feet in diameter and half the length of a football field, the Martin Marietta


Cuomo Seeks Altered Schools Panel
LEAD: Governor Cuomo said yesterday that he would ask the State Legislature early next year to restructure the New York City Board of Education so that the Mayor would control it.


DANIEL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DANIEL INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
42,233,000
34,897,000
Net loss
649,000
741,000
Yr rev
132,860,000
122,726,000
Net loss
3,285,000
3,869,000


Rate Cuts In Europe Spur Dow
LEAD: Stock prices moved higher yesterday, after West Germany, France and the Netherlands said they were cutting certain key interest rates to bolster their economies.


Oslo and Bonn at Odds on New NATO Chief
LEAD: Opposition from Norway has delayed the designation of Manfred Worner, the West German Defense Minister, as the next Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Western diplomats say.


Offer From Singer
LEAD: Paul A. Bilzerian, the Florida investor, said today that the Singer Company, an aerospace concern based in Stamford, Conn., had offered him access to certain nonpublic information if he agreed to purchase no more of the company's shares for 18 months.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Mr.


KIMMINS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KIMMINS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,443,000
7,806,000
Net inc
446,000
198,000
Share earns
.17
.09
Shares outst
2,607,000
2,325,000
9mo sales
29,541,000
25,219,000
Net inc
1,196,000
416,000
Share earns
.46
.22
Shares outst
2,598,000
1,909,000


DYCOM INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYCOM INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
24,732,297
14,180,477
Net inc
954,399
594,955
Share earns
.23
.17


SANDERSON FARMS reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANDERSON FARMS
Year to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
149,995,000
150,973,000
Net inc
10,956,000
15,582,000
Share earns
1.26
1.85
Shares outst
8,726,000
8,435,000


Horner May Return
LEAD: Bob Horner, the former Atlanta Braves slugger who played baseball in Japan this year, might be coming home next season.
The 30-year-old Horner said on Monday that he has been offered a contract to return to the Braves and that he no longer wants to play in the Japanese league. ''You grow up with an idea of what baseball should be,'' he said.


G.O.P. Governors Back Deficit Plan
LEAD: Republican Governors urged Congress today to ratify ''without delay'' the bipartisan budget compromise worked out between Congress and the White House that would reduce the Federal deficit by $76 billion over the next two years.


F.C.C. Rules on Indecent Programming
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission ruled today that radio and television stations could broadcast indecent programming between midnight and 6 A.M. and not risk Government sanctions.


Two Stars of 'Burn This' To Appear in Benefit
LEAD: John Malkovich and Joan Allen, now starring on Broadway in of Lanford Wilson's ''Burn This,'' are to appear with the playwright at a benefit performance of three of Mr.
Wilson's one-act plays on Dec. 6 at the Sanford Meisner Theater, 164 11th Avenue, between 22d and 23d streets.


E.C.A.C. Bowl Canceled
LEAD: Franklin and Marshall and Plymouth State have played - and won - too many times this season and will not be allowed to play for the Eastern College Athletic Conference football title.
The first-ever E.C.A.C.
Championship Bowl was canceled today when the schools discovered that National Collegiate Athletic


When the Sky Is No Longer The Limit
LEAD: For Wall Street, Thanksgiving 1987 will be remembered as a time when the euphoria and excitement of the incredibly profitable bull market had given way to uncertainty, somber reflection and depression.


TV Review; Tributes to Art of Norman Rockwell
LEAD: THIS being the week of Thanksgiving, television has appropriately decided to pay unusual attention to Norman Rockwell, the popular illustrator who combined an optimistic approach to life with a sentimental view of the world that is almost always innocent and sweet.


CONTINUING CARE ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINUING CARE ASSOCIATES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,003,000
2,609,000
Net loss
b405,000
c71,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
14,107,000
6,678,000
Net loss
178,000
c34,000
Share earns
-
.02


Lessons
LEAD: Today, a challenge to the theory of descent and modification, as Darwin called his great idea, his notion of natural selection, survival of the fittest.
But we must wait.
The paleontologist has forgotten the appointment and is late.
Never mind.
The door to his laboratory, here at the American Museum of Natural


CONSOLIDATED STORES reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED STORES (NYSE)
13wks to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
144,535,000
102,222,000
Net inc
1,166,000
4,738,000
Share earns
.03
.11
Shares outst
45,094,000
44,228,000
39wk sales
398,782,000
255,758,000
Net inc
3,889,000
11,857,000
Share earns
.09
.28
Shares outst
45,068,000
42,863,000


POLYMER INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POLYMER INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,774,000
9,680,000
Net inc
b3,600,000
781,000
Share earns
.68
.16
Shares outst
5,300,000
4,900,000
6mo rev
24,360,000
18,725,000
Net inc
4,513,000
1,534,000
Share earns
.85
.32
Shares outst
5,300,000
4,700,000


Helsinki Pact Violations
LEAD: To the Editor:


Queens Man Guilty In the 1986 Slaying Of a Rookie Officer
LEAD: A 34-year-old man described by the police as a low-level drug dealer was convicted yesterday of killing a rookie police officer in a gun battle in Queens last year.


RECORDS AT THE MET DISPROVE CHARGE OF ACQUIRING 5 PAINTINGS IMPROPERLY
LEAD: Officials of the Metropolitan Museum of Art yesterday disproved a suggestion that the museum illicitly acquired five paintings that had been stolen by the Nazis in World War II.
The museum acknowledged that one of the paintings had once been stolen by Nazis, but said it had legally and properly acquired that painting and two others from the rightful owners and had never owned the remaining two at all.


How a Brooklyn School Copes With Crowding
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chains Instead of Sand
LEAD: To the Editor:


INDIANA REPRIMANDS KNIGHT
LEAD: Bobby Knight, the Indiana University basketball coach, was reprimanded today by the university for pulling his team off the court during an exhibition game Saturday night against the Soviet Union's national team.


COMMONWEALTH EDISON CO reports earnings for 12mo to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMONWEALTH EDISON CO (NYSE)
12mo to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,710,460,000
5,419,833,000
Net inc
1,116,840,000
1,055,791,000
Share earns
4.90
4.75
Year-ago revenue restated to reflect reclassification of customers and to reflect revenue subject to refund by court order.


TEMPO ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEMPO ENTERPRISES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,736,000
21,153,000
Net inc
164,000
359,000
Share earns
.03
.06
9mo rev
17,736,000
21,153,000
Net inc
b2,434,000
2,068,000
Share earns
.42
.36


REAGAN TO PRESS SENATE ON TREATY
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he would begin a drive to win Senate approval for the emerging treaty to eliminate medium- and shorter-range nuclear missiles in Europe.


AMERICAN FIBER OPTICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FIBER OPTICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
728,000
914,000
Net loss
168,000
92,000


Dinkins and Rangel Backing Jackson's Candidacy
LEAD: Standing on the steps of New York's City Hall yesterday, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson won support for his Democratic Presidential candidacy from two of the city's leading black elected officials, Representative Charles B. Rangel of Harlem and Borough President David N. Dinkins of Manhattan.


DATARAM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATARAM CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,335,000
4,340,000
Net inc
103,000
280,000
Share earns
.05
.14
6mo rev
6,994,000
8,485,000
Net inc
276,000
771,000
Share earns
.14
.38


FLEETWOOD ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLEETWOOD ENTERPRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 25
1987
1986
Sales
360,293,000
303,945,000
Net inc
11,027,000
8,699,000
Share earns
.47
.37
6mo sales
722,612,000
618,340,000
Net inc
25,239,000
18,644,000
Share earns
1.08
.80


ENGLISH GREENHOUSE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENGLISH GREENHOUSE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,186,912
1,501,045
Net inc
20,101
b314,329
9mo rev
3,957,736
5,364,529
Net loss
6,215
682,316
b-Net loss


Company Pleads Guilty In Military-Export Case
LEAD: A Connecticut company pleaded guilty to felony charges and paid $750,000 in penalties today for illegally exporting military-related products to Israel, authorities said.


AME INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AME INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,445,605
8,404,003
Net inc
1,242,518
481,504
Share earns
.24
.12
Yr rev
37,008,044
25,670,502
Net inc
4,031,307
1,774,436
Share earns
.87
.44
The latest period results reflect the acquisition of A.M.E.-TAV in June 1986.


Advantages of New Ski Lifts
LEAD: OVER the last few years, words like quad, triple and detachable have crept into the skier's vernacular.
The terms describe the design and mechanics of new ski lifts.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  2 Events for Island


3 EUROPEAN ALLIES REDUCE KEY RATES TO SPUR ECONOMIES
LEAD: In a forceful sign of international economic coordination, the central banks of West Germany, the Netherlands and France today announced reductions in key interest rates to help spur their economies.


Allied-Lyons Move
LEAD: The British food and drink company Allied-Lyons P.L.C. said it would expand its 51 percent ownership and take full control of Hiram Walker-Gooderham &amp; Worts Ltd., the Canadian distiller, in a cash and share deal worth $1.01 billion.
Allied-Lyons is buying the interest from the Toronto-based GW Utilities Ltd.


MERRY-GO-ROUND ENTERRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERRY-GO-ROUND ENTERRISES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
73,674,000
59,440,000
Net inc
3,949,000
2,992,000
Share earns
.41
.31
9mo sales
176,167,000
141,623,000
Net inc
6,112,000
4,231,000
Share earns
.64
.44


FRONTIER TEXAS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRONTIER TEXAS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,289,366
1,419,114
Net inc
b914,053
c53,911
Share earns
.13
-
Shares outst
6,509,603
5,696,429
9mo rev
26,543,512
1,739,552
Net inc
b2,023,814
c1,042,123
Share earns
.28
-
Shares outst
6,497,881
5,578,571


MLX CORP reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MLX CORP
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
107,477,000
10,906,000
Net inc
6,000
319,000
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
15,777,000
10,080,000
9mo sales
285,469,000
23,473,000
Net loss
779,000
b599,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
15,776,000
9,941,000


BASIC EARTH SCIENCES SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BASIC EARTH SCIENCES SYSTEMS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
528,000
417,000
Net loss
65,000
182,000
6mo rev
994,000
945,000
Net loss
149,000
342,000


Southern Pacific Has 5 Offers
LEAD: Five bids, ranging from $900 million to more than $1 billion, have been submitted for the Southern Pacific Transportation Company, a company official said.
Kansas City Southern Industries said it had made the latest offer but declined to provide any details on its bid.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:  CIRCA '87  Dear Pilgrims, at the very least  At sevens and at sixes  You'd be at OUR Thanksgiving feast  Among the instant mixes.
And, when we carve the noble bird  Electrically this Autumn,  Your ghosts would shout ''Absurd, absurd!''  Confronted with the cheerful word  That, just before we cooked the bird


Mother Lost Custody Of Infant Who Died
LEAD: New York City officials confirmed yesterday that a 1-year-old girl who died at a Brooklyn hospital Monday and her brother and two sisters were removed from the custody of their mother earlier this year after the city received complaints against the woman.


CLOTHESTIME INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLOTHESTIME INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
46,752,000
45,539,000
Net loss
1,565,000
b3,964,000
Share earns
-
.28
9mo sales
137,037,000
118,156,000
Net inc
6,205,000
10,224,000
Share earns
.44
.71


ESSEF CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESSEF CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
33,445,000
17,443,000
Net inc
773,000
647,000
Share earns
.16
.17
Shares outst
4,884,200
3,726,000
Yr sales
102,659,000
64,545,000
Net inc
4,525,000
2,812,000
Share earns
1.12
.76
Shares outst
4,050,509
3,723,735


UNITED ILLUMINATING CO reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED ILLUMINATING CO (NYSE)
Year to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
492,008,000
482,959,000
Net inc
101,820,000
101,821,000
Share earns
6.42
5.95
Shares outst
13,887,000
13,800,000


Duro-Test Resists Tender Offer
LEAD: The Duro-Test Corporation has urged shareholders not to tender shares to a group led by Prof.
William P. Lyons of Yale University.
The light-bulb maker, based in North Bergen, N.J., said a $14 a share offer from the TCA Acquisition Corporation, a subsidiary of TCA-IV Limited Partnership that is headed by the professor, was inadequate.


St. Joe Gold Buyout
LEAD: The holding company of the Australian businessman Alan Bond said it intended to take the St.
Joe Gold Corporation private by buying the three million shares it does not already own for $17 each.
Dallhold Investments Proprietary Ltd. now owns about 90.3 percent of St.
Joe Gold's common stock.


Woman Dies in Ansonia Fire
LEAD: A 91-year-old resident of the Ansonia Hotel died in a fire in her apartment last night, according to authorities.
The woman, identified as Susan Breisach, was a long-time resident of the landmark building at 2107 Broadway, between 73d and 74th Streets.
The cause of the fire, which occurred around 6 P.M.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article yesterday about the Metropolitan Museum of Art discussed paintings looted by the Nazis during World War II and strongly suggested that the museum had obtained some of them illicitly.
The suggestion - based on information provided by a Rutgers University professor - was wrong.


CONTINENTAL GRAPHICS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINENTAL GRAPHICS (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
69,325,000
36,445,000
Net inc
2,401,000
1,864,000
Share earns
.23
-
9mo sales
197,259,000
99,457,000
Net inc
6,153,000
3,505,000
Share earns
.60
-


Advertising; B.B.D.O. Wins Account Of Pepsi-Cola's Slice
LEAD: Batten, Barton, Durstine &amp; Osborn has won the $20 million Slice brand soft drink from Pepsi-Cola, already the largest client in its New York office.


Crackdown Is Ordered In Bangladesh Strikes
LEAD: President H. M. Ershad ordered a fresh crackdown on his opponents today as their national strike against his Government continued to cripple the country.


Howard Will Sue
LEAD: James Cheeks, president of Howard University, says that the school is going to sue the National Collegiate Athletic Association because it was passed over for postseason play despite having the second-best record in Division I-AA football.
The suit, scheduled to be filed today, will charge antitrust and contract violations.


Bridge: Rosenkranz Team and Four From Seattle Capture Titles
LEAD: An experienced team led by Dr.
George Rosenkranz of Mexico City scored a solid victory in the men's Board-a-Match team championship at the American Contract Bridge League's fall nationals Monday night, and a foursome from the Seattle area led by Shirley Edelson won the women's Board-a-Match title by a big margin.


Centennial of Edison Laboratory Honors the Man Behind the Machines
LEAD: Michael Sloane and his sister, Lizabeth Sloane Taraskewicz, great-grandchildren of Thomas A. Edison, with one of the inventor's early phonographs at laboratory he built in West Orange, N.J.
Ceremonies marked the 100th anniversary of the research center where Edison not only perfected the phonograph and invented the motion picture camera, but instituted the concept of research and development.


Film: 'Planes, Trains and Automobiles'
LEAD: THE circuitous journey that is embarked upon in John Hughes's ''Planes, Trains and Automobiles'' is supposed to range from New York to Chicago, but its final destination is surprising.
The two traveling companions, Neal Page (Steve Martin) and Del Griffith (John Candy), do indeed make it to the Windy


Congressman to Shun Race
LEAD: Rep-resentative Byron L. Dorgan of North Dakota announced today he would not challenge Senator Quentin Burdick for the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate next year, but would seed re-election to the House.
The announcement ended months of speculation as to whether the 45-year-old Congressman would seek the par-ty's endorsement.


The Larger Crime of False Arrests
LEAD: Thomas Dargan's story of false arrests by the Transit Police does not involve dramatic allegations of torture or wrongful death as in other New York City police misconduct cases, but it would be a grim mistake to dismiss it as trivial.
The false arrests feed a larger cynicism about the police that criminal justice officials in New


New York Ordered to Find Care for Homeless Woman
LEAD: A state judge yesterday directed New York City to discharge a 41-year-old woman who was picked up under a Koch administration program to involuntarily hospitalize severely mentally ill homeless people living on city streets.


ARTRA GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARTRA GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
59,741,000
23,966,000
Net inc
b2,357,000
1,365,000
Share earns
.72
.49
9mo sales
153,706,000
56,970,000
Net loss
b2,081,000
c8,772,000
Share earns
-
3.17


Domestic Vehicle Sales Slip
LEAD: Sales of new American-made cars and light trucks totaled 282,177 units in the second 10 days of November, down 2.1 percent from the comparable 1986 period, the eight domestic manufacturers reported today.


Stage: 'Boys Net Door' at Lamb's
LEAD: IN ''The Boys Next Door,'' Tom Griffin has written a sweet-tempered comedy of social concern.
The subject of his play (at the Lamb's Theater) is the mentally handicapped and their place in society.
Mr.
Griffin's principal characters are four young men living together in an apartment in a New England city.


No Mas for Knight
LEAD: BOBBY KNIGHT cried, ''No mas, no mas,'' in deed if not in actual word, and removed his Indiana University basketball team from the court, forfeiting the game Saturday night to the Soviet Union.


Gene Blakely, Actor, 66
LEAD: Gene Blakely, an actor who worked on and Off Broadway in the 1940's and 50's, died of bone cancer Monday at the Greater Community Hospital of Creston, Iowa.
He was 66 years old and lived in Phoenix.


VIGILANTES EMERGE AMID HAITI STRIFE
LEAD: As more violence broke out in Haiti and Government security forces remained mainly on the sidelines, some Haitians began organizing themselves as vigilantes this week to try to insure that presidential elections would take place as scheduled in five days.


TEVA PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSRIES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEVA PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSRIES LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
40,775,000
45,849,000
Net inc
4,054,000
4,526,000
Share earns
.21
.22
6mo sales
78,416,000
88,288,000
Net inc
7,352,000
9,003,000
Share earns
.39
.45


In Manhattan, It'll Be No Holiday For Drivers, Traffic Officials Say
LEAD: New York City officials are expecting major traffic problems during the holiday season and are taking steps to prepare for as many as 200,000 extra vehicles a day.


Men's Club Ponders An Unknown: Women
LEAD: CHARLES DEVENS OSBORNE JR. is not a happy man.
His sanctum santorum, not to mention his ''personal space,'' is being invaded.
Mr.
Osborne is a 40-year-old investment counselor from San Francisco who comes from old California money - that is, money from this century.
As did his father and other men in his family, he belongs to a men's club, where others of his ilk gather for a round of squash, a steam bath, luncheon, backgammon and other rituals of male camaraderie.


HEALTH-MOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTH-MOR INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,233,583
5,752,152
Net inc
b178,829
c479,233
Share earns
.08
.27
9mo rev
21,003,187
19,026,899
Net inc
b693,481
c1,365,481
Share earns
.34
.77


Film: Forsyth's 'Housekeeping'
LEAD: ''HOUSEKEEPING,'' Bill Forsyth's fine adaptation of Marilynne Robinson's 1981 novel, is a clear-eyed, brow-furrowed, haunting comedy about impossible attachments and doomed affection in a world divided between two kinds of people.


A Thanksgiving Feast in Many Languages
LEAD: At least a half-dozen of the kindergartners who took part in the Thanksgiving feast at Public School 162 in Bayside, Queens, yesterday had never tasted turkey before.
Some did not have a word for it in their native language.


On the Town
LEAD: New York, New York. It's a city of beggars and limousines.


Stage: 'The Racket' Opens SoHo Rep's Season
LEAD: ''THE RACKET,'' which opens a season of ''lost American plays'' at the SoHo Rep, is 60 years old and shows it.
Michael Bloom, who directed, has done his darndest to put some kick into this watered-down version of ''The Front Page'' (even though it was written a year earlier).
Wisecracking reporters dash for the telephone and holler, ''Get me the desk!


High Noon in El Salvador
LEAD: Two brave experiments are under way in El Salvador, the bloodiest and most fragmented of the countries engaged in the Central American peace effort.
Putting their skins at risk, a pair of exiled leftists have returned to test the reality of reconciliation.
With matching boldness, no doubt to upstage his rivals, President Duarte is at last holding the violent right accountable for the 1980 murder of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo


Closings Set For Holiday
LEAD: Businesses, banks, exchanges and government offices will be closed tomorrow to observe Thanksgiving.


Finding Contentment
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Beverly Hills Listed As a Distressed Area
LEAD: This glamorous city whose boulevards are lined with luxury shops is down in the dumps over a Federal rating that defines it as economically distressed.


Duarte Tries to Deal With Violent Legacy
LEAD: El Salvador's frail political system is undergoing one of its most severe tests in recent years as it confronts challenges from the left and the right and an unresolved past of violence.


City and Country Meet to Eat
LEAD: IT was an occasion that had something for everyone: for restaurants, which loved the exposure; for farmers, who could display their wares, and for the New-York Historical Society, which played host last week to the event, the Thanksgiving Food Festival, part of the Farm-City Week Celebration held nationwide every year.


5 Invited for Heisman
LEAD: Craig Heyward, the Pitt junior tailback who leads all Division I-A rushers with 1,655 yards in 11 games, was one of five players invited yesterday to the Heisman Trophy dinner Dec. 5 at the Downtown Athletic Club in New York.
Also attending will be Tim Brown, the Notre Dame wide receiver; Lorenzo White, the Michigan State running back; Don McPherson, the Syracuse quarterback, and Gordie Lockbaum, the Holy Cross wide receiver and saftey.


Carlucci Rejects Test Limit
LEAD: Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci 3d insisted today that the Reagan Administration would not negotiate limits on ''Star Wars'' research and rejected Soviet proposals on limiting tests of defenses against nuclear missiles.


Wolf Creek Journal; Idealists With a Knack For Being Prosperous
LEAD: More than a century after their ancestors settled here, the Hutterite people still live together in communes, speak German as a native tongue and teach their children that capitalism is inherently an evil system.


Litton's Navy Pact
LEAD: Litton Industries said it had received a $352.7 million contract to build an amphibious Navy assault ship at its yard in Pascagoula, Miss., where a similar vessel is being outfitted and a sister ship is in early stages of production.
Construction on the third ship is not expected before 1989.


New York Court Upholds Conjugal-Visit Ban for Inmate With AIDS
LEAD: New York State's highest court ruled 4 to 3 today that prison officials can deny conjugal visits to inmates with AIDS.


Seton Hall Gains With Iowa State
LEAD: Daryll Walker and Mark Bryant scored 7 points apiece in a decisive first-half spurt that carried Seton Hall to a 93-61 victory over Middle Tennessee State tonight in the second round of the Big Apple National Invitation Tournament.


CORADIAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORADIAN CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,803,000
3,017,000
Net loss
137,000
b44,000
9mo rev
7,754,000
7,655,000
Net loss
601,000
234,000
b-Net income


WAREHOUSE CLUB reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WAREHOUSE CLUB (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
57,471,000
43,407,000
Net loss
275,000
1,261,000
Yr sales
228,393,000
157,311,000
Net loss
6,397,000
1,707,000


COBB RESOURCES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COBB RESOURCES CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
630,000
485,000
Net inc
75,000
b163,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Salvador Acts to Prosecute Rightist Tied to Killing
LEAD: A court began proceedings today to strip a rightist political leader, Roberto d'Aubuisson, of legal immunity that would protect him from prosecution for the 1980 killing of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of El Salvador, the Salvadoran Justice Minister said.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: ALTHOUGH potatoes fall into that category of foods considered basically neutral, they are to my mind one of the great glories of gastronomy.
They borrow, almost as if by magic, the flavors of other foods teamed with them.


More Bright Lights on Big City's Highways
LEAD: In what might be the last flicker of the fiscal and oil crises, thousands of lights along New York City's highways, darkened a decade ago to cut costs, will be blinking back on over the next few months.


Court Is Picked For LTV Case
LEAD: Federal District Judge Robert Sweet has ruled that a dispute over who has financial responsibility for the LTV Corporation's pensions would be litigated in Federal district court rather than bankruptcy court.


Big Board and Workers Reach a Tentative Pact
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange and 1,100 employees reached tentative agreement Monday night on a three-year contract.


New Nuclear Follies?
LEAD: For nearly 30 years, countries have sold nuclear materials around the world with the requirements that the importing nations promise to use them for peaceful purposes and permit on-site inspection.
These two pledges are the main barrier between civil and military use of the atom.


When a City Defies a Judge
LEAD: What should a court do when a community under a desegregation order continuously drags its feet?
In barring Yonkers, N.Y., from aiding commercial and residential development until it complies with his order, U.S.
District Judge Leonard Sand offers a creative answer that merits support.


Restructuring Plan for Cliffs
LEAD: The New Jersey investment banker David F. Bolger today proposed a restructuring plan for Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. that he valued between $18.72 and $20.22 a share, or a total of $250.7 million.
Cleveland-Cliffs announced


Japan's Cresting Wave
LEAD: A traveler gets strikingly different first impressions of the capital cities of China and Japan.


Frances F. Vandivier, Child Care Educator, 61
LEAD: Frances Finnell Vandivier, a child care educator, died Thursday at Goergetown University Hospital in Washington of ovarian cancer.
She was 61 years old.


President Also Named Chief at Brush Wellman
LEAD: Brush Wellman Inc., a Cleveland-based company that has a lock on the beryllium market, announced yesterday that it had named its president and chief operating officer, Raymond A. Foos, to the added position of chief executive, effective Jan. 1.


MAPPING OUT ETHNIC MENUS
LEAD: THE savory ingredients of New York's melting pot have been assembled in a new book called ''The Food Lover's Guide to the Real New York'' by Myra Alperson and Mark Clifford (Prentice Hall Press, $12.95).
This borough-by-borough guide explores the ethnic neighborhoods from the venerable Lower East Side of Manhattan to a newly established pocket of Cambodian settlements in the Bronx.


Music to Read Vodka Ads By
LEAD: Absolut Vodka and TBWA Advertising, the Swedish company's New York ad agency, are relying on technology to strike the right note with their Christmas magazine advertising.
Readers of New York magazine who open Absolut's two-page Christmas display this week will be greeted - some might say assaulted - by tinny-sounding but unmistakable fragments of


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Hold the Press


Karpov Evens the Score
LEAD: Gary Kasparov lost the 16th game of his world championship chess match in Seville, Spain, yesterday and let Anatoly Karpov get back into contention.


LEVER'S 14 ASSISTS HELP DEFEAT NETS
LEAD: Lafayette Lever scored 21 points and had 13 rebounds and 14 assists tonight as the Denver Nuggets routed the New Jersey Nets, 132-104.


Panama Journal; A Justice Is Slain: Did Regime Turn a Blind Eye?
LEAD: The mysterious shooting death of a Supreme Court Justice here has become a cause celebre that has raised questions about the ability of a military Government already accused of political assassination, election rigging and vast corruption to administer justice impartially.


ARYT OPTRONICS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARYT OPTRONICS INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,188,000
1,704,000
Net inc
235,000
217,000
Share earns
.05
.04
6mo sales
4,409,000
3,369,000
Net inc
467,000
427,000
Share earns
.09
.09


Jazz: Jobim and Bossa Nova
LEAD: ANTONIO CARLOS JOBIM, the composer who virtually invented the bossa nova, led an auspicious gathering of Brazilian pop musicians at Avery Fisher Hall on Monday evening.
When first planned, the concert, celebrating the 10th anniversary of the Brazilian Cultural Foundation, was to have reunited the composer with the tenor saxophonist Stan Getz, who was instrumental in popularizing the bossa nova in the United States 25 years ago.


Connecticut Governor Leaves Hospital
LEAD: Gov.
William A. O'Neill as he left St.
Francis Hospital in Hartford.
He had been there since Nov. 15 when he was admitted with a 103-degree fever.
He was diagnosed as having diverticulitis, an inflammation of small pockets protruding from the side of the colon.
Colon polyps were also discovered.
He said he would remain on antibiotics before making arrangements to have the polyps removed, probably in a month.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Basketball  Soviet Team Loses in Finale: Winston Bennett sank two free throws with 17 seconds left last night to lift Kentucky to a 75-72 victory over the Soviet National team in Lexington.
The loss marked the end of a 10-game tour by the Russians, who compiled a 6-4 mark against American college teams.


At Our Saviour High, Small Stands Tall
LEAD: Everybody loves a good David and Goliath story, so they should doubly love the story of Our Saviour Lutheran High School.


Sooners Led TV Ratings
LEAD: Last Saturday was a busy day for sports on television, and according to Arbitron Ratings of 13 metered markets, these were the five highest- rated sports programs for the day, with network, rating and share (the rating is a percentage of households with televisions tuned into a program and the share is the percentage of households with televisions in use tuned in): 1 - Nov.


Market Place; High Returns Of Junk Bonds
LEAD: ARE junk bonds a better deal than ever?
The author of a new study on the high-yield securities thinks so.


COLLINS FOOD INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLLINS FOOD INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
142,004,000
120,443,000
Net inc
5,868,000
b3,827,000
Share earns
.25
.19
6mo rev
280,867,000
242,322,000
Net inc
12,629,000
b15,037,000
Share earns
.55
.72
Shares outst
23,166,000
20,742,000


AMERICAN NATIONAL PETROEUM CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN NATIONAL PETROEUM CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,750,000
1,193,000
Net inc
123,000
b369,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
4,912,000
5,377,000
Net inc
302,000
b300,000
Share earns
.07
-


AIDS CHIEF WEIGHS QUITTING U.S. POST
LEAD: Dr.
Robert C. Gallo, a leading Federal AIDS researcher, today confirmed reports that he was exploring the possibility of leaving the Government to establish a virus research laboratory at an academic center with industry backing.


PENTAGON PLANS FIRST LASER TEST IN SPACE IN 1990'S
LEAD: Defense Department officials said today that they planned to conduct the first test of a laser weapon in space in the early 1990's, as part of one of the costliest and probably most disputed experiments in the Reagan Administration's effort to build a defense against nuclear missiles.


ONEIDA LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONEIDA LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
88,985,000
75,090,000
Net inc
4,352,000
1,742,000
Share earns
.52
.20
9mo sales
232,418,000
204,943,000
Net inc
10,140,000
1,100,000
Share earns
1.18
.12


SYNTEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYNTEX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
306,100,000
262,900,000
Net inc
75,400,000
63,900,000
Share earns
.64
.51
Shares outst
118,400,000
123,900,000
Share earnings reflect a 2-for-1 stock split effective in June.


5 ARE CONVICTED IN TERROR SCHEME
LEAD: A Federal jury convicted five members of El Rukns street gang today of conspiring to blow up airplanes and government buildings in hopes of gaining up to $2.5 million from Libya.


76ers Sign King
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers signed Albert King, the free-agent guard who last played for the Nets, to a two-year contract yesterday.
The Nets, who agreed not to exercise their right of first refusal, received a second-round draft selection in 1988 and a conditional second-round choice in 1990 from the 76ers.


ACCORD IS REACHED ON MISSILE TREATY BY U.S. AND SOVIET
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union said today that they had resolved their remaining differences over a new treaty banning medium- and shorter-range missiles that President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev are due to sign in Washington in two weeks.


Latest Quakes Differed From One at Los Angeles
LEAD: The two earthquakes that shook southern California late Monday and early yesterday differed basically in nature from the quake that struck the Los Angeles area on Oct. 1, scientists believe.


GENERAL EMPLOYMENT ENTERRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL EMPLOYMENT ENTERRISES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,060,096
3,323,796
Net inc
54,050
108,896
Share earns
.04
.08
Yr rev
14,652,035
13,290,634
Net loss
58,184
263,202
The latest quarter includes a pre- tax charge of $60,000 related to certain costs associated with the closing of the company's Toronto agency operation.


Recital: Elena Obraztsova, Mezzo
LEAD: ONLY when the official part of her program was done and she had begun the encores did Elena Obraztsova give her fans at Carnegie Hall what they most wanted.
Singing ''O mio babbino caro'' from ''Gianni Schicchi,'' ''Voi lo sapete'' from ''Cavalleria Rusticana'' and the Habanera from ''Carmen,'' the Russian mezzo-soprano provided the kind of visceral, flamboyant vocalism that she had kept pretty much under wraps during the bulk of her recital


Concert: Villa-Lobos's 'Magdalena'
LEAD: SIFTING through the detritus of history in hopes of turning up neglected masterpieces is an activity for which only congenital optimists need apply.
The success rate is guaranteed to be between low and nil.
However, even the slimmest hope of excavating a deserving old work is often enough to rally a dedicated band of musical archeologists.


Smoking Ban in Pittsburgh
LEAD: The City Council approved a bill Monday to ban or restrict cigarette smoking in restaurants, offices and public buildings.
Mayor Richard Caliguiri, who as a Councilman 12 years ago failed to win passage of a similar bill, said he would sign the measure into law.


A Feeling Of Betrayal For Cubans
LEAD: Expecting that her husband would soon be freed from the Federal detention center here, Marsha Martinez had started preparing to move to this small isolated town in central Louisiana.


Odorless Garlic: Admiration Isn't Universal
LEAD: Two Japanese companies say they have a method of treating garlic so it does not linger on the breath, but some domestic growers say they are not impressed.





61 Groups given Hunger Aid
LEAD: A $3.8 million final installment of money raised by the cross-country ''Hands Across America'' charity drive has been distributed to 61 groups aiding the hungry and homeless in 28 states and the District of Columbia, USA for Af-rica, the parent foundation, said Mon-day.
The money was raised in the May 25, 1986, Hands Across America drive in which an estimated six million peo-ple joined hands in symbolic support of the nation's hungry and homeless.


MORGAN KEEGAN &amp; CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORGAN KEEGAN &amp; CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
17,566,555
19,423,178
Net inc
377,101
1,546,769
Share earns
.06
.33
Shares outst
5,902,398
4,741,121


AMCOLE ENERGY CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMCOLE ENERGY CORPORATION
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,067,072
564,854
Net loss
114,854
375,754


Wide Appeal Filed on Forced Caesarean Delivery
LEAD: Thirty-nine organizations, including the American Medical Association, asked the District of Columbia Court of Appeals today to reconsider a ruling that a gravely ill pregnant woman could be forced to undergo a Caesarean delivery against her wishes.


Banks' 'Grace Periods' Mislead Card Holders
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stock Index Price Limits Set
LEAD: Following similar moves by other futures exchanges, the Chicago Board of Trade last week approved the adoption of daily price limits for its stock index futures contracts.


HANDLEMAN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANDLEMAN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
148,671,000
124,398,000
Net inc
9,099,000
6,721,000
Share earns
.64
.48
Shares outst
14,177,000
13,984,000
6mo sales
245,552,000
213,184,000
Net inc
13,732,000
10,307,000
Share earns
.97
.74
Shares outst
14,152,000
13,966,000


Hyundai Duty Set by Canada
LEAD: Cars made by South Korea's Hyundai Motor Company are being dumped in Canada at unfairly low prices, Canada's Revenue and Customs Department said today in a preliminary ruling that puts an import duty on future imports.
A department spokesman said that at current prices the duty would result in a 36 percent price increase on the cars.


CDI CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CDI CORPORATION (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
150,777,000
116,459,000
Net inc
3,205,000
1,518,000
Share earns
.52
.25
6mo rev
289,311,000
230,683,000
Net inc
5,722,000
3,422,000
Share earns
.92
.56


BARTON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARTON INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,340,263
1,403,399
Net loss
748,926
124,271
Yr rev
4,181,642
7,930,126
Net loss
2,643,833
1,947,103


ICEE-USA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ICEE-USA (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,137,000
4,991,000
Net inc
291,000
522,000
Share earns
.19
.33
9mo sales
11,830,000
11,393,000
Net loss
b2,010,000
c203,000
Share earns
-
.13
b-Includes a writedown of the territorial rights to Canada and Mexico of $1,876,000, to reflect the rights at management's assessment of their value.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: Advances; Software For Design Engineers
LEAD: ''MACHINE TOOLS for the mind'' is how A. Wayne Snodgrass, president of the Computer and Automated Systems Association, describes the new generations of software becoming available to mechanical design engineers.


New Model Iowa for '88: Less Corn, More Silk
LEAD: John Jensen called Bruce Babbitt one day to give the Democratic Presidential candidate some advice.
Mr.
Jensen thought Mr.
Babbitt, the former Governor of Arizona, was good on the issues, but he was worried about the candidate's pig-holding policy.


Day Care for Infants: Debate Turns to Long-Term Effects
LEAD: While lawmakers face the issue of how society should respond to the growing demand for child care, researchers are engaging in a debate about the effects of day care on America's youngest citizens, the 3.7 million children under a year old.


CRITICARE SYSTEMS reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRITICARE SYSTEMS
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,752,000
1,544,000
Net inc
477,000
295,000
Share earns
.08
.06


Pritzkers in Talks On Pan Am Unit
LEAD: Representatives of the Pritzker family have been working with officials of the Pan American Corporation to develop a takeover offer for its airline unit that could be presented to the Pan Am board when it meets on Dec. 1, union and sources close to the talks said yesterday.


Transplant of a Human Knee Is Achieved for the First Time
LEAD: The first successful transplant of an entire human knee was announced today by the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.


MALRITE COMMUNICATIONS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MALRITE COMMUNICATIONS GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
29,034,000
27,031,000
Net loss
b196,000
c29,000
9mo rev
83,802,000
76,125,000
Net loss
b4,878,000
d2,881,000
b-Includes pre-tax gains of $2.2 million from disposal of assets.


New Security Measures Planned After Court Melee
LEAD: New York City correction officials said yesterday that they were planning additional security measures for inmates brought to court as a result of a melee in Brooklyn Monday during which three prisoners took out hidden razor blades and a makeship knife and injured 11 court officers.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  A New Kitchen Outfit


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Arab Novelist Falls in Love With French
LEAD: Tahar Ben Jelloun approves of polygamy - with languages, not women, he hastens to add. ''My wife is Arabic,'' the 43-year-old Moroccan novelist explained, ''and my mistress is French, and I maintain a relationship of betrayal with both of them.''


WASHINGTON TALK: Interior Department; At the Wildlife Service, an Extinction With Irony
LEAD: The Office of Endangered Species has gone the way of the dusky seaside sparrow and the Sampson's pearly mussel.
Like six of the species that it was created to protect in 1973, it has become extinct.


TERRORIST LEADER IS SEIZED IN JAPAN
LEAD: After a long manhunt, the Japanese police have arrested a leader of the Japanese Red Army, the terrorist group responsible for the massacre at Lod Airport near Tel Aviv in 1972.


Scare for Elliott
LEAD: Bill Elliott, the race-car driver, was a passenger in an Air Force F-16 jet that clipped a Georgia Air National Guard F-15 over Jefferson County yesterday.
No injuries were reported although the F-15 crashed after the pilot, Lt.
Col.
Bruce MacLane, was forced to eject.
The pilot of the plane carrying Elliott, Maj.


FROZEN FOOD EXPRESS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FROZEN FOOD EXPRESS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,732,713
23,228,250
Net inc
706,111
579,576
Share earns
.54
.44
9mo rev
63,095,797
68,567,974
Net inc
1,657,634
582,001
Share earns
1.26
.44


Bridge: Partners From Middle West Lead Blue Ribbon Pair Event
LEAD: A mixed pair from the Midwest was in the lead at the midpoint of the prestigious Blue Ribbon Pair Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's fall nationals here tonight.


REGENCY EQUITIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REGENCY EQUITIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,386,194
c1,890,711
Per share
.06
.02
9mo net inc
b12,258,294
c5,151,217
Per share
.14
.06
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of 3 cents a share for the quarter, and an extraordinary credit of 1 cent a share in the 9 months.


The Woman in the Race Gives Korea a Jolt
LEAD: Barring miracles, which occur with about as much frequency here as anywhere else, Hong Sook Ja will not become South Korea's next President.


6 Are Accused In Racial Fight At High School
LEAD: A Brooklyn grand jury has charged six black youths with a series of misdemeanors, including aggravated harassment and rioting, in what the police described as a racial disturbance outside a high school in June.


THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 1987
LEAD:  Companies


VARO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VARO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,125,000
18,922,000
Net inc
99,000
392,000
Share earns
.02
.09
6mo rev
47,904,000
36,517,000
Net inc
302,000
753,000
Share earns
.07
.17


I.O.C. Puts Out Warning
LEAD: Countries that accept Olympic invitations and then decide to boycott the Games face the punishment of not being invited to the next Olympics, according to Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committee.


WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING
LEAD: No Joke For the last several years, creators of some of the best-known comic strips have marked Thanksgiving Day by giving those strips a serious message about people who are hungry.
The effort moved off the funny pages today, with a number of prominent editorial cartoonists using their spots on the nation's editorial pages to deliver a Thanksgiving message about the homeless.


Haiti Vigilantes Lynch 4 Men Suspected of Election Terror
LEAD: As election officials, hampered by violence and a lack of government support, struggled today to organize the presidential elections scheduled for Sunday, neighborhood defense groups lynched four men suspected of anti-election terrorism.


AMWEST INSURANCE GRP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMWEST INSURANCE GRP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b768,000
544,000
Share earns
.39
.27
9mo net inc
b2,117,000
c1,457,000
Share earns
1.06
.73
b-Includes gains of $72,000 and $69,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, from investments.


GIANT FOOD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 7
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GIANT FOOD INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 7
1987
1986
Sales
619,496,000
564,593,000
Net inc
17,665,000
b4,553,000
Share earns
.59
.15
9mo sales
1,838,176,000
1,667,291,000
Net inc
48,418,000
b31,477,000
Share earns
1.61
1.05


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Altus Bank, Mobile, Ala., named William L. Watson 3d president and chief executive, replacing Gerald M. Czarnecki, who resigned.


Dr. Edgar Berman Is Dead at 68; Writer and Humphrey Confidant
LEAD: Dr.
Edgar Berman, an author, newspaper columnist, surgeon and personal physician to former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, died of a heart attack yesterday at Sinai Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 68 years old.


4 Train Accidents Leave 3 Dead and Dozens Hurt
LEAD: Two people were killed Tuesday in separate accidents involving Amtrak trains in Massachusetts and the body of a tow-truck driver was recovered in Arkansas after his vehicle was struck by a train.
In Florida, an Amtrak passenger train struck a tractor-trailer snagged on the tracks yesterday, slightly injuring 24 people.


AMERICAN FEDERAL S&amp;L (COLOADO) ASSN (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FEDERAL S&amp;L (COLOADO) ASSN (O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b2,447,000
c101,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo net loss
b4,786,000
c2,983,000
Share earns
-
1.63
b-Includes provision for loan losses of $2,500,000 for the quarter and $6,250,000 for the 9 months.


WHEN INSPIRATION STRIKES TWICE
LEAD:  A. The Circle club chair by Kevin Walz for Arc International, introduced in October 1986.
B.
The Enigma chair by Paul Haigh for Bernhardt, introduced in June 1987.


G.M. Discounts
LEAD: Three divisions of the General Motors Corporation announced new buyer incentive programs, with discounts ranging from $550 to $900 on selected models.
The Pontiac division said buyers of Pontiac 6000's, Firebirds, Fieros, Safari wagons and Bonnevilles may choose either free air-conditioning or a $600 cash allowance; buyers of Pontiac Grand Ams qualify for discounts of $550 to $775, depending on the options package.


Connecticut Official To Challenge Weicker
LEAD: State Attorney General Joseph I. Lieberman, a Democrat, said today that he would run for the United States Senate seat now held by Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
Mr.
Lieberman did not formally declare his candidacy, saying he would do that early next year.
Instead, he announced the formation of a committee that will let him start raising funds for the 1988 campaign.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


HERS
LEAD: A NEW friend has asked me why my oldest friends are also my political adversaries.


WASHINGTON TALK: Embassy Row; Executive of Apartheid, Advocate of Reform
LEAD: It is always a frustrating experience for opponents of the South African Government when Pretoria's representatives do not defend the very system they administer.


Icahn to Get Big Block Of Texaco
LEAD: Trans World Airlines Inc. agreed yesterday to pay $348 million for 12 million shares of Texaco stock and the voting rights of an additional 12.1 million shares.


Seton Hall Savors Its Victories in N.I.T.
LEAD: College basketball tournaments usually rely on either glamour teams or local teams for box-office appeal.
The Big Apple National Invitation Tournament is down to just local appeal - Seton Hall.


NEW YORK TESTING LABS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW YORK TESTING LABS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,097,202
1,781,259
Net loss
90,495
b16,888
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
6,300,378
5,689,433
Net loss
74,342
b131,930
Share earns
-
.04
b


EVEREX SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EVEREX SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
56,004,000
26,595,000
Net inc
2,673,000
1,172,000
Share earns
.12
.09
Shares outst
23,076,000
13,216,000


MICRO GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICRO GENERAL CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
870,497
1,110,015
Net loss
297,093
b4,317
9mo rev
3,139,781
3,593,396
Net loss
307,568
b10,551
b-Net income


WAVETEK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WAVETEK CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Sales
23,926,000
19,183,000
Net inc
b1,310,000
c1,113,000
Share earns
.14
.12
Yr sales
82,536,000
73,824,000
Net inc
b3,850,000
3,081,000
Share earns
.42
.34


A 1789 PROCLAMATION BY WASHINGTON... F.D.R.'S VIEW
LEAD: In 1932, in the midst of the Depression, New York's Governor, Franklin D. Roosevelt, then President-elect, issued a Thanksgiving Day proclamation that included words from an old prayer: ''Remember in pity such as are this day destitute, homeless or forgotten of their fellow men.''


APACHE PETROLEUM reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APACHE PETROLEUM (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
38,799,000
48,807,000
Net loss
8,703,000
8,218,000
9mo rev
120,121,000
146,973,000
Net loss
18,667,000
14,675,000


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Terry Bross, a 6-foot-9-inch senior center for St.
John's, suffered a ligament sprain of his right ankle during practice Monday and will be sidelined for a minimum of three weeks.
Bross started 29 games last season, averaging 4.2 points and 3.6 rebounds per game. . . .
The Air Force Academy has suspended indefinitely three of its basketball players - Eric Kjome, a junior forward; Chad Kimble, a junior center, and Jeff Bowling, a sophomore guard - for what Coach Reggie Minton called internal reasons.


Turkey Scouts and Mr. Franklin
LEAD: Be thankful today that Benjamin Franklin did not prevail in the choice of a national symbol for the fledgling United States.
He wanted a turkey.


ODYSSEY ENTERTAINMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ODYSSEY ENTERTAINMENT
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
474,809
214,717
Net loss
828,475
431,673


TIME MANAGEMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIME MANAGEMENT
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
246,762
23,052
Net loss
514,952
200,575
9mo sales
507,486
69,682
Net loss
1,453,261
454,322


WELCOMING PACT, NATO ALLIES STOP DEPLOYING MISSILES
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that the United States and its allies had decided to stop deployment of American missiles in Europe as soon as a Soviet-American treaty is signed in two weeks in Washington.


CBS Gives Mornings Another Try
LEAD: The last time around, there was a golden retriever named Daisy, a fake country kitchen set with a fireplace, a ''personals'' dating match-up service, a stand-up comic and a co-host whose persona was described by one network executive as that of the wacky suburban wife who pushes someone in the pool at a party.


Bogota Moves Drug Suspect
LEAD: A reputed drug baron, Jorge Luis Ochoa, was secretly transferred from one army barracks to another on Tuesday night for fear that his lieutenants might try to help him escape, the Colombian press said.
Since his capture on Saturday, the Colombian police say they have detected the arrival in Bogota of a large number of people linked to the Medellin cartel said to be responsible for 80 percent of the cocaine exported from Colombia.


CHARMING SHOPPES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHARMING SHOPPES (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
161,716,000
132,051,000
Net inc
11,041,000
9,913,000
Share earns
.22
.20
9mo sales
455,765,000
357,458,000
Net inc
35,048,000
26,501,000
Share earns
.70
.53


THERMO PROCESS SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THERMO PROCESS SYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,678,000
4,575,000
Net inc
65,000
175,000
Share earns
.01
.08
Shares outst
5,340,000
2,255,000
6mo rev
12,541,000
12,880,000
Net inc
204,000
345,000
Share earns
.04
.16
Shares outst
5,340,000
2,128,000


MAGMA COPPER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAGMA COPPER
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
105,175,000
84,273,000
Net loss
b5,067,000
15,036,000
9mo rev
304,419,000
252,621,000
Net loss
b3,383,000
41,366,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $1,091,000 and $3,984,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Sudan Seeks Write-Off
LEAD: The Sudan said today that it had called on creditors to write off foreign loans or ease repayment terms in a new bid to reduce its $11 billion debt and a growing threat of mass starvation.
Finance Minister Beshir Umar Muhammad said the impoverished African nation, which has been unable to meet debt repayments in full since the early 1980's, wanted all loans by foreign governments canceled.


DESIGNS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DESIGNS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,471,000
9,035,000
Net inc
1,000,000
869,000
Share earns
.19
.22
Shares outst
5,227,073
4,768,934
9mo sales
26,146,000
17,925,000
Net inc
1,354,000
896,000
Share earns
.28
.22


Avram Weiss Plays Handel, Grieg and Bach
LEAD: The first notes of Avram Weiss's violin recital at Merkin Concert Hall Sunday evening - the vaulting arpeggio that opens Handel's familiar D major sonata - bespoke musical confidence and authority, and these qualities stayed with him through the evening, even though it quickly became apparent that technical problems would limit his expression.


MERCHANTS CAPITAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCHANTS CAPITAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
146,000
-
Per share
.03
-
9mo net inc
2,650,000
-
Per share
.55
-
Comparable year-ago figures are not available because the company changed its financial reporting from a fiscal year ending April 30 to a calendar year ending Dec.


CURBS ON SMOKING ARE STRUCK DOWN IN NEW YORK STATE
LEAD: An emotional nine-month legal battle over stricter smoking regulations in New York State ended today as the state's highest court declared the regulations invalid because they had been issued without the approval of the Legislature.


Larry King's Interviews, on CNN
LEAD: ''LARRY KING LIVE'' is a radio program that just happens to be on television.
In fact, it suggests as much itself.
When it begins each weekday night, on the Cable News Network at 9 o'clock, it does so without musical fanfare, fancy graphics or shouts and screams from an audience.
Instead, we see a microphone, and then we see Mr.


MSA REALTY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MSA REALTY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,756,414
2,107,454
Net inc
586,891
66,497
Share earns
.07
.01
Shares outst
8,515,577
4,932,183
9mo rev
6,764,794
12,177,812
Net inc
1,302,760
b2,965,340
Share earns
.16
.66
Shares outst
8,110,179
6,242,552


BURNUP &amp; SIMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURNUP &amp; SIMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
54,962,000
55,593,000
Net inc
2,452,000
b2,832,000
Share earns
.18
.20
6mo rev
106,956,000
106,089,000
Net inc
4,544,000
b4,860,000
Share earns
.33
.37


Corrections
LEAD: An article from Denver yesterday about President Reagan's drive to win Senate approval for a treaty banning medium- and shorter-range nuclear missiles misstated the scope of the treaty.
It would ban all such weapons in the American and Soviet arsenals, not just those based in Europe.


U.S. Panel Removes Obstacle to Nuclear Plant
LEAD: The Nuclear Regulatory Commission today voted 4 to 1 to remove a major obstacle to the preliminary licensing of the Seabrook nuclear plant in New Hampshire.


U.S. Envoy Assails Cuba on Rights at U.N.
LEAD: The American chief delegate to the United Nations told the Security Council today that riots by Cuban prisoners were an ''action of despair'' that described ''louder than any words'' the poor human rights situation in Cuba.


Chess Game Adjourned; Draw Likely
LEAD: The 17th game of the world chess championship between Gary Kasparov and the challenger, Anatoly Karpov, was adjourned today after 42 moves.


Ultrasound Held to Detect Down's Syndrome
LEAD: Doctors say they have found a way to use ultrasound tests to spot fetuses with Down's syndrome.
But other experts warned that the technique should still be considered experimental.


Can't We Aid New York's Homeless Without Locking Them Up?
LEAD: To the Editor:


BRE PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRE PROPERTIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,058,000
8,706,000
Net inc
3,105,000
3,666,000
Share earns
.40
.47
The company was formerly Bankamerica Realty Investors and became independent under its new name effective Oct.


Books: View of Theater
LEAD: THE SHIFTING POINT. By Peter Brook.


Security Pacific
LEAD: Security Pacific Corporation said it would consolidate the administrative functions of its three international securities operations.
As part of that integration, Anthony Greayer, the chief executive of Hoare Govett Ltd., the London stock trader primarily owned by the bank holding company, has resigned.


WICKES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WICKES CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
896,363,000
547,809,000
Net inc
b33,306,000
c38,781,000
Share earns
.67
.79
Shares outst
47,809,000
47,821,000
9mo sales
2,644,401,000
1,388,087,000
Net inc
b172,237,000
c86,265,000
Share earns
3.53
1.87


STAGE: MUSIC FROM PRISON
LEAD: LIKE a clear stream surging around all the words spoken during the evening, Frank Morgan's alto saxophone infuses ''Prison-Made Tuxedos,'' his music-theater collaboration with the writer George Trow, with a steady, vibrant current of emotion.


Thank-You Notes
LEAD: IN a prelude to Thanksgiving Day thank-you notes to sports people here several years ago, it was suggested that certain villains should be ignored on this holiday.
About a week later, one of the principal villains who had been mentioned was heard to say:


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. I once saw an advertisement for door hinges that raise the door slightly as it opens so that it won't rub against carpeting or where there is weatherstripping along the bottom edge.
Can you tell me where to find these hinges?
A.
You should be able to find them in some of the better hardware stores and lumberyards.


CASTLE &amp; COOKE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CASTLE &amp; COOKE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 10
1987
1986
Revenue
496,381,000
470,568,000
Net inc
b28,849,000
c22,096,000
Share earns
.53
.38
9mo rev
1,361,385,000
1,312,301,000
Net inc
b78,158,000
c75,797,000
Share earns
1.42
1.41


OIL-DRI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OIL-DRI CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,341,000
15,038,000
Net inc
1,593,000
1,513,000
Share earns
.29
.27


Pro Hockey Notebook; 18-Year-Old Sabre Is Making Transition
LEAD: Pierre Turgeon's English is still slightly broken, a reality that can often confound reporters during his first National Hockey League season.
Thankfully, he admits with a laugh, there hasn't been all that much to explain, certainly nothing for which to apologize.
His transition on the ice has been quietly fluent.


STUARTS DEPARTMENT STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STUARTS DEPARTMENT STORES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
32,131,000
32,178,000
Net inc
520,000
777,000
Share earns
.12
.18
9mo sales
88,870,000
79,696,000
Net loss
109,000
b1,222,000
Share earns
-
.28


BIRDFINDER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIRDFINDER CORP
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
46,359
-
Net loss
600,503
1,146,508
Yr rev
1,189,028
1,120,927
Net loss
1,130,945
2,409,502
The company said in the year-ago quarter it had negative revenue of $1,426,298 reflecting reverse sales resulting from audit adjustments.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Barnett Banks Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., said it had extended its $70-a-share tender offer for the common shares of First Fulton Bancshares Inc. through Jan. 8.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: A sleekly dressed woman in her 30's thought it odd when the physician she consulted about her frequent headaches asked if she usually tried to hold in her stomach.
The resulting muscular tension, he told her, could cause the pain in her head.
She has since allowed herself to show a little belly and, much to her surprise, has been virtually headache-free.


Philippine Typhoon Devastates Province; Toll Is Put at 1,600
LEAD: A typhoon struck the main Philippine island today, and a Roman Catholic priest said that local authorities and church groups put the number of dead at 1,600 in the province hit hardest.


SCIENTIFIC SOFTWARE-INTEROMP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCIENTIFIC SOFTWARE-INTEROMP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,799,000
4,706,000
Net inc
b34,000
c935,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
19,032,000
17,594,000
Net inc
b290,000
c15,590,000
Share earns
.08
-


Jazz: Tribute to Lopez
LEAD: ISRAEL (CACHAO) LOPEZ made lasting contributions to Latin music beginning in the late 1930's, when he helped introduce the hot Afro-Cuban rhythms of the mambo into the more urbane dance idiom known as the danzon.


Fire Halts Service at Grand Central
LEAD: Stranded commuters resting on an idle escalator last night as they waited for train service to resume out of Grand Central Terminal.
A track fire beneath Park Avenue interrupted Metro-North and Amtrak service for more than two hours during the evening rush hour.
Page B1. (NYT/Frankie Ziths)


Talks With Cubans in Louisiana Go On as Siege Is Said to Stabilize
LEAD: The standoff at a Federal detention center here, where Cuban refugees are holding 28 hostages, continued for the fourth day today.


Fire Strands Commuters At Rush Hour
LEAD: Tens of thousands of commuters heading home from New York City for the Thanksgiving holiday were stranded yesterday evening when a smoky electrical fire forced officials to halt rail service on three major railway lines.


Unwrapping Of Enigmas; Long After Spy Plane, Soviet Opens Its Door
LEAD: Twenty-seven years ago a Soviet-American summit meeting was angrily aborted because an American U-2 spy plane was shot down while trying to photograph the closed city of Sverdlovsk.
Next month a Soviet-


The Stage: 'Memories,' A Comedy
LEAD: PEARL CLEAGE'S ''Come and Get These Memories,'' which opens the repertory season of the Billie Holiday Theater in Brooklyn, is a type of comedy once popular in theater (it still is on television), in which the happy ending is everything, never mind how you get there.
This one is much less than the sum of its parts, and when it works, it does so only because director and cast concentrate on the characters and treat the muddle of incident as a distraction best ignored when it can be.


Ex-Manhattan,inc. Aide Joining Alfred A. Knopf
LEAD: Jane Amsterdam, a founding editor of Manhattan,inc., will join Alfred A. Knopf as a senior editor, according to an announcement yesterday from Sonny Mehta, president of Knopf.


SIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIS CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,826,731
4,378,399
Net inc
35,141
41,915
Share earns
.02
.03
9mo sales
26,182,455
11,593,865
Net loss
458,663
b59,632
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


MEETING WITH CHINA SET ON CAR VENTURE
LEAD: Officials of the Big Three automobile companies will meet with a delegation from China next month to discuss establishing a large joint venture to produce cars in that country.


Mayor of Charlestown, W.Va., Steps Down
LEAD: Mayor James E. (Mike) Roark has resigned, fulfilling the agreement he made with Federal prosecutors in pleading guilty last week to charges of possessing cocaine.


UNITED BANKSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED BANKSHARES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,769,000
1,080,000
Per share
.66
.40
9mo net inc
5,686,000
4,442,000
Per share
2.13
1.66


KELLWOOD CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KELLWOOD CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
196,300,000
157,250,000
Net inc
8,316,000
7,007,000
Share earns
.70
.62
Shares outst
11,797,331
11,386,917
6mo rev
355,976,000
296,426,000
Net inc
16,433,000
13,512,000
Share earns
1.39
1.20
Shares outst
11,818,426
11,279,081


Chicago's Mayor Washington Dies After a Heart Attack in His Office
LEAD: Harold Washington, the first black Mayor of Chicago, the nation's third largest city, died today of a heart attack.
He was 65 years old.


Jog Away Jet Lag? Maybe?
LEAD: Humans suffering from jet lag, their nervous systems battered by the unreasonable sunlight of a new time zone, may want to consider the recent experience of 20 hamsters at the University of Toronto.
A single three-hour round of exercise - running on a wheel in a cage - allowed hamsters to adjust to a severe case of jet lag surprisingly fast, within a day and a half.


Neediest Cases Fund Aids Woman's Fight
LEAD: Sometimes the public assistance checks did not come, the young mother remembered, and sometimes her children did not eat.


U.S. Judge Steps Aside In P.L.O. Office Case
LEAD: Citing a possible conflict of interest, Federal District Judge Stanley Sporkin today stepped down from a case on whether the Government should be allowed to close an information office for the Palestine Liberation Organization here because the organizastion advocates terrorism.


ARCHITECT TRIES ON NEW SHOES
LEAD: AT a recent lecture he delivered, the Princeton architect Michael Graves found that his shoes were attracting more than their share of interest.
Not surprising, since Mr.
Graves is appearing in an advertisement citing ''the significance of classic structures,'' in which footwear by the Dexter Shoe Company of West Newton, Mass., is paired with the architect's post-modernist ideas.


Incomes Rose 1.7% In October
LEAD: A surge in farm subsidy payments helped drive Americans' personal incomes up 1.7 percent in October, the Commerce Department said today.


DAWSON GEOPHYSICAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAWSON GEOPHYSICAL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,596,000
1,104,000
Net loss
116,000
246,000
Yr rev
5,366,000
7,263,000
Net loss
1,215,000
913,000


SYSTEMS &amp; COMPUTER TECHOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYSTEMS &amp; COMPUTER TECHOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,969,000
10,224,000
Net loss
b356,000
c4,323,000
Yr rev
42,037,000
41,523,000
Net inc
b100,000
c14,810,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $1,560,000 for both periods, and latest year includes a previously announced settlement with the company's former directors' and officers' liability insurance carrier of $3,879,000, net of reserves.


MHP MACHINES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MHP MACHINES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,469,000
4,050,000
Net loss
181,000
146,000
Yr sales
13,749,000
15,731,000
Net loss
b685,000
c14,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Includes a tax credit of $75,000.


SOUTHERN STARR BROADCASTNG GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN STARR BROADCASTNG GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,144,192
2,007,367
Net inc
16,886
382,592
Share earns
.01
.34


Yields Are Mixed
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, money market mutual funds and bank money market accounts were mixed for the week ended yesterday in the absence of any clear economic signals.


SOONER FEDERAL S&amp;L ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOONER FEDERAL S&amp;L ASSN (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b748,000
bc112,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Includes a loan loss provision of $708,000 for this year's first quarter loss while year-ago first quarter net was after a loan loss provision of $675,000.


Met Asks Obraztsova To Join 'Trovatore' Cast
LEAD: Elena Obraztsova, the Soviet mezzo-soprano who has been absent from the Metropolitan Opera for eight years because of the suspension of cultural exchanges following the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, will return to the house next week.
She will sing Azucena in ''Il Trovatore'' with Joan Sutherland and Luciano Pavarotti on Tuesday, on the evening of Dec.


Bomb Goes Off in Kuwait
LEAD: An explosion apparently caused by a small bomb ripped through a building housing an American insurance company in downtown Kuwait today, the Kuwaiti news agency reported.
There were no casualties.


CINEPLEX ODEON reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINEPLEX ODEON (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
149,635,000
94,276,000
Net inc
12,825,000
6,796,000
Share earns
.29
.17
Shares outst
43,438,903
37,677,976
9mo rev
400,020,000
241,118,000
Net inc
28,135,000
14,249,000
Share earns
.66
.51
Shares outst
41,101,311
25,981,928


TEMCO HOME HEALTH CARE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEMCO HOME HEALTH CARE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,386,000
3,253,000
Net inc
105,000
135,000
Share earns
.04
.05
9mo sales
9,985,000
9,719,000
Net inc
382,000
b246,000
Share earns
.15
.10
b-Includes a non-recurring pretax charge of $240,000.


MACHINE TECHNOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACHINE TECHNOLOGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,765,453
3,728,109
Net inc
133,346
b498,802
Share earns
.02
-
Yr sales
17,773,708
15,372,131
Net loss
2,524,847
1,427,552
b-Net loss


WARRANTECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARRANTECH CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
739,932
269,582
Net inc
24,837
b191,901
6mo rev
1,606,385
446,816
Net inc
111,438
b432,576
b-Net loss


Investigation Continues
LEAD: The Southwest Conference is investigating reports that Randy Thornton, a safety for the University of Houston, played in two football games this month while he was ineligible.
Fred Jacoby, the conference commissioner, said yesterday that he could not say whether Houston would have to forfeit victories over the University of Texas and Temple University because of Thornton's possibly illegal participation.


From North Korea: Faint Rays of Light
LEAD: Is it possible to imagine a North Korea whose leaders admit their economic difficulties, acknowledge South Korea's successes and disavow the dream of reuniting the peninsula under their strange brand of Communism?
That's the remarkable portrait painted by Selig Harrison, an American writer, in The New York Times last Sunday, after a recent stay in


Irish Aid Funds for Ethiopia
LEAD: Ireland announced today that it would provide $375,000 in emergency aid for Ethiopia.
The Irish Foreign Ministry said the funds would be chaneled through Red Cross and United Nations relief agencies. ''Indications are that the situation could be as bad as in the 1984-1985 famine when an estimated one million people died,'' it said.


VEGA BIOTECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VEGA BIOTECHNOLOGIES
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,421,000
1,093,000
Net inc
4,000
b85,000
6mo rev
2,895,000
1,923,000
Net loss
200,000
241,000
b-Net loss  The company said the net loss in the latest 6 months is primarily due to a $209,000 writeoff in the first quarter as a result of a terminated public offering.


ASHES OF GARBAGE ARE FOUND TOXIC
LEAD: Ashes from incinerated garbage contain significant amounts of lead, cadmium, dioxin and other toxic substances that can threaten health and the environment, according to a report prepared for the Environmental Protection Agency.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: WOBBLY chairs are more than just annoying; a weakened chair can lead to accidents.
Most wobbly chairs have broken glue joints.
Either the glue holding the pieces together has deteriorated with age, or so much strain has been placed on the glue that the seam it forms between the pieces fractures.


ENTRE COMPUTER CENTERS reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENTRE COMPUTER CENTERS (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
27,293,000
15,121,000
Net inc
1,092,000
b4,614,000
Share earns
.11
-
Yr rev
86,005,000
66,893,000
Net inc
101,000
b8,007,000
Share earns
.01
-


MILWAUKEE INSURANCE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MILWAUKEE INSURANCE GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b955,000
c2,099,000
Per share
.31
.51
Shares outst
3,062,030
2,000,000
9mo net inc
b4,345,000
c4,084,000
Per share
1.42
2.04
Shares outst
3,061,451
2,000,000


ASK COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASK COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,609,000
20,344,000
Net inc
1,882,000
1,775,000
Share earns
.14
.14
Shares outst
13,081,000
12,907,000
The company said results include the operations of NCA Corp., which was acquired effective Aug.


SUN COAST PLASTICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUN COAST PLASTICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,341,000
2,605,000
Net inc
b68,000
b127,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Includes a tax credit of $23,000 and $57,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


QUADREX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUADREX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,408,000
12,992,000
Net inc
14,000
b774,000
9mo rev
44,834,000
43,967,000
Net inc
127,000
b549,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Comex Case Fines Paid
LEAD: The Commodity Exchange and its clearing association have paid $105,000 in fines to settle Federal charges regarding the default of the Volume Investors Corporation in 1985, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission said.


Parents Held in Burglary
LEAD: A man served as a lookout and his wife drove a getaway car as the couple sent their 10-year-old son to hold up an audio store Tuesday night, the police said.
The couple were being held today on charges of burglary, criminal conspiracy and corruption of a minor.
They were identified as Howard Bucahanon, 34, and his wife, Stormy Bucahanon, 29.


As Splendors Erode, Luxor Spruces Up
LEAD: This ancient city beside a placid Nile, long used to tending its plundered antiquity, has become embroiled in a modest effort to build a little modernity, too, so as to beautify the visage it presents to visitors when the sightseeing is done.


After Quakes, Coping With Fear and Damage
LEAD: Residents of Southern California struggled today to overcome fear and to repair damage from two severe earthquakes as aftershocks died down.


DEVILS TOP OILERS IN OVERTIME N.H.L.
LEAD: Aaron Broten scored 13 seconds into overtime to give the New Jersey Devils an 8-7 victory over the Edmonton Oilers tonight.


Bonds Only Collectors Love
LEAD: Last month's stock market collapse may have left a trail of walking wounded on Wall Street, but it pales when compared with the financial flops of Victorian times.
A reminder of those freebooting, all-or-nothing days surfaced Tuesday at Sotheby's, the London auction house, when a huge cache of 75,000 antique bonds was sold for about $630,000.


1987 Turkeys: Sales Soaring As Prices Fall
LEAD: Never have Americans eaten so much turkey.


AMERICAN COLLOID reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN COLLOID
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
22,910,000
18,827,000
Net inc
1,048,000
406,000
Share earns
.41
.16
9mo sales
61,726,000
57,355,000
Net inc
2,358,000
1,773,000
Share earns
.92
.69


Translation Prize Awarded
LEAD: Richard Howard, poet, translator and critic, has been awarded the annual translation prize by the French-American Foundation for his English version of George Duby's ''William Marshal: The Flower of Chivalry,'' published by Pantheon Books.
An honorable mention was given to Nancy Amphoux for her translation of ''Cat's Grin'' by Francois Maspero, published by Alfred A.


SEAHAWK OIL INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEAHAWK OIL INTERNATIONAL INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
658,865
442,247
Net loss
98,905
749,345
9mo rev
2,192,625
1,405,485
Net loss
b462,888
1,278,334
b-Includes $266,053 in costs from dry hole drilling costs.


Tobacco Stock Prices Drop Sharply
LEAD: Tobacco company stocks fell sharply yesterday amid investor nervousness that some potentially damaging disclosures may be imminent.


Kew's Faceted Conservatory Is Home to 10 Microclimates
LEAD: The gale that ripped across southern England on Oct. 16 hit Kew Gardens in west London just before 4 A.M.
By sunrise the magnificent 300-acre garden was scarcely recognizable.
About 1,000 trees had been destroyed or badly damaged.


Thanksgiving
LEAD:  NEW YORK  Parade: Begins at 9 A.M. at 77th Street and Central Park West.
Proceeds down Central Park West to Columbus Circle and then down Broadway to 34th Street.
Parking: Sunday rules in effect.
Sanitation: No refuse collection or street sweeping.
Government offices: Federal, state and municipal offices closed.


SMUCKER (J.M.) CO (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SMUCKER (J.M.) CO (N)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
82,219,000
78,119,000
Net inc
5,508,000
4,320,000
Share earns
.75
.59
6mo sales
159,328,000
147,481,000
Net inc
11,695,000
8,808,000
Share earns
1.59
1.20


AMERICAN HEALTH PROPERIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN HEALTH PROPERIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,887,000
-
Net inc
4,329,000
-
Share earns
.39
-
9mo rev
19,157,000
-
Net inc
10,582,000
-
Share earns
.95
-
The company said the 9 months represents year-to-date; year-to-date results reflect only 40 days of operations in the first quarter, which followed the company's inception Feb.


GENERAL AMER INVESTORS reports earnings for As of Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL AMER INVESTORS (NYSE)
As of Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
401,752,081
307,483,014
Per share
24.84
20.44
Shares outst
16,171,086
15,046,767
The net income figures represent net assets.
The net assets per share are after capital gain distributions of $1.77 per share paid in December 1986 and 38 cents per share paid in March and an income dividend of 36 cents paid in March.


UNIFAST INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIFAST INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,007,070
5,546,779
Net inc
383,424
178,392
Share earns
.23
.12
Shares outst
1,675,132
1,470,530
9mo sales
20,186,728
16,815,328
Net inc
830,772
729,752
Share earns
.50
.50
Shares outst
1,675,132
1,470,530


Boy in Abuse Case Will Remain With Mother
LEAD: Travis Christian Smigiel, the 17-month-old boy formerly known as Mitchell Steinberg, was placed in the permanent custody of his mother yesterday by a judge in Manhattan.


Europe May Lift Steel Quotas
LEAD: The European Community proposed today to scrap quotas for most steel products by July 1988 and return the industry to free-market competition.


Bird Returns as Celtics Pound Hawks
LEAD: Larry Bird, back after a four-game absence with Achilles' tendinitis, came off the bench and sparked a decisive spurt in the fourth quarter tonight, helping the Boston Celtics to a 117-102 victory over the Atlanta Hawks.


Rightists in Salvador Challenge Duarte
LEAD: In language recalling the harshest days of political confrontation in El Salvador, rightist political leaders called on their supporters today to prepare to fight the Government no matter what the consequences might be.


THE HAMMACHER GADGETEERS
LEAD: After trying out a few thousand possibilities, Hammacher Schlemmer &amp; Company has come up with its annual list of Christmas surprises - for instance, the new remote-control videocassette recorder for the forgetful viewer that can be programmed by telephone, and the ski helmet for the tuned-in sportsman that comes with its own built-in two-way radio.


JOHNSTOWN AMER COS reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSTOWN AMER COS (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
23,810,000
34,681,000
Net loss
14,320,000
b416,000
Share earns
-
.04
Yr rev
117,464,000
145,477,000
Net loss
12,586,000
b1,898,000
Share earns
-
.17


Ex-Teacher Charged in Sex Abuse of Boys
LEAD: A Long Island man was charged today with molesting boys enrolled in a school he operated in his house, according to the Nassau County police.


The Newest Sixer
LEAD: Albert King, the former Net, on the 76er bench Tuesday night after signing as a free agent. (AP)


Going Crazy on Schools
LEAD: What a week for the troubled New York City school system!
Governor Cuomo suggests revamping the Board of Education, giving control to the mayor . . .
Mayor Koch says he wants responsibility for the schools and wants to appoint a Hispanic to the board . . . board members call for its restructuring.


Reliance Offering To Buy Days Inns
LEAD: A subsidiary of Reliance Group Holdings Inc. proposed to take private the Days Inns Corporation, one of the nation's largest hotel and motel chains, in a deal worth around $153.3 million.
Reliance Capital Group, the company's principal shareholder, offered $7.50 a share in cash for the 16.14 million common shares it does not already own, plus preferred stock with a face value of $2 per share.


Erick Hawkins to Get Scripps Dance Award
LEAD: Erick Hawkins is to receive the 1988 Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival Award.
Mr.
Hawkins will be given the award, established to honor American modern dance choreographers who have made a lifetime contribution to the art form, in a presentation ceremony and performance on June 15 at the festival in Durham, N


Price of Copper Soars; Other Metals Also Gain
LEAD: Copper futures prices soared again yesterday, reaching life-of-contract highs for a second consecutive day and prompting New York Commodity Exchange officials to raise margin limits to discourage further price speculation.


Leader Who Personified Black Rise to Urban Power
LEAD: Mayor Harold Washington, who died here today after a heart attack in his office, was one of the nation's most visible symbols of urban black political power, a combative, street-smart politician who in 1983 became the first black to be elected Mayor of Chicago.


F.D.A. Approves the Testing Of Second Vaccine for AIDS
LEAD: A second experimental vaccine that researchers hope could prevent infection with the AIDS virus was approved today for human testing by the Food and Drug Administration.


RISE TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RISE TECHNOLOGY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
204,000
504,000
Net loss
1,229,000
213,305
9mo rev
1,457,000
1,343,000
Net loss
2,637,000
313,000


KINCAID FURNITURE CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KINCAID FURNITURE CO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
23,938,548
21,062,199
Net inc
b249,676
779,172
Share earns
.07
.23
9mo rev
66,635,397
56,654,802
Net inc
1,716,270
2,013,737
Share earns
.49
.59


Fire Unions Sue Over Koch Emergency Plan
LEAD: New York City's firefighter and fire officer unions filed a joint lawsuit yesterday challenging Mayor Koch's decision to subordinate the Fire Department role to the police role at all emergencies except fires.


Storm Leaves Woodlands In Shambles
LEAD: From the Taconic State Parkway, Ray Helm's pine plantation looks as if it was attacked by a maniac wielding a chain saw.
What was once a lush, seven-acre pine forest on a gentle hill is now a field of jagged stumps.


Suriname Holds an Election, The First Since the '80 Coup
LEAD: Surinamese voted today in the first national elections since a group of army sergeants seized power from a parliamentary government in 1980.


WASHINGTON TALK: Human Rights; U.A.W. Takes a Look At Pretoria's Justice
LEAD: For several years, Washington has struggled, without great success, over how best to spur changes in South Africa's apartheid Government.
In September 1986, it imposed an array of penalties against Pretoria, including denial of bank loans to South African Government agencies, a ban on strategic mineral imports and a cessation of direct airline flights.


Mental Health; Trying to Face Reality? It May Be the Last Thing That the Doctor Orders
LEAD: A bit of illusion, of clinging to false hopes and inflated self-regard, may be the bedrock of psychological health, according to evidence emerging from a broad range of scientific studies.
Certain positive illusions, the data suggest, promote a sense of well-being and happiness and the capacity for productive work.


The Limits on Action by a Public Health Agency
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the New York State Court of Appeals decision striking down smoking rules imposed by the Public Health Council.
The majority opinion was written by Judge Vito J. Titone and the dissent was written by Judge Joseph W. Bellacosa.
MAJORITY OPINION


TV Reviews; Jerome Kern's Music at White House
LEAD: THIS year's series of ''In Performance at the White House,'' a classy public-television photo opportunity for Washington's top political echelons, has been focusing exclusively on popular American composers.
George Gershwin was one.
Cole Porter was another.
And now, tonight at 10 on Channel 13, there is Jerome Kern (1885-1945).


2 Seized in Dozen Muggings At 23d Street PATH Station
LEAD: Two suspects in a dozen muggings at the 23d Street PATH station in Manhattan were arrested yesterday by the Port Authority Police, officials said.


COLLEAGUES APPLAUD JACOBI'S QUIET CRAFT
LEAD: When Derek Jacobi opened on Broadway in ''Breaking the Code'' last week, his performance in the starring role won praise not only from the critics, but also from his peers - among them an opening night audience that included such actors as Bernadette Peters, Frank Langella, Jeremy Irons, Sinead Cusack, Jim Dale, Rex Harrison and Simon


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE SOCRATIC METHOD. By Michael Levin. 304 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $17.95.


NYTEST ENVIRONMENTAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NYTEST ENVIRONMENTAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
822,389
565,746
Net loss
75,387
37,332
9mo rev
2,413,442
1,794,165
Net inc
9,596
b20,610
b-Net loss


CATO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CATO CORP
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
47,470,000
43,009,000
Net loss
1,245,000
b1,333,000
Share earns
-
.10
9mo rev
152,981,000
132,653,000
Net inc
4,261,000
c5,739,000
Share earns
.29
.41
b-Net income


PARISIAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARISIAN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
62,020,000
56,883,000
Net inc
2,504,000
2,298,000
Share earns
.33
.31
9mo rev
168,684,000
153,572,000
Net inc
4,351,000
5,279,000
Share earns
.58
.74


1 KILLED, 5 INJURED AND 16 ARRESTED AT RAP CONCERT
LEAD: A rap music concert at the New Haven Coliseum erupted into a melee Tuesday night in which one spectator was stabbed to death, five others were injured and 16 were arrested.


Home Shopping Buys Brokerage
LEAD: Home Shopping Network Inc., the leading shop-from-home television retailer, said it had purchased a regional brokerage firm and a seat on the New York Stock Exchange.
Joseph Connolly, chief financial officer for the company, which is based in Clearwater, Fla., said both purchases were part of previously disclosed plans to offer such financial services as insurance, credit cards, stocks, bonds and mutual funds to customers by mid-1988.


WILSHIRE OIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILSHIRE OIL CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,887,000
1,318,000
Net inc
102,000
30,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
5,896,000
5,841,000
Net inc
480,000
b8,121,000
Share earns
.06
-
b-Net loss


Potential Buyer For Shoe-Town
LEAD: Shoe-Town Inc., a discount footwear chain, said a potential buyer had indicated an interest in the company.
The news sent Shoetown shares up $1.625, to $7, on the New York Stock Exchange.
At yesterday's closing price, the sale price would be about $75 million.
Shoe-Town, which operates 200 stores in 11 states, earned $5.5 million last year on sales of $142.4 million.


BIOSEARCH MEDICAL PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOSEARCH MEDICAL PRODUCTS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,721,704
4,366,175
Net inc
b288,099
c320,014
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
14,415,652
13,282,497
Net inc
b365,041
c717,197
Share earns
.06
-


PETROLEUM HEAT &amp; POWER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PETROLEUM HEAT &amp; POWER (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
43,895,000
24,713,000
Net loss
9,366,000
5,377,000
9mo sales
219,810,000
199,560,000
Net loss
2,237,000
b1,832,000
Share earns
-
.12
b-Net income


SCIENTIFIC TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCIENTIFIC TECHNOLOGIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,395,275
1,466,929
Net inc
171,572
97,100
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
24,031,778
23,913,545
9mo rev
4,348,917
4,405,369
Net inc
558,023
239,272
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
24,027,722
23,913,545


Older Men Better Off, Study Says
LEAD: The oldest Americans are more than twice as likely to be women, but socially and economically it still seems to be a man's world, a private study says.


Quarterbacks Featured
LEAD: Don McPherson of Syracuse and Mike Perez of San Jose State will be the opposing quarterbacks in the 63d East-West Shrine Game scheduled for Jan. 16 at Stanford Stadium in California.


Cardinal Question in Jewish-Christian Dialogue
LEAD: To the Editor:


WORKINGMENS CO-OPERATIVE reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WORKINGMENS CO-OPERATIVE
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Net inc
602,000
b839,000
Per share
.48
-
6mo net inc
1,120,000
b1,164,000
Per share
.89
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $410,000 and $546,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Saints to Print Playoff Tickets
LEAD: For only the second time in the club's 21-year history, the New Orleans Saints have been told to print playoff tickets for two games that could be played in the Louisiana Superdome.


TPEX EXPLORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TPEX EXPLORATION
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
120,464
111,480
Net loss
50,263
64,118


MONITEK TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONITEK TECHNOLOGIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,647,275
1,102,454
Net inc
75,259
b10,324
Share earns
.03
-
6mo rev
2,785,818
2,156,159
Net inc
71,284
b25,514
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss


CANNON GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANNON GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
116,891,000
-
Net loss
19,392,000
-
9mo rev
322,601,000
-
Net loss
41,422,000
-
The company said comparative figures cannot be provided because it determined that its impractical to restate its financial statements for prior periods because of constraints of time, costs and availability of accounting records.


6 Found in Nursing Home Filth, Florida Says
LEAD: Six elderly people, one with deformities caused by neglect, others who had been found strapped into urine-soaked chairs, have been placed in state custody after being removed from an unlicensed nursing home, state officials say.


Reality and the Light Fantastic
LEAD: He is elegant, whether fox-trotting in a sleek tuxedo or doing the twist in fashionably baggy clothes, his face wreathed in a tantalizingly inscrutable smile.
She is elegant, waltzing through the night in a cloud of marabou feathers and wistful fragility.
He is Pierre Dulaine.
She is Yvonne Marceau.


INSIDE
LEAD:  The Health Page


U.S. to Send Official Delegation To Observe Haiti's Voting Sunday
LEAD: President Reagan will send an official delegation to Haiti this weekend to observe its first presidential election in 30 years, the White House announced today.


LAUREN SHEETS HAVE 40'S CHIC
LEAD: THE introductions of the new bed linens that will be in stores next season are never modest.
Extravagantly dressed beds in showrooms are meant to transport buyers into never-never land, far from the humdrum of budgets and thread counts.
The crop introduced this month was no exception.
For his first foray into sheet design Hubert de Givenchy, Martex's celebrity catch, journeyed to a French chateau, while at J.P.


Simon C. Kregar; Architect, 74
LEAD: Simon C. Kregar, an architect, died of an aneurism last Thursday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 74 years old and lived in Queens.


Boat Racer in Florida Charged in Drug Case
LEAD: Benjamin Barry Kramer, an international powerboat racing champion and a builder of racing boats, was charged today in a 44-count indictment stemming from a Federal investigation into drug smuggling.


LAND OF LINCOLN S &amp; L reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAND OF LINCOLN S &amp; L (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,419,000
3,311,000
Per share
.43
1.01


Talking Deals; Premium's Size In Takeovers
LEAD: WHEN stock prices tumbled Oct. 19, many a takeover expert went back to the drawing boards.
After all, a company is only worth its value on the stock exchange and the extra premium a potential acquirer is willing to pay.


INACOMP COMPUTER CENTERS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INACOMP COMPUTER CENTERS (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
48,016,000
39,822,000
Net inc
764,000
188,000
Share earns
.11
.04


Francis Keil Decker, Lawyer, 84
LEAD: Francis Keil Decker, a lawyer active in Westchester County civic affairs, died of leukemia Monday at his home in Somers, N.Y.
He was 84 years old.


Prudently, Prague Is Getting in Step
LEAD: Led by President Gustav Husak, who dismantled the innovations of 1968 under the watchful eyes of a Soviet occupation army, Czechoslovakia is slowly getting in line with the general restructuring stimulated by Mikhail S. Gorbachev's program in the Soviet Union.


Italians Strike Against Deficit-Cutting Drive
LEAD: Italy's labor federations staged a nationwide general strike today in an attempt to unify their fractured ranks with a protest against the Government's deficit-reduction program.


IN MANHATAN, A TRIP TO THE TROPICS
LEAD: IT'S not just the mix of merchandise, it's also the message.
For overstressed New Yorkers, the next best thing to a trip to the tropics could be a stop at Tropica Island Traders, a new shop where the sights, sounds and smells that evoke distant isles include Hawaiian coffee; seashells; fresh orchids; painted wooden Balinese fish, left, and videos of rolling waves.


Knicks Finally Win on Road
LEAD: Mark Jackson and Kenny Walker led an 18-7 surge in the fourth quarter tonight as the Knicks defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers, 104-101.


Metro Matters; TV in the Court: Titillation Or Education?
LEAD: Stephen Murphy, a defense lawyer in the Howard Beach trial, was asked yesterday whether the presence of television cameras in the courtroom would inspire him to behave any more flamboyantly than he already does. ''Get serious,'' Mr.
Murphy grinned. ''I don't think you could be more flamboyant than I usually am without getting the judge down off the bench with me,'' he said.


PRIMAGES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIMAGES INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
930,466
1,506,244
Net loss
420,337
336,509
9mo sales
3,281,643
4,666,713
Net loss
777,410
1,219,037


6 ISRAELI SOLDIERS DIE IN ARAB RAID
LEAD: At least one Arab guerrilla landed a motorized hang glider just outside an Israeli Army base in northern Israel on Wednesday night and killed six Israeli soldiers and wounded at least seven others before being shot dead, Israeli military officials said today.


STRAWBRIDGE &amp; CLOTHIER reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STRAWBRIDGE &amp; CLOTHIER (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
182,990,000
167,587,000
Net inc
3,247,000
2,433,000
Share earns
.44
.33
9mo sales
526,592,000
473,474,000
Net inc
8,329,000
5,959,000
Share earns
1.13
.81


LIFE OF INDIANA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIFE OF INDIANA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b569,166
c615,766
Share earns
-
.11
9mo net loss
b1,459,959
c1,339,352
Share earns
-
.24
b-After realized investment gains of $21,500 for the quarter and $112,910 for the 9 months.


SIZELER PROPERTY INVESTORS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIZELER PROPERTY INVESTORS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,399,000
-
Net inc
1,076,000
-
Share earns
.29
-
9mo rev
6,399,000
-
Net inc
2,862,000
-
Share earns
.86
-
The company went public in January.


Korea in Airline Talks
LEAD: South Korea's Transport Ministry said today that it had held talks with several airlines that want to start service here before the 1988 Seoul Olympics.
The interested airlines include British Airways, Air Canada and Dragon Air, which is based in Hong Kong, the officials said.
In addition, All Nippon Airways of Japan, Gulf Air of the United Arab Emirates and Air-India are conducting studies on service to Seoul, the officials said.


Trailmobile to Bid For Fruehauf Unit
LEAD: The Trailmobile Group of Companies, of Brantford, Ontario, intends to make a tender offer of $39 (Canadian), or about $29.70 (United States), for each of the outstanding shares of Fruehauf Canada, the company said.


WESPERCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESPERCORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,056,000
2,549,000
Net inc
b8,000
c95,000
b-Includes a one-time credit for deferred rent of about $240,000.
c-Net loss


Bond Prices Weaken Again Healthy Data Chill Market
LEAD: Bond prices weakened again yesterday, pulled down by the release of positive economic data.


DRAMATIC TOUCH OF GLASS
LEAD: ''GLASS blocks can change the whole feeling of an apartment,'' said Bernard Gold, co-owner of New York Builders Supply Corporation. ''They open up space and let light through, while still keeping privacy.''


Placido Domingo Ferrer, Baritone, 80
LEAD: Placido Domingo Ferrer, a baritone who was a world-famous zarzuela performer and the father of the tenor Placido Domingo, died of a heart attack on Sunday at Hospital Espanol in Mexico City.
He was 80 years old.


Winter Palace 'Stormed' Only in a Soviet Movie
LEAD: To the Editor:


Howard U. Sues, Asks Playoff Halt
LEAD: As expected, Howard University sued the National Collegiate Athletic Association today and asked a Federal judge to stop the Division I-AA playoffs this weekend because its team, with a 9-1 record, was excluded.


WESCO FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESCO FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,559,000
c3,497,000
Per share
.64
.49
9mo net inc
b10,006,000
c10,896,000
Per share
1.40
1.53
b-Includes a loss of $650,000 from the flood of a manufacturing facility for both periods; a gain of $959,000 and $1,148,000 on sales of securities for the quarter and 9 months, respectively; the 9 months also includes a writeoff of $1,935,000 on prepaid FSLIC insurance premiums.


2 Seized in Sale of Counterfeit Eau de Toilette
LEAD: A counterfeiting operation that made and distributed eau de toilette fragrance purported to be Opium, by Yves St.
Laurent Perfumes, has been broken up with the arrest of two men, Federal authorities announced yesterday.


Bonn Considers Ways To Stimulate Economy
LEAD: Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg said today that Bonn was considering some moves to spur West Germany's sluggish economic growth, but he reiterated that they would not include moving up a planned tax revision.


The Two Americas
LEAD: When we celebrate Thanksgiving, the America we think of is a generous country, optimistic, open.
It is the self-confident country that Thomas Jefferson had in mind when he said in his first inaugural:


Hutton Competition Intensifies as Deadline Nears
LEAD: The auction of E. F. Hutton &amp; Company is growing more intense as a Tuesday deadline for bids approaches, Wall Street professionals close to the situation said yesterday.


Audelco Awards Given For Black Theater
LEAD: Three productions won four awards each at the 15th annual Audelco Recognition Awards last week.
The prizes are presented by the Audience Development Committee to honor excellence in black theater.


Moscow Journal; At Co-op Cafe, More From Lenin Than Escoffier
LEAD: For years Andrei Anatolyevich Fyodorov could only fantasize beyond the steam tables of the state restaurant he ran, directing a staff of 380 workers through a vast, noisy operation.
He was yearning, he says, for the comforts of crisp napery, subtle ambiance and the ''dirty capitalist principles'' he now fondly emulates.


Bass Offers $602 Million For Bell
LEAD: The Bell &amp; Howell Company said yesterday that it had received an all-cash takeover offer of $602 million, or $64 a share, from a group led by the Texas investor Robert M. Bass and several key Bell &amp; Howell executives, including Gerald E. Schultz, the president and chief executive.


For Travelers, An Evening Of Miseries
LEAD: The food in the snack bar sold out, not to mention the beer.
The power failed, and the passengers sat in darkness.
A conductor said anyone who left the train would be electrocuted.


Holly Reconsiders
LEAD: The Holly Sugar Corporation, after agreeing to a merger proposal from an investor group before the stock market's plunge, said it was discussing renegotiating terms of the $95-a-share, or $106.4 million, deal.
Last month, Holly, based in Colorado Springs, had rejected a proposal from Plum Associates to lower the price of the acquisition to $85 a share in light of stock market volatility.


Tiny House, Big Design
LEAD: ARTHUR ANDERSSON faced a formidable challenge when he and Charles Moore bought their sloped, woody site in Austin, Tex.
Not many young architects build a house within swimming distance of their mentors.
There were also ''some unwritten rules,'' said Mr.
Andersson, who runs Mr.
Moore's Austin studio.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: NORMAN ROCKWELL'S famous painting of a Thanksgiving dinner makes a lot of children uncomfortable.
Everyone at the table - with the probable exception of the turkey, who was given no voice in the matter -looks as if he or she belongs.


Tamils Say 12 Indian Troops Were Killed in East Sri Lanka
LEAD: Tamil rebels said today that they killed 12 Indian soldiers in a major clash in eastern Sri Lanka, while officials said 9 militants had died.


Ovation for Knight
LEAD: Bob Knight received a standing ovation from 2,700 Indiana University basketball boosters yesterday after saying he was wrong to pull his team off the floor in an exhibition game against the Soviet Union last Saturday.
The Indiana coach did not mention the reprimand issued by the university the day before, nor was he asked about it when he took questions from the audience.


America's Cup Bid Validated
LEAD: A New York court issued a ruling yesterday that could mean a return to the big-boat era in America's Cup yacht racing and force the next series to be held in 1988, three years earlier than expected.


Fluke Manufacturing Names Chief Executive
LEAD: The John Fluke Manufacturing Company, which makes electronic test and measurement instruments, said yesterday that George Winn had been named chief executive.


TRUDY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRUDY CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,312,600
1,979,000
Net inc
70,700
26,700
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo rev
3,444,000
3,907,000
Net loss
38,300
b34,900
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in some editions on Saturday about reduced radiation levels outside a Queens radium plant misstated the results of Geiger-counter measurements last September.
At that time, the radiation was found to be as much as 40 times above what New York State regards as safe.


BROWN TRANSPORT reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROWN TRANSPORT (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 30
1987
1986
Revenue
50,980,000
48,140,000
Net loss
769,000
b1,679,000
Share earns
-
.33
9mo rev
150,217,000
143,640,000
Net inc
968,000
4,083,000
Share earns
.15
.79
Shares outst
6,517,500
5,150,000


TELEMUNDO GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELEMUNDO GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,253,000
-
Net loss
b13,964,000
-
9mo rev
57,678,000
-
Net loss
b40,304,000
-
b-Includes a charge of $3,483,000 for the extinguishment of debt.
The company began operations earlier this year.


CONVERGENT SOLUTIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONVERGENT SOLUTIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,796,886
933,323
Net inc
675,006
312,015
Share earns
.15
.13
Shares outst
4,528,011
2,405,025
Yr sales
4,335,312
2,500,147
Net inc
1,400,412
301,690
Share earns
.45
.13
Shares outst
3,106,865
2,380,925


MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY PRODCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY PRODCTS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
207,567
225,821
Net inc
3,693
b19,566
9mo sales
432,817
580,477
Net loss
104,789
71,995
b-Net loss


U.N. Chief May Drop Gulf Cease-Fire Effort
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar may abandon his effort to negotiate a cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war if an Iranian diplomat does not arrive here for talks by next week, United Nations officials and diplomats say.


Chief of C.I.A. Covert Operations, Criticized in Iran Affair, Resigns
LEAD: Clair George, chief of covert operations at the Central Intelligence Agency, submitted his resignation today effective at the end of the year, the agency said.


FINALCO GROUP reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FINALCO GROUP
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
57,892,000
72,153,000
Net loss
b1,660,000
c1,663,000
b-Includes a reversal of $590,000 in tax credits.
c-Includes a one-time gain of $1,537,000 from an accounting change.


Expert at Assault Trial Says Drug Was Factor
LEAD: A toxicologist called by the defense in the Howard Beach murder trial testified yesterday that Michael Griffith had been under the influence of cocaine when he dashed to his death on the Belt Parkway.


2 Convictions Upset As Court Cites Police For Lack of Lineups
LEAD: New York State's highest court overturned criminal convictions in two New York City cases today because police officers had allowed crime victims to identify suspects in situations other than police lineups.


H &amp; H OIL TOOL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*H &amp; H OIL TOOL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,457,000
2,157,000
Net inc
b237,000
cd2,475,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
8,366,000
9,438,000
Net loss
b1,082,000
d3,313,000
b-After an extraordinary charge from the writedown of equipment of $57,000 for the quarter and $688,000 for the 9 months.


SPRINGBOARD SOFTWARE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPRINGBOARD SOFTWARE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,206,000
2,601,000
Net loss
649,000
b1,128,000
Share earns
-
.47
9mo sales
4,859,000
5,495,000
Net loss
749,000
b1,239,000
Share earns
-
.53


For Sheik Yamani, Oil Is Not a Topic
LEAD: Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani, the elusive and legendary force behind Arab oil domination, turned up at Harvard Law School the other night to make his longest public statement since being ousted a year ago as Saudi Arabia's oil minister.


LORI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LORI CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
34,565,000
22,908,000
Net loss
389,000
b2,372,000
Share earns
-
.65
9mo sales
92,216,000
53,627,000
Net loss
2,224,000
b4,149,000
Share earns
-
.99


STANDARD HAVENS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD HAVENS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,705,359
16,765,766
Net loss
684,210
2,600,189
Yr sales
70,237,232
78,510,333
Net inc
b31,032
c3,165,063
Share earns
.01
-
b-Includes a gain of $1,351,000 on the initial public offering of stock by the company's majority-owned subsidiary, BHA Group Inc.


Sentence Pared in Home State Case
LEAD: The former president of the Home State Savings Bank had his prison sentence reduced today in return for guilty pleas to four charges resulting from the savings and loan institution's 1985 collapse.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 1987
LEAD:  International A2-13, A32


ALLIED SECURITY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIED SECURITY INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,635,114
15,398,044
Net inc
343,966
252,953
Share earns
.67
.48


Card Purchases Insured
LEAD: The American Express Company has begun to provide free limited insurance on most retail items bought with its domestic credit card.
Ed Cooperman, president of the company's Consumer Card Group, said the new service insures most articles against theft, fire, accidental damage or loss for 90 days after purchase.


AUTODESK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUTODESK INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
20,208,000
13,651,000
Net inc
5,436,000
3,018,000
Share earns
.23
.14
9mo rev
56,279,000
36,851,000
Net inc
14,133,000
8,160,000
Share earns
.62
.39


Esiason Endures a Nightmarish Season
LEAD: The players' strike strained a number of relationships, and none more so than the one between Boomer Esiason and the fans of the Cincinnati Bengals.


Armed Forces Report Safe Aviation Records
LEAD: For the second year in a row the armed forces had unusually safe flight records, but the number of deaths rose despite the relatively low number of accidents, reports show.


S&amp;K FAMOUS BRANDS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*S&amp;K FAMOUS BRANDS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,442,000
7,457,000
Net inc
200,000
102,000
Share earns
.10
.05
9mo sales
27,739,000
24,227,000
Net inc
743,000
472,000
Share earns
.36
.23
Corrected from yesterday's editions.


TUCKER HOLDING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TUCKER HOLDING
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
200,777
b56,090
Per share
-
.06
9mo net inc
509,832
98,717
Per share
.49
.11
b-Net income


PARENTS CHARGED IN DEAH OF YEAR-OLD GIRL
LEAD: The parents of a year-old Brooklyn girl who died earlier this week of malnutrition, pneumonia and dehydration were arrested last night and charged with criminally negligent homicide, the police said.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.69
6.77
N.A.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.70
5.77
5.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.20
6.14
5.41
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.77
8.72
6.97
30-YR.


Colangelo Won't Sell
LEAD: Jerry Colangelo, the president of the Phoenix Suns, who headed a group that bought the National Basketball Association club for a record $44.5 million last month, said he would turn down an offer to sell the team for $60 million.
Colangelo said he received the offer Tuesday from an out-of-town businessman he would not identify.


STAGE: 'RAKE OF SEVILLE'
LEAD: AFTER 350 years, the first play written about Don Juan -''El Burlador de Sevilla y El Convidado de Piedra'' (''The Rake of Seville and the Stone Guest'') by Tirso de Molina - still has more dramatic force than any other version of the famous story, and the stylish, modern-dress performance of it given in Spanish by the Repertorio Espanol at the Gramercy Arts


Edward Maxwell, 77, Real-Estate Executive
LEAD: Edward C. Maxwell, a realty and economic development executive, died of prostate cancer Sunday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Calendar: Crafts, Antiques, Workshops
LEAD:  Crafts Fair


MR. ROOTER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MR. ROOTER
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
685,065
435,725
Net loss
177,596
b38,025
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
1,773,554
1,338,623
Net loss
541,887
b57,771
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


A Quiz on Victorian Silver: Test Your Tableware Knowledge
LEAD: SOMETIME after the dawn of civilization and before the invention of plastic and Styrofoam, there was a glorious period when human beings ate and drank with utensils made of silver.


Ben C. Birdsall, Retired Arizona Judge, 64
LEAD: Ben C. Birdsall, a retired judge who presided over two of Arizona's most publicized criminal cases, died Sunday of cancer.
He was 64 years old.


Social Worker Took Children of Deaf Woman
LEAD: Two small children were taken from their mother, a 28-year-old deaf woman, and held in foster care for almost three weeks without authorization from the courts or the mother, New York City officials said yesterday.


Dow Drops 16.58 In Light Trading
LEAD: Stock prices fell yesterday in light pre-holiday trading enlivened by takeover news and a selloff in tobacco stocks.


Dollar Ends Day Mixed As Gold Edges Upward
LEAD: The dollar was little changed in light foreign-exchange trading yesterday as gold prices edged higher.


The House That Charles Moore Built: One Architect's Fantasy Kingdom
LEAD: THE Kingdom of What Can Be is located in a quiet neighborhood of Austin, Tex., in the grand, curving hallway of a wondrous house where breakfast is served amid armored pilaster warriors decked out in skirts, spears and epaulets.


Holiday Today: Many Closings
LEAD: Businesses, banks, exchanges and government offices will be closed today for Thanksgiving.


ZG ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZG ENERGY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
772,727
699,570
Net loss
155,635
499,370
9mo sales
2,189,454
2,662,198
Net loss
1,259,274
6,045,300
Year-ago results are restated due to financial reorganization.


Erie Mills Prepares for Debut at Met
LEAD: ''When I was 5,'' said Erie Mills, ''I thought I was going to be Shirley Temple.
At 12 I wanted to be Barbra Streisand.
I was certainly going the musical comedy route.''


SEAFOOD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEAFOOD INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
990,468
1,236,930
Net inc
175,537
57,494
The net equals less than l cent a share.


WEISFIELD'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEISFIELD'S INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,039,000
10,878,000
Net inc
33,000
71,000
Share earns
.03
.07
9mo sales
34,885,000
31,978,000
Net inc
136,000
107,000
Share earns
.12
.10


ANALOGIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANALOGIC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
34,824,280
45,569,367
Net inc
b1,328,000
3,496,362
Share earns
.08
.18
Yr rev
155,431,915
148,210,640
Net inc
b14,527,916
10,074,975
Share earns
.80
.53


ALPHA INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALPHA INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,771,000
16,361,000
Net loss
290,000
153,000
6mo sales
32,083,000
33,835,000
Net inc
18,000
b319,000
b-Net loss


Stranger Shakes Up Honolulu Politics
LEAD: A mysterious lawyer with a checkered past comes to Hawaii from the mainland and wins a dramatic fraud suit against the powerful silver-haired Mayor of Honolulu, threatening his anticipated bid for re-election.


Family of Slain Youth Files Negligence Suit
LEAD: The family of a 16-year-old boy killed on a camp trip last year filed suit against the camp and the parents of the accused murderer yesterday, charging them with negligence in allowing the alleged killer to attend camp despite his history of violent behavior.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Monday, about Manufacturers Hanover's plans to offer mutual funds to customers, misstated the timing of Chase Manhattan Bank's activity.


BOMBARDIER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOMBARDIER INC
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
345,900,000
393,600,000
Net inc
b25,200,000
c18,100,000
Share earns
.38
.34
9mo sales
1,010,000,000
715,000,000
Net inc
b58,200,000
c29,100,000
Share earns
.88
.55


Fees Held Back In Robins Case
LEAD: Federal District Judge Robert R. Merhige Jr. ordered today that lawyers in the A. H. Robins Company's bankruptcy case would receive no more fee payments until the case is over.


Mutual Funds Limited Stock Sales
LEAD: The mutual fund industry absorbed, rather than increased, much of the pressure to liquidate giant holdings of stocks on Oct. 19 by using billions of dollars in cash reserves to meet shareholder redemptions, the industry's trade group said today.


Cuban Refugees Adjust to Life in Jersey
LEAD: After hearing another news report of the prison rebellions by Cuban inmates fearing deportation, Jose Follaco vividly recalled his 21 months in prison upon his arrival in this country from Mariel.


NBC Is Said to Seek 25% of Turner Broadcasting
LEAD: The National Broadcasting Company and the Turner Broadcasting System are discussing a deal in which NBC would buy about 25 percent of the cable television network and entertainment company for approximately $400 million, people familiar with the talks said yesterday.


CANDIDATES SPLIT ON MISSILE TREATY
LEAD: Presidential candidates took sharply differing views of the treaty to eliminate shorter- and medium-range nuclear missiles today, underscoring a dispute that is expected to take on increased intensity in the 1988 campaign.


A No-Trump Game
LEAD: Donald Trump, the New York real estate tycoon, has rejected an invitation to play host to the 25th annual Democratic Congressional dinner next year, and for that all good Democrats should give thanks today and hereafter.


FIRST FINCL SAVINGS ASSN-PA.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30FLAMEMASTER CORP reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FINCL SAVINGS ASSN-PA.
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
249,000
332,000
Share earns
.22
-
The year-ago share earnings not available; the company went public in April.


HMG-COURTLAND PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HMG-COURTLAND PROPERTIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,462,698
2,876,919
Net loss
b693,845
cd384,610
Share earns
-
.32
9mo rev
7,992,828
8,612,218
Net loss
b171,261
d146,868
b-Includes gains from real estate sales of $925,319 for the quarter and $4,435,130 for the 9 months.


UNITED SAVINGS ASSOC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED SAVINGS ASSOC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
10,014
b125,580
Per share
.01
.16
yr net inc
233,334
b315,046
Per share
.30
.45
Shares outst
777,252
695,891
b-Includes a tax credit of $42,978.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Becker Advances: Boris Becker defeated Claudio Pistolesi of Italy, 6-1, 6-2, in a second-round match yesterday at the $150,000 Young Masters tournament in Friedrichshafen, West Germany.
The 20-year-old West German, who served several aces and was in total control of the match, has won all three of the previous Young Masters tournaments in Friedrichshafen.(AP)


5 Reagan-Gorbachev Sessions Are Planned in Summit Talks
LEAD: President Reagan's summit meeting with Mikhail S. Gorbachev will include five direct meetings as well as a state dinner at the White House, the Administration announced today.


BIOTHERAPEUTICS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOTHERAPEUTICS
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,399,634
838,823
Net loss
2,189,205
545,850
6mo rev
2,575,601
1,503,389
Net loss
3,673,505
1,019,507


NORTH AMERICAN VENTURES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH AMERICAN VENTURES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
96,880,000
-
Net loss
3,765,000
-
9mo rev
262,924,000
-
Net loss
10,520,000
-
Prior year figures are not comparable because the company went public in May 1986 and has made acquisitions since then.


National Christmas Tree Gets a 5-Point Star
LEAD: Barbara Bush, wife of the Vice President, with her grandchildren Jenna and Barbara, who were celebrating their sixth birthday, in a cherry picker yesterday as they examined an ornament which, earlier, had been placed by Mrs.
Bush atop a 32-foot-tall Colorado blue spruce on the Ellipse near the White House.


TRANNET CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANNET CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,231,600
4,378,553
Net inc
219,279
313,068
Share earns
.04
.05


A DOCTOR TREATS ANTIQUE RADIOS
LEAD: PETER THOMASHOW explained that by restoring old radios that he found in ''almost destroyed condition'' in flea markets and junk shops, he felt he was ''almost bringing them back from the dead.'' Dr.
Thomashow is a psychiatrist who is also an artist, and his latest project has a twofold purpose.
First, he puts the vintage radios -most date from the late 40's and the 50's - back into working order.


When Lincoln Had to Lift Flagging Spirits
LEAD: To the Editor:


When Shopping for a Down Comforter
LEAD: SHOPPING for a down comforter can be a confusing proposition.
Down bedding, often heavily promoted, is available in numerous versions and at many different price levels.
To get the best value, the wise shopper should be armed with as many facts as possible before setting out.


First U.S. Employer Charged Under Alien Law Pays a Fine
LEAD: A Virginia inn that was the first employer to be charged with violating the nation's new immigration law has reached a settlement with the Immigration and Naturalization Service.


Just in Time for Holidays, Cinemas Raise Prices to $7
LEAD: Quietly, Manhattan's two largest motion picture exhibitors have raised their ticket prices to $7 - just in time for the Christmas releases.


HORMEL (GEO. A.) &amp; CO (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORMEL (GEO. A.) &amp; CO (A)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
741,907,000
552,208,000
Net inc
20,146,000
16,031,000
Share earns
.53
.42
Yr sales
2,314,082,000
1,960,237,000
Net inc
45,944,000
39,079,000
Share earns
1.20
1.02


VARLEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VARLEN CORP
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
43,584,000
24,918,000
Net inc
1,991,000
b992,000
Share earns
.49
.24
9mo sales
130,141,000
84,290,000
Net inc
5,662,000
b3,993,000
Share earns
1.39
.98


LAURENTIAN GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAURENTIAN GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
618,391,000
356,821,000
Net inc
9,461,000
8,635,000
Share earns
.21
.25
Shares outst
40,699,059
31,833,936
9mo rev
1,890,736,000
1,186,431,000
Net inc
29,657,000
12,884,000
Share earns
.71
.40
Shares outst
40,699,059
31,833,936


Brazil Debt Stance Upheld
LEAD: Brazil's President Jose Sarney said in an interview published today that he would repeat a suspension of payments on his country's foreign debt if merited.


Restraint Urged Amid Confusion Ruling Atlanta
LEAD: Hours after a team of Army advisers arrived at the Federal Penitentiary here today, one of the hostages being held in the prison hospital urged officials not to do ''anything foolish'' because rebellious Cuban inmates ''are willing to take us down if they have to die.''


A 1789 Proclamation By Washington
LEAD: Following is a Thanksgiving Proclamation issued by George Washington on Oct. 3, 1789.


SYSTEMS ENGINEERING &amp; MFG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYSTEMS ENGINEERING &amp; MFG CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,066,000
6,359,000
Net inc
211,000
147,000
Share earns
.13
.09
Yr sales
24,876,000
20,631,000
Net inc
571,000
b661,000
Share earns
.35
-


Giants Sign LaCoss
LEAD: Mike LaCoss, a right-handed pitcher whose 13 victories for the San Francisco Giants was the highest total on the National League Western Division pennant winner's staff last season, has signed a two-year contract with the Giants, whose longest agreements are for that length. ''He's very competitive and always ready to take the ball, and having him for two years pleases me,'' said Al Rosen, the general manager.


COGNITRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COGNITRONICS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,463,000
3,532,000
Net inc
b208,000
c205,000
Share earns
.10
-
9mo rev
13,352,000
10,277,000
Net inc
b620,000
c1,231,000
Share earns
.28
-


MAVERICK RESTAURANT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAVERICK RESTAURANT CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,430,392
3,789,578
Net inc
30,595
b131,351
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
10,489,850
11,108,433
Net inc
107,827
3,157
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Critic's Notebook; Making the Best of Less at the Met
LEAD: THE casting problems that have vexed the Metropolitan Opera this season did not arise in an instant and are not likely to be solved without pain in the foreseeable future.
Most are not unique to the Met.
They demand hard thought from all who hope to pass on opera's traditions to the 21st century with some preservation of standards.


Board of Education in New York Should Be Ended, 3 Members Say
LEAD: Amid rising criticism of the leadership of the New York City schools, the president of the Board of Education and two board members called yesterday for the abolition of the board on which they sit.


Cotton Bowl Showdown
LEAD: Bret Stafford, the Texas quarterback, and Craig Stump of Texas A&amp;M have had to overcome adversity to reach the showdown Thursday night for the Southwest Conference championship and a spot in the Cotton Bowl against Notre Dame on New Year's Day.


HORIZON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORIZON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,327,000
2,202,000
Net loss
122,000
998,000
9mo rev
9,630,000
7,646,000
Net inc
226,000
b2,190,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Protecting Family Assets: A New Breed of Medicaid Counselors Steps In
LEAD: A new breed of legal specialist is advising elderly people how to protect their financial assets, maximize eligibility for Medicaid and avoid being impoverished by the high cost of health care, especially nursing homes.


Rangers Are in Control As They Defeat Leafs
LEAD: There hadn't been much for the Rangers to feel invincible about of late.
In the course of winning just twice in their previous 12 games, they had rarely been in charge of any contest.
Last night at the Garden, however, a sense of composure characterized their play against the Toronto Maple Leafs and helped them put together their first two-game winning streak after more than a month of unhappiness and, at least in the standings, regression.


BUEHLER INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUEHLER INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,672,000
15,725,000
Net inc
941,000
b1,002,000
Share earns
.18
.19
9mo sales
49,307,000
47,670,000
Net inc
2,506,000
b2,883,000
Share earns
.49
.56


Triangle Stake Being Sold
LEAD: The Primerica Corporation announced today that it had agreed to sell its entire common stock investment of nearly five million shares of Triangle Industries to CJI Industries.


Edelman Reduces Telex Bid
LEAD: Asher B. Edelman, the New York investor, lowered his hostile bid for the Telex Corporation yesterday, to $55 a share, from $65, and reduced the shares he is seeking to 75 percent of the company.


N.F.L. Matchups; 49ers vs. Browns May Be a Super Bowl Preview
LEAD: Of all the games in one of the biggest television weeks in National Football League history, the Browns-49ers matchup Sunday night might be the best: it could be a preview of Super Bowl XXII.


Oral Roberts Recuperates
LEAD: Oral Roberts, the television evangelist, was recovering today at home after receiving a corneal transplant Monday, a spokesman said.
Dr.
James Winslow, the spokesman, said the evangelist received a new cornea for his left eye in an out-patient procedure at City of Faith Medical and Research Center.


Deaver Said to Give Message From Reagan to Top Korean
LEAD: A former ambassador to South Korea testified today that Michael K. Deaver handed a letter from President Reagan to the President of South Korea when Mr.
Deaver was soliciting Seoul as a private lobbying client.


Orders for Durables Up by 0.3%
LEAD: Orders for big-ticket durable goods edged up three-tenths of 1 percent in October with much of the strength coming from a sharp jump in demand for civilian aircraft, the Government reported today.


Cambridge Journal; M.I.T. Faces a Problem And Can't Find Answer
LEAD: It should have been an evening for doing physics problems in the library, or listening to the new Stevie Wonder album or heading down the street to Toscanini's to sample some of its renowned Grand Marnier ice cream.


ANTHONY INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANTHONY INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
73,782,000
65,344,000
Net inc
3,138,000
bc2,243,000
Share earns
.71
-
9mo sales
197,705,000
175,265,000
Net inc
5,798,000
c394,000
Share earns
1.31
.09


Dukakis Role: Cheerleader Or Fiscal Miracle Worker?
LEAD: As Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis travels the country seeking the Democratic Presidential nomination he has been stressing what he calls the ''Massachusetts economic miracle.'' As one example of his efforts, he has pointed to a General Motors assembly plant in Framingham that his administration helped revitalize in 1983.


The 200 Tin Progenitors Of a New Coffeepot
LEAD: ON the way to designing a new coffeepot for Alessi, the Italian company known for the slick, avant-garde designs it commissions from leading designers and architects, Riccardo Dalisi, a Neapolitan artist, created dozens of tin coffeepots in the style of the neapolitana, the kind that is flipped upside down to make the brew.


BALTEK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALTEK CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,414,137
6,394,282
Net inc
584,916
b992,287
Share earns
.25
.45
9mo rev
21,924,296
18,798,150
Net inc
1,997,471
b2,255,767
Share earns
.86
1.00


SAGE DRILLING INC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAGE DRILLING INC CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,319,000
680,000
Net loss
b132,000
b160,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $76,000 and $138,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


A Way to Help Blacks Enter Higher Education
LEAD: To the Editor:


County Ordered to Pay For Prisoner Abortions
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled today that a New Jersey county must pay for abortions for prison inmates if no other public or private financing is available.


Simms Will Probably Start for Giants
LEAD: When the Giants play the Redskins Sunday in Washington, the starting quarterbacks will be Doug Williams for the Redskins and probably Phil Simms for the Giants.


Bilson and Nelson In Early-Music Series
LEAD: The ghost of ''early music'' as a semi-amateur activity descended now and then at the sometimes fine concert in Merkin Concert Hall's ''On Original Instruments'' series Monday evening.
In the last section of Schubert's ''Shepherd on the Rock,'' Malcolm Bilson hit a left handful of wrong notes on his replica of an 1815 Dulcken piano, Judith Nelson hit a tentative sounding high note and looked uncomfortable about it, and Lawrence McDonald flubbed the final flourish on his early 19th century clarinet.


MCCAW CELLULAR reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCCAW CELLULAR (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,600,000
4,200,000
Net loss
46,800,000
11,700,000
9mo rev
64,600,000
11,400,000
Net loss
66,100,000
23,000,000
The company said it has been and remains in a start-up phase in which its activities are concentrated on the acquisition, construction and development of regional operating clusters and the building of a customer base.


VANDERBILT GOLD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VANDERBILT GOLD (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
865,000
283,000
Net loss
154,000
c1,244,000
Share earns
-
.15
9mo rev
3,430,000
1,259,000
Net loss
b1,668,000
c1,301,000
Share earns
-
.16
b-Includes $1,308,000 in restructuring costs due to mergers completed in the first quarter of 1987.


Ward in Talks On Investigating Subway Arrests
LEAD: Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward met with the acting chief of the New York City transit police yesterday to begin an investigation into accusations that four transit police officers made scores of false or improper arrests in the subways in 1983 and 1984.


Riots Discomfit the Cubans of Miami
LEAD: ''It's no good for my people,'' Jose Lopez said today of the uprisings of Cuban detainees at Federal prisons in Atlanta and Louisiana, echoing the feelings of many of the 650,000 Cuban-Americans who call Miami home.


WORLCO DATA SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WORLCO DATA SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,749,676
2,658,151
Net loss
379,345
b103,152
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
5,444,643
4,984,473
Net loss
768,719
b159,828
Share earns
-
.06
b


Collapse Fails to Stop An Investment Team
LEAD: John K. Castle and Leonard M. Harlan, with their new company and financing in place, are all set to start making leveraged buyout deals.
But is this a good time, in the wake of the stock market collapse, to be starting a buyout company?


WINSTON RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WINSTON RESOURCES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,471,516
4,466,613
Net inc
367,751
263,899
Share earns
.16
.12
9mo rev
15,568,907
12,051,178
Net inc
861,683
552,024
Share earns
.38
.25


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''We will take no invasive steps so long as the hostages are not harmed.
My patience is endless.''  - J. Michael Quinlan,director of the FederalBureau of Prisons, on theAtlanta prisoner rebellion.  [ D17:4. ]


BANTA (GEORGE) CO (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANTA (GEORGE) CO (O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
76,850,000
75,625,000
Net inc
4,459,000
4,061,000
Share earns
.38
.35
9mo sales
229,738,000
216,754,000
Net inc
13,430,000
12,384,000
Share earns
1.15
1.07


Harold Washington's Chicago
LEAD: Mayor Harold Washington of Chicago, who died yesterday at 65, loved to tweak political enemies and delight supporters by declaring, ''I'm going to be Mayor of the City of Chicago for 20 years.'' After his re-election to a second term last spring, it looked as if he might.
Now, with his sudden death, assessments are in order, and they underline an important point:


C. Gordon Lamude, Lawyer, 84
LEAD: C. Gordon Lamude, a lawyer, died of bronchial pneumonia Saturday at Community Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 84 years old and lived in Douglaston, Queens.


MILITARY HOSTAGE SPECIALISTS SENT TO HELP F.B.I. AT ATLANTA PRISON
LEAD: At the request of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, the Pentagon sent a team of military experts in hostage rescue to Atlanta today to advise the Federal Bureau of Investigation on dealing with Cuban inmates holding 94 hostages at the Federal prison there.


Resignation At Texas Bank
LEAD: The First Republicbank Corporation, the largest bank-holding company in Texas, with $33.6 billion in assets at the end of September, announced this week that one of its four vice chairmen, Ronald G. Steinhart, planned to resign at the end of the year.


GRAY COMMUNICATIONS SYSEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAY COMMUNICATIONS SYSEMS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,796,042
12,864,085
Net inc
343,456
717,646
Share earns
.70
1.45


2 Killed by Tornado in Texas
LEAD: Two people were killed and two others were injured by a tornado that swept across a rural area of the central Texas coast today, ripping the roofs off houses, tearing apart trees and pushing cars off roads.
Officials said a 10-year-old girl and a 23-year-old woman died when the tornado struck a mobile home about six miles east of Bay City.


ALLIANT COMPUTER SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIANT COMPUTER SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,202,000
8,570,000
Net inc
b789,000
c1,288,000
Share earns
.07
.15
Shares outst
10,612,000
8,433,000
9mo sales
39,560,000
18,503,000
Net inc
b4,979,000
c2,452,000
Share earns
.47
.29
Shares outst
10,644,000
8,431,000


Home Resales Rise by 3.2%
LEAD: Sales of existing homes climbed a surprising 3.2 percent in October, the biggest increase in five months, a real estate trade group said today.


Editors' Note
LEAD: A brief Associated Press article from Washington on Nov. 15 reported that Senator Jesse Helms had made public a letter from the chairman and vice chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee absolving the Senator and a staff member of having given sensitive intelligence information to the Government of


COMPUCOM SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUCOM SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
21,729,000
731,000
Net inc
655,000
b1,554,000
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
18,119,000
10,887,000
9mo sales
22,443,000
2,163,000
Net loss
623,000
7,790,000
Shares outst
12,504,000
10,812,000


TECOGEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TECOGEN INC
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Revenue
3,749,000
3,321,000
Net loss
69,000
110,000
Yr rev
15,028,000
11,472,000
Net inc
12,000
b400,000
b-Net loss  The latest year net was less than 1 cent a share.


Gorbachev May Stay Two Extra Days in U.S.
LEAD: A senior Soviet adviser to Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that the Soviet leader would stay an extra day or two in Washington if success is at hand on an accord to cut strategic nuclear missiles.


For the Seabrook Plant, The Numbers Are Grim
LEAD: When the Seabrook nuclear plant was conceived, the power it produced was to be competitive with oil at $12 a barrel.
Now that Seabrook is finished, it could still save consumers money - if oil were to rise above an improbable $130 a barrel.


PIANO, FOUR HANDS
LEAD: Millette Alexander and Frank Day-kin will perform works for piano, four hands, by Schubert, Schumann, Webber and Faure on Sunday at 3 P.M. at St.
Bartholomew's Church (Park Avenue and 51st Street).
Tickets are $5.
Information: 751-1616.


KINGSTON SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KINGSTON SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
353,113
43,687
Net loss
146,769
483,192
6mo sales
694,882
93,908
Net loss
137,006
990,414


Prices Up in Europe
LEAD: Consumer prices in the European Community jumped five-tenths of 1 percent in October, pushing the annual inflation rate to a provisional 3.4 percent, its highest since June 1986.
The community's annual inflation rate is below the 4.5 percent rate of the United States but well above Japan's rate of 1.6 percent.


LINPRO SPECIFIED PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINPRO SPECIFIED PROPERTIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
348,411
-
Share earns
.19
-
9mo net inc
1,118,734
-
Share earns
.60
-
There are no comparable year-ago figures because the real estate investment trust began operations on July 31, 1986.


Investor for Disney Seeks Diversity . . .
LEAD: For a decade, Stanley P. Gold has been turning the inheritance of Roy E. Disney, the nephew of Walt Disney, into a sizable fortune.


ABENDMUSIK
LEAD: Abendmusik, a chamber group, will perform works by Christian Fried-rich Witt, Bach, Cimarosa, Mozart, Schubert and J.C.
Bach Sunday at 3 P.M. in Lenfell Hall on Fairleigh Dickinson University's Florham-Madison campus in Madison, N.J.
Tickets are $7; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information and direc-tions: (201) 593-8620.


LONDON HOUSE reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LONDON HOUSE
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,307,922
1,913,500
Net inc
338,066
250,281
Share earns
.26
.15
6mo rev
4,329,568
3,573,870
Net inc
591,844
335,841
Share earns
.45
.20


Taiwan Record On Reserves
LEAD: Taiwan's foreign exchange reserves, buoyed by the rising value of the Taiwan dollar, have hit a new high of about $72 billion (United States), that country's central bank said today.


STOLEN VAN CRASHES INTO TAXI, INJURING NINE
LEAD: Nine people were injured early yesterday when a stolen van eluding a police car plowed into a taxicab on Columbus Avenue at 75th Street, propelling it onto the sidewalk and through a restaurant window, the police said.


8 Latin Presidents in Acapulco for Summit Talks
LEAD: With a variety of political and economic problems on their agenda, the Presidents of eight nations arrived at this Pacific Ocean resort today for the first large-scale Latin American summit conference without the participation of the United States.


Market Place; Mixed Views Of The Limited
LEAD: WHEN a growth stock plunges 65 percent from its bull market high, is it time to buy?
In the case of The Limited Inc., a company that has bitterly disappointed followers lately, some analysts who favored the stock in the past continue to recommend its purchase.


Topics of The Times; Happy M10
LEAD: Some People are to the psyche what warm socks are to cold feet, and one of them was driving the M10 bus up Eighth Avenue Wednesday.
He greeted oncoming passen-gers with a ''Good morning'', and saluted departing ones with a ''Happy holiday''.
They all left smiling.


Appeals Court Says Firefighter Is Owed a Trial
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has ruled that a volunteer firefighter is entitled to a trial on his complaint that he has been harassed for exercising freedom of speech, including some foul language, in the firehouse.


Topics of The Times; Smells of Thanksgiving
LEAD: Last Monday, a Brooklyn woman dreamed of gathering the family, getting out the gravy boat and breathing the aroma of spicy pie and roasting bird.
What she smelled instead was gas.


WASHINGTON TALK: The Presidential Campaign; Another Issue for '88: Left-Winged Politics
LEAD: As the 1988 political campaign proceeds, Americans are being repeatedly assured that things will really be different in the White House after the November voting produces a new President.


CANADA MAY DROP NUCLEAR SUB PLAN
LEAD: Only five months after it was announced, Canada's plan to join the small group of nations that operate nuclear-powered submarines has run into difficulties with budget planners at home and among officials in Washington who could veto the transfer of American nuclear technology for the submarines.


George W. Korngold, Record Producer, Dies
LEAD: George W. Korngold, a record producer and son of Erich Wolfgang Korngold, the Austrian composer, died of cancer Wednesday night at his Los Angeles home.
He was 58 years old.


CROWN BRANDS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROWN BRANDS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,441,612
8,955,816
Net loss
130,713
b121,687
Share earns
-
.06
9mo sales
35,087,332
20,500,191
Net inc
172,602
185,091
Share earns
.06
.09
b-Net income


Swiss Ready to Face Armageddon, in Comfort
LEAD: In a matter of hours, an ordinary expressway tunnel can be transformed into one of Europe's biggest bomb shelters: a spick-and-span netherworld with its own water supply, air filters, a jail and even a studio pumping out soothing music to the evacuees inside.


At McMurdo Station, Many Thanks
LEAD: or the ecumenical Thanksgiving Day service at the Chapel of the Snows at McMurdo Station, the American scientific research base in Antarctica, the Gospel was taken from the sixth chapter of St.
Mark.
It is the story of the loaves and the fishes that fed 5,000 people in what the Disciples termed ''a remote place.


U.S. Cigarettes Soar in Japan
LEAD: Exports of American cigarettes to Japan have bounded ahead this year, up fourfold from a year ago because Japan has ended restrictions, the Agriculture Department said.


Spaniard Gets First Victory in Slalom
LEAD: Blanca Fernandez-Ochoa of Spain won the first slalom race of her career today in the inaugural event of the 1987-88 World Cup of Alpine skiing.


ALLEGHENY &amp; WESTERN ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEGHENY &amp; WESTERN ENERGY (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
16,190,000
28,532,000
Net loss
2,580,000
b2,531,000
Share earns
-
.32
b-Net income


CHIEF CONSOLIDATED reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHIEF CONSOLIDATED (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
64,090
34,535
Net loss
34,649
62,381
9mo rev
175,471
107,946
Net loss
125,777
176,945


'I Like Gorby' Buttons
LEAD: President Gustav Husak and Foreign Minister Bohuslav Chnoupek of Czechoslovakia donned buttons today, proclaiming ''I Like Gorby'' when greeting Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany in Prague.
A West German diplomat said Mr.
Genscher presented Mr.
Chnoupek with one of the buttons praising Mikhail S.


Advertising; Two Agencies Receive Travel Accounts
LEAD: Just in time for the winter travel season, McCann-Erickson has heard a far-off aloha and Warren/Kremer has felt the caress of a Caribbean breeze.


INFODATA SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INFODATA SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,836,700
2,758,908
Net inc
214,112
268,274
Share earns
.10
.13
9mo rev
8,531,846
7,615,111
Net inc
531,780
5,554
Share earns
.24
-


Diner's Journal
LEAD: THE wide-eyed curiosity seekers have been flocking to Sam's Restaurant, the latest American bistro by Mariel Hemingway and her family, in the Equitable Tower at 152 West 52d Street. (The other is Sam's Cafe, Third Avenue at 80th Street.) Opened just a month, the restaurant still has a good deal of fine tuning to do on its moderately priced menu, which focuses on pastas, pizzas and grilled meats and fish.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''We prefer to have imperfect elections rather than no elections at all.''


DAMON CREATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAMON CREATIONS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,172,000
12,192,000
Net inc
102,000
505,000
Share earns
.09
.46
9mo sales
25,172,000
28,568,000
Net loss
1,774,000
1,324,000
The latest quarter includes $588,000 of expenses incurred in connection with a proposed merger between Damon Creations and Enro Holding Corp.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-24


INSITUFORM OF NORTH AMERCA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSITUFORM OF NORTH AMERCA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,411,018
3,651,934
Net inc
b453,869
767,495
Share earns
.06
.11
9mo rev
11,845,080
8,835,817
Net inc
b1,655,186
1,629,020
Share earns
.23
.25


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  ARBOREAL CHORALE


Grief and Politics Mingle in Chicago
LEAD: At Thanksgiving Day church services and prayer vigils today, Chicago mourned the death of Mayor Harold Washington, even as his longtime supporters and politicial rivals quietly began positioning themselves for the battle over his succession.


Eyewitness Is Disputed On Alaska Air Crash
LEAD: Disputing a witness' account, investigators today said the landing gear appeared to have been down on a commuter plane that crashed short of a runway here, killing 18 people and injuring three.


ENERGY CONVERSION DEVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENERGY CONVERSION DEVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,573,000
2,212,000
Net loss
b5,312,000
7,985,000
b-Included a $487,000 gain from a minority interest.


Reason to Be Thankful
LEAD: Marty Lyons spent today with the family of the Jets' equipment manager, Bill Hampton.
But the big defensive lineman said he didn't mind being apart from his family.
He was glad they were able to have a Thanksgiving celebration at all.


Art: Alison Wilding, Sculptor, at the Modern
LEAD: THE first British artist to be included in the Museum of Modern Art's continuing ''Projects'' series is a 39-year-old sculptor called Alison Wilding.
Though she was shown in 1983 and 1986 at the Salvatore Ala Gallery in New York, this is her first solo appearance in an American museum.
In its thoughtful, reticent, nuanced and strikingly individual way, it is a great success.


FIRST NATIONAL CORP OF OHIO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST NATIONAL CORP OF OHIO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
323,283
38,083
Net inc
b71,640
cd25,100
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
1,240,977
38,083
Net inc
b313,029
d95,990
Share earns
.17
.05
b-Includes tax credits of $22,000 and $96,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Dining Out Guide: Casual
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication, or a Diner's Journal designation.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
CAFE UN DEUX TROIS, #123 West 44th Street (354-4148) - *(May 15, 1987) For its reliably animated atmosphere and straightforward bistro fare, this 10-year-old cafe in the theater district continues to be one of the better bets in the area.


EXPOSAIC INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXPOSAIC INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
47,734,000
36,896,000
Net inc
b1,199,000
1,052,000
Share earns
.47
.41
Yr sales
179,498,000
101,192,000
Net inc
b4,729,000
3,773,000
Share earns
1.85
1.46


Texas A&amp;M Wins And Goes to Cotton
LEAD: A freshman quarterback for Texas A&amp;M, Bucky Richardson, came off the bench tonight to score the winning touchdown with 4 minutes 33 seconds to play in a 20-13 victory over Texas that gave the Aggies their third straight Southwest Conference title and the host berth in the Cotton Bowl.


Syria-Based Group Says It Staged Israel Raid
LEAD: A Syrian-based Palestinian guerrilla group took responsibility today for an attack on Israeli Army positions by two Palestinian guerrillas flying motorized hang gliders.


WASHINGTON TALK: Veterans' Affairs; War of Words Over the New V.A.
LEAD: Particularly among conservatives, who remember fondly when President Reagan strode into office promising to deflate what he deemed a bloated Federal bureaucracy, the question echoes: How can one justify elevating the Veterans Administration to Cabinet status?


EMBARGO STRAINS IRAN FINANCIALLY
LEAD: A tightening embargo on purchases of Iranian oil by the United States, France and to some extent Japan has been choking Teheran's exports and straining its financial lifeline in recent weeks.


City Ballet: 'La Sonnambula'
LEAD: THE New York City Ballet continues to introduce new male dancers from abroad into the company with a vengeance.
On Tuesday night at the State Theater, Jeppe Mydtskov from Denmark make his New York debut in one of the two principal male roles in George Balanchine's ''Kammermusik No. 2.'' And on Wednesday night, ''La Sonnambula'' acquired a nearly all-new cast at the top when Carlo Merlo, Heather Watts and Otto Neubert appeared for the first time, respectively, as the Poet, the Sleepwalker and the


DBA SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DBA SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,936,820
13,015,789
Net inc
b1,047,173
c967,997
Share earns
.33
.27
b-After income from discontinued operations of $538,207 for the latest first quarter and $86,973 for the year- ago period.


Sri Lanka Emergency Stays
LEAD: Sri Lanka's Parliament voted today to extend the state of emergency for a further month as Indian troops continued their drive to disarm Tamil guerrillas in northern and eastern areas.
Members supported the extension after Acting Parliamentary Affairs Minister M. D. Premaratne said political assassinations were on the increase in the south and rebel violence still flared in Tamil-dominated areas.


EASTERN ENVIRONMENTAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTERN ENVIRONMENTAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,246,784
2,122,475
Net inc
472,039
283,158
Share earns
.12
.08
Shares outst
3,943,478
3,400,000


Thanksgiving Touches the Less Fortunate, Too
LEAD: City Councilwoman Ruth W. Messinger serving Thanksgiving dinner to Bessie Polack at St.
Paul the Apostle Church at 415 West 59th Street.
Ms.
Messinger joined other volunteers in helping Project FIND sponsor the dinner for the elderly, the homebound and the homeless. (The New York Times/Chester Higgins


Jets Seek Cure from McElroy
LEAD: He may not be the answer.
Even Coach Joe Walton admitted that today.
But Reggie McElroy is back at right tackle, and he will start Sunday against Cincinnati as the Jets desperately attempt to protect their quarterback.


War On Pennsylvania Avenue
LEAD: The fight between Congress and the Administration is trickier even than it seems.
Modest last-minute budget compromise isn't yet assured of adoption.
In fact, the threat of Gramm-Rudman cuts is still the main hope for making it stick.


Movie Maker In China Rails At the Leftists
LEAD: China's foremost movie studio director has publicly assailed a senior Communist official for interference in the work of the Xian Film Studio and the arts.


REAGAN REPORTED PAINED BY CHARGES
LEAD: Howard H. Baker Jr., the White Housechief of staff, said today that the Congressional committees' report on the Iran-contra affair was ''personally hurtful'' to President Reagan and that he ''didn't like it a bit.''


New Panel Is Urged in Subway Arrests Case
LEAD: Mayor Koch should appoint an independent commission to investigate ''systemic corruption'' in the Transit Authority police, said the lawyer for people who say they were falsely arrested by transit police officers.


EAST BERLIN RAIDS STAGED ON CHURCH
LEAD: East German security agents, making raids on unofficial Christian advocates, detained at least 21 people and broke into the homes of several others in a three-day crackdown, church people said today.


AMERICAN CRUISE LINES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CRUISE LINES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,878,500
2,747,400
Net loss
330,100
b126,300
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income


New Face: Linda Hart; EVER THE SEXY GUN MOLL
LEAD: ''IT'S the easiest thing I have ever done in my life, and the most fun.'' That is Linda Hart's report on her critically praised role as Erma the gun moll in ''Anything Goes,'' the Cole Porter revival at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center.


In the Labyrinth of Soviet Internal Politics
LEAD: To the Editor:


Region's
LEAD: Planetariums a selection of those in the New York metropolitan region follows:  New York


ZYGO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZYGO CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,491,000
4,144,000
Net loss
290,000
637,000


Advertising;
LEAD: John Emmerling Inc. has been named the agency for Holsten Bier, a beer that Mr.
Emmerling calls ''the Budweiser of West Germany.'' He said the client was planning to spend more than $1 million for advertising.
At first it will all be in print - magazines probably - but before the end of the year there could be some dabbling in radio.


2 Salvador Rebels Threatened
LEAD: Two senior Salvadoran rebel civilian leaders said today that they had been threatened with death by telephone callers this morning.


Advertising; Talks Confirmed
LEAD: Responding to a published report of merger talks between Chiat/Day and Tatham-Laird &amp; Kudner, of Chicago, Robert Wolf, president and chief executive of Chiat/Day's Los Angeles office, said that get-acquainted conversations had indeed been held after the competition for the Nissan account that Chiat-Day won.


2 Youths Quit School in S.A.T. Tampering
LEAD: Two students withdrew from a private boys academy after admitting that they had broken into a school and opened sealed copies of a college entrance exam the day before it was to be administered, officials said today.


Japan Steps Up Security After Arrest of Terrorist
LEAD: The Japanese police intensified security for the imperial family and other prominent figures today after the arrest this week of a leader of the Japanese Red Army.


Vandals Hit Church And Country Club
LEAD: Satanic symbols were spray-painted on a church, and anti-Semitic slurs were painted on the walls of a country club in unrelated incidents in the last week, Nassau County police said yesterday.


MACROCHEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACROCHEM CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,000
880
Net loss
579,036
356,694
6mo rev
43,024
25,880
Net loss
1,061,938
650,883


DATAKEY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATAKEY INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
814,769
437,392
Net inc
b315,920
c82,204
Share earns
.09
-
9mo rev
2,370,364
1,321,843
Net inc
b315,155
c244,651
Share earns
.09
-
b-Includes a tax loss carryforward of $126,000 for both the quarter and 9 months.


THREE EXILES: STANDOFF NEGOTIATORS
LEAD: Roberto Martin Perez, released earlier this year from a Cuban prison, had been jailed there since 1959 because of his involvement in a conspiracy against Fidel Castro organized by the Dominican dictator, Leonides Trujillo.


INTERFUND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERFUND CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
7,780
b42,131
Share earns
.01
.03
9mo net inc
77,546
b23,323
Share earns
.06
.02
b-After a tax credit of $5,100 for the quarter and 9 months.
The company said the latest third quarter and 9 months' nets reflect the interest expenses of senior subordinated notes.


No Headline
LEAD: THERE are few holidays in dance.
This may be Thanksgiving weekend to the rest of us, but dancers are dancing.
And so there is a variety of ballet and modern dance taking place in and around New York City.


Rate of Violent Crime Against Elderly Drops
LEAD: Elderly Americans are half as likely as younger people to become crime victims, and the violent crime rate against the elderly has declined 50 percent since 1973, the Government says.


HEWLETT-PACKARD CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEWLETT-PACKARD CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,279,000,000
1,933,000,000
Net inc
218,000,000
157,000,000
Share earns
.85
.62
Yr rev
8,090,000,000
7,102,000,000
Net inc
644,000,000
516,000,000
Share earns
2.50
2.02


Touring a Tranquil Haven For Medieval Treasures
LEAD: THOUGH - architecturally speaking -much of the Cloisters, the Metropolitan Museum of Art's medieval outpost in Fort Tryon Park, is close to a thousand years old, it's about to celebrate only its 50th birthday.
If that seems slightly out of sync, let it pass.
What the birthday - next May 10 - commemorates is the opening of the Cloisters in 1938 and the feat of putting together this ambitious pastiche of ancient ecclesiastical parts, a job so well done that today it's hard to picture the banks of the


A Superhero's Debut
LEAD:  The new Spiderman balloon get-ting into position on Central Park West for its first Thanks-giving Day Parade.
Page B3. (NYT/Sara Krulwich)


PRESSER IS CALLED INFORMER SINCE '74
LEAD: Jackie Presser, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, has been providing the Federal Bureau of Investigation with information since 1974, documents filed in Federal court here indicate .


Correction
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the Chrysler Corporation misstated the company's production plans.
Chrysler intends to reduce production at three plants indefinitely, but the plants will continue to operate.


CENTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRONICS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Revenue
2,084,000
781,000
Net inc
597,000
b206,000
Share earns
.03
.01
9mo rev
5,711,000
1,564,000
Net inc
126,000
b1,035,000
Share earns
.01
.05
b-After gains from discontinued operations of $541,000 for the quarter and $2,856,000 for the 9 months.


Philharmonic: Bernstein in Mahler 3d
LEAD: MAHLER'S all-inclusive, all-demanding Third Symphony filled the New York Philharmonic's subscription program at Avery Fisher Hall Wednesday night.
Leonard Bernstein conducted, reminding us over the course of the evening how remarkable this orchestra can be when the right suggestions are planted in its collective mind.


. . . But Wherehouse Appears Uninterested
LEAD: It should be no surprise that Louis A. Kwiker, the chairman of Wherehouse Entertainment Inc., has so far expressed little interest in a $92 million takeover offer from Shamrock Holdings Inc.


CUE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CUE INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
14,553,000
15,925,000
Net inc
b591,000
539,000
Share earns
.10
.06
9mo rev
42,080,000
48,437,000
Net inc
b1,036,000
1,509,000
Share earns
.03
.12


At the Movies
LEAD:  Lahti, at Last


School Football; Iona's Victory Brightens a 20th Reunion
LEAD: The 1967 Iona Prep football team might have been the best the school ever had.
It was undefeated and the top team in the metropolitan area.
But the one game its players still talk about is the 13-0 victory over New Rochelle in the rain on Thanksgiving Day that year.


FORU DEBUTS DURING A 'SPECTACULAR' PARADE
LEAD: Four giant balloons made their debut yesterday at the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade, and so did a 3-week-old boy.


Typhoon Kills 270 in Philippines
LEAD: Civil defense officials said today that at least 243 people were killed and thousands were left homeless when a typhoon tore through the central Philippines Wednesday and Thursday.


BIOTECH RESEARCH LABORATOIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOTECH RESEARCH LABORATOIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,922,751
1,512,338
Net inc
306,618
b120,631
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
7,252,011
4,283,793
Net inc
489,368
b444,034
Share earns
.08
-


Suriname Voters Give a Strong Rebuff to Military
LEAD: A three-party opposition coalition in Suriname won a landslide election victory today in a popular rebuke of the South American country's seven years of military dictatorship.


Iowa Restaurant Serves Up Sweet and Sour Poll Results
LEAD: There's state-of-the-art polling, and then there's steamed-pot-shrimp polling.


More Victims Sought In Nurse Case
LEAD: Six more bodies will be exhumed by Suffolk County authorities in a search for possible victims of a nurse suspected of injecting lethal drugs into patients at Good Samaritan Hospital, the Suffolk County District Attorney's office said yesterday.


LONG LAKE ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LONG LAKE ENERGY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
415,268
585,344
Net loss
1,397,410
618,595
9mo rev
1,539,607
1,689,132
Net loss
2,993,345
1,104,270


Fewer Meals Served On Eastern Air Lines In Effort to Cut Costs
LEAD: Passengers on Eastern Air Lines will have to survive some flights without hot meals, or in some cases with no food at all, to help cut the costs of the financially ailing carrier.


AMERICAN MAGNETICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MAGNETICS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,439,000
1,876,000
Net inc
226,000
6,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
7,720,000
7,111,000
Net loss
358,000
b366,000
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income and after an extraordinary credit of $607,000.


Transplant Recipient Nears One-Month Mark
LEAD: As 3-year-old Tabatha Foster struggles to survive one month with five transplanted organs, a milestone never before reached, her family and doctors are fretting over her latest complications.


New Delhi Warms to Soviet Cultural Festival
LEAD: The Bolshoi Ballet is at one end of town, and on the other are Russian folk dancers, pop artists and circus performers.
Again, the Indian capital is draped with banners proclaiming the country's friendship with Moscow.


BUNDY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUNDY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
71,753,000
59,634,000
Net inc
1,553,000
1,061,000
Share earns
.44
.31


LIPOSOME CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIPOSOME CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,091,000
1,046,000
Net loss
1,663,000
858,000
9mo rev
2,841,000
1,295,000
Net loss
5,010,000
3,078,000


Creditors' Plan for Texaco
LEAD: The general creditors committee in Texaco Inc.'s bankruptcy case is expected to seek the authority today to submit its own plan of reorganization, according to people close to the case.


CHAMBER SYMPHONY
LEAD: The New York Chamber Sympho-ny, conducted by Gerard Schwarz, will perform a concert version of ''Alexander's Feast'' by Handel tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the 92d Street Y (at Lexington Avenue).
Soloists Jane Bunnell, mezzo-soprano; David Gordon, tenor, and Jan Opalach, bass-baritone.
Tickets are $15 to $21.


2 Leave Amfac After a Shift
LEAD: Amfac Inc. said two senior vice presidents had left after a management reshuffle.


THE LEADERS
LEAD: The Leaders - Lester Bowie on trumpet, Aruthu blythe on alto saxo-phone, Chico Freeman on tenor saxo-phone, Kirk Lightsey on piano, Cecil McBee on bass and Don Moye on drums - will perform tonight through Sunday at Sweet Basil, 88 Bleecker Street (242-1785).
Sets are at 10 and 11:45 P.M. and 1:30 A.M.; there is a $12 cover and a $6 mini-mum.


KIMMINS ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KIMMINS ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICE
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,800,041
2,162,066
Net inc
326,458
58,266
Share earns
.06
.02
9mo sales
10,230,334
6,811,460
Net inc
645,398
123,042
Share earns
.17
.04


Pearson Up On Rumors
LEAD: Pearson P.L.C. was the biggest gainer on the London Stock Exchange today, sparked by rumors that the publisher Rupert Murdoch was about to increase his stake of nearly 15 percent and might begin a takeover bid, brokers said.


Advertising; Changes at Siegel
LEAD: Alan Siegel, chairman and chief executive of Siegel &amp; Gale, a corporate communications company owned by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, has announced that Kenneth M. Morris, 42 years old, has been named president but has given up his title of chief operating officer to Jerry Kessler, 42.
Mr.
Kessler had been executive vice president and chief financial officer of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Compton.


CONTRAS PROPOSE POLITICAL PARLEYS AS BASIS FOR TRUCE
LEAD: Nicaraguan rebel leaders said today that they were insisting on significant political discussions with the Nicaraguan Government in a counterproposal to the Sandinistas on terms for a cease-fire.


In Spite of All, He Remains Quite English
LEAD: Leaving England seemed to be the thing to do in 1937, said the old man whose life of adventure has brought him at last to a cramped duplex apartment in this Wiltshire village.


School Opener A Sellout
LEAD: What with the Big Apple N.I.T. final being held at Madison Square Garden tomorrow night, the Knicks playing the Cleveland Cavaliers there in the afternoon, and St.
John's opening its Joe Lapchick Tournament against Harvard, it might seem that the toughest basketball ticket to get in town this weekend would be at either the Garden or Alumni


MARATHON OFFICE SUPPLY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARATHON OFFICE SUPPLY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,445,000
11,510,000
Net loss
242,000
183,000


TIGERA GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIGERA GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
94,000
6,063,000
Net loss
b5,144,000
2,933,000
9mo rev
8,684,000
26,438,000
Net loss
b19,525,000
c2,335,000
b-After a charge of $1.7 million in legal expenses from the Fortune Systems securities litigation for the quarter and interest income of $1,163,000 for the 9 months.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Michael Zaremba has been elected senior vice president of DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago.


Panama Quits Joint Exercises
LEAD: President Eric Arturo Delvalle said today that his country will not hold joint military exercises in January with the United States.


AIR MIDWEST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIR MIDWEST (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,785,000
18,814,000
Net loss
b1,005,000
332,000
9mo rev
62,441,000
49,324,000
Net inc
b225,000
c5,007,000
Share earns
.06
-
b-After a reversal of a tax loss carryforward of $146,000 for the quarter and a tax credit of $33,000 for the 9 months.


Death Draws Public's Eye To Adoption
LEAD: The death of 6-year-old Lisa Steinberg has focused attention on New York State's complex adoption laws.
While many experts in the field say the Steinberg case has nothing to do with adoption, others say it highlights flaws in the system.


Why Sacrifice Welfare Reform?
LEAD: A solid welfare reform bill, which seemed a sure thing a few months ago, begins to look doubtful because Congress is increasingly nervous about the Federal budget deficit and anything that might add to it.
Such concern is commendable, but misplaced on welfare reform legislation.


Wrong Assumption on Abusers and Social Class
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cruise Missile Launched
LEAD: An Air Force B-1B bomber has successfully launched a cruise missile for the first time, the Pentagon said Wednesday.
In the test, conducted Tuesday at the Utah Test Range outside Salt Lake City, the plane fired the weapon from its bomb bay while flying at low altitude.
The missile's warhead had been removed and replaced with an instrument test package.


Question To a Judge
LEAD: I used to see Joyce Brown almost every day but I never knew her name.
She would be lying huddled on the sidewalk on Second Avenue, across the street from my apartment.
I would look at her, stop sometimes, but usually just walk on, restless in my mind about what it told about the city, about the woman, about myself, that a person could lie amid the rubbish of the street and her own filth, day after day, night after night, for a full year, and nothing done.


New Face: James Wilby; The Vision of a Gay Hero
LEAD: E.M.
FORSTER'S vision of the hero for his novel of homosexual love was a man quite unlike himself: ''someone handsome, healthy, bodily attractive, mentally torpid and rather a snob.'' Except for the ''mentally torpid,'' James Wilby, the relative unknown who plays the title role in the movie adapted from Forster's ''Maurice,'' fits the description to a T.


Winterset Journal; The Duke Enshrined in Land of Corn
LEAD: There is some short, dark fellow running around this state calling himself the Duke.
But Iowans don't pay much mind to the nickname of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts.
They know who the real Duke was.


Propane Leak Delays Amtrak Service
LEAD: NIANTIC, CONN


Guerrillas Report Defection Of Brother of Afghan Leader
LEAD: A Pakistan-based Afghan guerrilla party said today that the younger brother of Afghanistan's Soviet-backed leader had defected to the guerrillas.


EAGLE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EAGLE FINANCIAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
435,000
385,000
Share earns
.31
-
9mo net inc
1,549,000
1,413,000
The company went public in February.


Reagan's Aide Savors Intrusion-Free Holiday
LEAD: As he prepared for a tennis game beneath the eucalyptus trees here, Marlin Fitzwater, the President's chief spokesman, said today that he was thankful for a relatively calm Thanksgiving at the Western White House.


Iranian Who Escaped Appears at U.N. to Tell of Torture in Prison
LEAD: An Iranian who says he escaped from Iran last month after five years of imprisonment and torture in Iranian prisons came to the United Nations this week to describe his ordeal.


Deadly Tale of Obtaining a Child Without Adoption
LEAD: The life and death of Lisa Steinberg illustrate how easy it was for a Manhattan couple to obtain a child and rear her without going through the formal process of adopting her.


WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING
LEAD: Museum Hopper Millions of people visit Washington each year, and almost all, it seems, head for the museums of the Smithsonian Institution.
So it is probably only natural that one of this year's most conspicuous tourists, Raisa Gorbachev, is likely to do the same.


ATI MEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATI MEDICAL (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,033,636
1,797,535
Net inc
53,971
72,932
Share earns
.01
.02
Yr rev
12,584,823
6,888,934
Net inc
410,718
653,831
Share earns
.08
.17
Shares outst
5,325,000
3,887,000


Which Holiday Events Are Available
LEAD: A recent telephone survey of some of the city's popular holiday attractions indicated that tickets for many still remained.
Here are the results of the survey:  ''THE MAGNIFICENT CHRISTMAS SPECTACULAR,'' Radio City Music Hall (757-3100).
All weekend shows are sold out from now until Dec. 26; after that, tickets to weekend shows are available up to the show's last performance on Jan.


DEB SHOPS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEB SHOPS (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
45,244,000
43,491,000
Net inc
1,807,000
2,432,000
Share earns
.12
.16
9mo sales
134,367,000
118,521,000
Net inc
7,369,000
7,157,000
Share earns
.48
.47


Books of The Times
LEAD:  RODIN: A Biography.
By Frederic V. Grunfeld. 738 pages.
Illustrated.
Henry Holt. $35.


FAIRMONT CHEMICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAIRMONT CHEMICAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,982,900
5,909,800
Net loss
1,042,700
730,600
9mo sales
1,862,000
1,850,000
Net loss
194,000
309,100


Bridge: 2 Ex-World Champions Lead in Contract Bridge
LEAD: Two former world champions were in the lead going into the final session of the Blue Ribbon Pair Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's fall nationals here tonight The two players, Kerri Shuman of Monrovia, Calif., World Mixed Pair titlist in 1978, and Bobby Levin of Chicago, a World Team titlist in 1981, were nearly a board ahead of Ron Andersen of Carrollton, Tex., and David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N


Cubans Free One of 28 Hostages at Oakdale Center
LEAD: Rebellious Cuban inmates, who last Saturday seized a Federal detention center here, tonight released one hostage amid strong indications that the six-day standoff had been settled.


EIP MICROWAVE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EIP MICROWAVE (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,730,000
5,532,000
Net inc
106,000
b127,000
Share earns
.05
.06
Yr sales
18,826,000
20,163,000
Net inc
310,000
b361,000
Share earns
.14
.16
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $48,000 from termination of a retirement plan for both the quarter and year.


Kleinwort Benson Ltd. Names New Chairman
LEAD: Kleinwort Benson Ltd., the merchant banking subsidiary of Kleinwort Benson Lonsdale P.L.C., has named David Peake chairman, effective Jan. 1.
He will succeed Michael Hawkes, 58, who becomes the company's executive deputy chairman.
Mr Peake will also become the executive chief chairman of the Kleinwort Benson holding company when Robert Henderson, 70, retires Dec.


Men in Black Unite to Fight Mafia in Palermo
LEAD: Exuding a sense of past glory with its frayed damask, chipped gold leaf and overcrowding of memorial plaques, Palermo's city hall is now occupied by a long-haired Mayor who says he has brought the ideals of 1960's student protests back to life and into power.


FIRST MEDICAL DEVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST MEDICAL DEVICES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
946,000
35,000
Net loss
123,000
498,000
9mo sales
2,128,000
35,000
Net loss
757,000
1,065,000


A Push for All-Business Radio
LEAD: The collapse of stock prices last month touched off a surge in demand for news about business and finance.
Consumers cleaned out newsstands and eagerly scanned the airwaves for the latest reports of market activity around the world.


TARO VIT INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TARO VIT INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,041,000
1,576,000
Net loss
71,000
84,000
9mo sales
6,040,000
4,487,000
Net loss
87,000
b2,000
b-Net income  The translation into U.S. dollars was at the exchange rate of $1.00 equals 1.6 shekels for the 1987 results and $1.00 equals 1.5 shekels for the 1986 results.


BAKER, J, INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAKER, J, INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
50,986,000
49,085,000
Net inc
1,896,000
2,087,000
Share earns
.20
.23
9mo sales
146,931,000
120,407,000
Net inc
5,723,000
b5,752,000
Share earns
.60
.69


Colombia Takes First Steps To Extradite Cocaine Dealer
LEAD: Colombia took the first step today toward extraditing the reputed king of the cocaine trade to the United States.


Why Doctors Treat Alcoholism as a Disease; Age-21 Laws Backfired
LEAD: To the Editor:


Comeback Halted
LEAD: An attempted comeback by Kermit Washington after a five-year absence from competition has apparently ended after the Golden State Warriors requested waivers on the 36-year-old power forward.
Washington was released after the Warriors' 10th defeat in 11 games, the worst start in the team's history.


AMERICAN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN OF FLORIDA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN OF FLORIDA (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b421,000
c20,780,000
Share earns
-
2.37
Yr net inc
b19,568,000
c50,242,000
Share earns
1.67
6.11
b-After an extraordinary gain of $597,000 which includes pre-tax income of $1.7 million from Kaufmann, Alsberg &amp; Co.


MAYNARD OIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAYNARD OIL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,882,747
2,417,515
Net inc
188,274
b824,017
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
10,107,020
10,608,876
Net loss
250,043
2,252,194
b-Net loss


N. Alabama Coach Out
LEAD: Robert Guillot, the president of the University of North Alabama, announced Wednesday that the contracts of Wayne Grubb, the head football coach, and five of his assistants would not be renewed.
Guillot refused to elaborate on the reasons for the dismissals but said that the use of an ineligible player that caused the team to forfeit two games it had won was ''just the tip of the iceberg.


Hyundai Announces a Recall Of Some 1986 and 1987 Cars
LEAD: The Hyundai Motor Company, the South Korean automobile manufacturer, said Wednesday that it would voluntarily recall more than 320,000 cars to correct a possible deficiency in their brakes.


BETHLEHEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BETHLEHEM CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,697,000
2,702,000
Net loss
840,000
57,000
9mo rev
10,970,000
9,314,000
Net loss
768,000
40,000


George W. Barton, Transportation Planner, 81
LEAD: George W. Barton, founder of an international transportation planning firm, died Nov. 12 at his home in Sarasota, Fla., of a stroke.
He was 81 years old.


AMERICAN LEARNING reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN LEARNING
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,820,000
3,413,000
Net inc
343,000
353,000
Share earns
.09
.09
Yr rev
12,719,000
9,754,000
Net loss
864,000
b68,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


Markets Mark Time In European Trading
LEAD: The dollar marked time and the prices of stocks were mixed and hardly changed in Europe today, with markets still uncertain about the value of recent Western efforts to shore up the dented global economy.


Four Killed in Crash Of a Private Plane At Upstate Airport
LEAD: A Michigan businessman, his wife and two traveling companions were killed today when the private plane they were in crashed on approach to Skaneateles Airport, the authorities said.


Mohammed A. Aziz, Researcher, 58
LEAD: Dr.
Mohammed A. Aziz, senior director of clinical research at Merck &amp; Company's research laboratories in Woodbridge, N.J., died of cancer Wednesday at the Princeton Medical Center.
He was 58 years old and lived in Princeton Junction.


Board of Examiners' Bureaucracy Turns Away Good Teachers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confessions Exonerate 2 Accused of Robbery
LEAD: Two men jailed for nine months while awaiting trial on robbery charges have been cleared when a pair of look-alikes confessed, the police here say.


8 MORE DIE IN HAITI AS CONCERN GROWS OVER VOTE SUNDAY
LEAD: Three days before Haiti's first presidential election in 30 years, eight people were found shot to death today on the streets of the capital after a night of patrols by heavily armed Government troops.


On the Street, Cut-Rate Bookstands Surge
LEAD: For more than 10 hours every weekday, Assem Haddad stands on 48th Street and hawks new copies of Dr.
Seuss's most popular books at prices that would make most book dealers blanch: two for $5.
On a good day, he says, he can sell $400 worth.


Man Killed Inflating a Tire
LEAD: A man was killed Wednesday when his spare tire exploded while he was inflating it, the authorities said.
The man, Jimmie Henagan, 27 years old, suffered injuries to the face and chest when he was filling the tire at a service station in this town east of New Orleans.
He died an hour later at a nearby hospital.


DERMA-LOCK MEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DERMA-LOCK MEDICAL
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,786,000
-
Net inc
b35,000
-
9mo sales
4,237,000
-
Net loss
416,000
-
b-Includes a gain of $160,000 of income not related to the company's regular business.


Tuition Aid Program Helps to Retain Staff
LEAD: When Herb Schervish, a Burger King restaurant owner, found that his employees were turning over almost as fast as the burgers on his grill, he thought of a way to get them to stay: pay their college tuition.


DYNASCAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYNASCAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
51,022,000
31,641,000
Net inc
b2,135,000
c1,789,000
Share earns
.29
.25
9mo sales
135,985,000
82,577,000
Net inc
b4,276,000
c3,632,000
Share earns
.59
.51


AMERICAN CAPACITY GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CAPACITY GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,110,977
1,197,527
Net inc
139,721
186,436
Share earns
.06
.09
9mo rev
11,025,374
1,530,059
Net inc
b1,325,982
243,191
Share earns
.54
.20


Arabs Praising Raider As Hero for Palestinians
LEAD: Much of the Arab world today lauded the airborne assailant who killed six Israeli soldiers before being shot to death.


Holiday Stargazing at Hayden Planetarium
LEAD: THOUSANDS of flickering stars appear overhead, as artificial twilight gives way to mechanized night.
Tiny spacecraft dart through a sparkling cosmos of whirling planets, eerie, undulating nebulas and supernovas exploding in a flash of light.


GIANT YELLOWKNIFE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GIANT YELLOWKNIFE (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
31,321,000
15,357,000
Net inc
3,059,000
1,809,000
Share earns
.44
.42
9mo rev
96,514,000
42,915,000
Net inc
9,302,000
2,859,000
Share earns
1.33
.66


Nets Lose, 110-102, As Kings End Slide
LEAD: Reggie Theus scored 25 points tonight as the Sacramento Kings snapped a six-game losing streak with a 110-102 victory over the Nets.


Transactions
LEAD:  WEDNESDAY  BASEBALL


GANTOS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GANTOS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
33,627,000
24,267,000
Net inc
1,291,000
1,221,000
Share earns
.25
.23
9mo sales
90,765,000
66,469,000
Net inc
2,673,000
2,232,000
Share earns
.51
.45


Our Towns; Geese Are Bright But Turkeys Put Cash in Register
LEAD: That turkey you ate yesterday? It wasn't as smart as a goose.


In the Night
LEAD:  Remembering Rich


LET'S REFORM THE O-T-C MARKET
LEAD: The stock market collapse was significantly aggravated by structural and regulatory failings in the over-the-counter marketplace.


Holder Of Cup Shocked
LEAD: A court decision two days ago upholding New Zealand's challenge for the America's Cup next summer has left the guardian of the cup - the San Diego Yacht Club - in turmoil.
But officials of the New York Yacht Club, which held the trophy for 132 years, have said that they expected the court to rule as it did.


Art: Works by Ana Mendieta in a Retrospective Exhibition
LEAD: TWO years after Ana Mendieta was found dead on the roof of a delicatessen below the 34th-floor Greenwich Village apartment in which she lived with her husband, the sculptor Carl Andre, and two months before Mr.
Andre is scheduled to go on trial to face murder charges of which he has declared himself innocent, Ms.


HANCOCK FABRICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANCOCK FABRICS (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
80,030,000
78,691,000
Net inc
5,286,000
4,056,000
Share earns
.41
.32
9mo sales
224,163,000
218,789,000
Net inc
14,031,000
12,582,000
Share earns
1.09
.98


Broadway Tickets
LEAD: Here is the ticket availability, at press time, for Broadway shows on Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
Occasionally, shows that report being sold out at press time have tickets available because of weather conditions or because of ticket returns.
A CHORUS LINE:Friday and Saturday matinee, all sections; Friday night, all but orchestra; Saturday night, balcony only.


Woman Who Killed a Mother To Steal Baby Is Sentenced
LEAD: A 19-year-old woman obsessed with having a child was sentenced to life in prison without parole Wednesday for shooting a young mother to death and stealing her 4-day-old baby.


Stage: 'About Face,' Dario Fo Comedy
LEAD: THE funniest scenes in ''About Face'' owe more to the gadgetry of burlesque than to Dario Fo's semblance of plot or his politics.
Most of Act I, for example, takes place in a hospital room occupied by a patient who has a way of flying out of bed at the jerk of pulleys operated by several jerks who like to jig while they work.


Rebels in Zimbabwe Said to Have Killed 16 People at Mission
LEAD: The British Broadcasting Corporation said today that anti-Government rebels in Zimbabwe massacred 16 people, most of them white missionaries and their children, in the southern province of Matabeleland.


Metro-North Returns To Normal After Fire
LEAD: Traffic on the Metro-North commuter railroad was normal yesterday following an electrical fire on Wednesday evening in the Park Avenue tunnel that delayed tens of thousands of homebound commuters and other passengers leaving town for a long weekend.


INTERNATIONAL 800 TELECOM reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL 800 TELECOM
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,445,877
-
Net inc
150,563
-
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
2,996,838
-
Net inc
314,233
-
Share earns
.05
-
The results are expressed in U.S.


Events
LEAD:  FRIDAY  Music


COMPUCHEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUCHEM CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,873,000
4,294,000
Net inc
324,000
68,000
Share earns
.05
.01
9mo rev
16,781,000
11,753,000
Net inc
360,000
250,000
Share earns
.06
.04
The year-ago periods were restated to give effect to certain year-end adjustments.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Becker Upset in Third Round: Magnus Gustaffson of Sweden, ranked 51st in the world, upset top-seeded Boris Becker of West Germany, 2-6, 6-4, 6-2, yesterday in the third round of the $150,000 Young Masters tennis tournament in Friedrichshafen, West Germany.
The defeat eliminated the 20-year-old Becker, a two-time Wimbledon champion who has been suffering lately from the effects of a lingering cold and a knee injury.


INVESTMENT TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INVESTMENT TECHNOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
318,646
347,068
9mo net loss
868,629
1,102,289
Investment Technologies is a development stage company.


On Stage
LEAD:  Offbeat Casting for Big Daddy


INSIDE
LEAD:  The Law Page


Florida Senator Walks for Re-election
LEAD: Much as the swallows return to Capistrano and Old Faithful spouts off, ''Walkin' Lawton'' returns to this Florida Panhandle town every six years.


ALASKAN INDICTED IN BRIBERY INQUIRY
LEAD: A Federal and state investigation of corruption in Alaska's oil-rich North Slope Borough has led to the indictment of one of the most influential figures in the state's politics.


N.J. Transit Warns of Possible Fare Increases
LEAD: An unexpected decline in bus ridership could force N.J.
Transit to reduce service or increase fares on both its buses and trains, the executive director of the state-supported agency says.


COMMUNICATIONS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMUNICATIONS GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,775,000
4,046,000
Net loss
b156,000
c161,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo sales
7,637,000
5,622,000
Net loss
82,000
c273,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Includes a reversal of tax credit of $27,000 for the quarter and a tax loss carryforward of $22,000 for the 6 months.


Singer Seeks A New Buyer
LEAD: The Singer Company said today that it was talking with potential buyers about being acquired.
It declined to identify any of them but said they do not include the Florida financier Paul Bilzerian, who has made a $1.05 billion bid for the military electronics concern.


Smoking Ban in Los Angeles
LEAD: Smoking would be banned in stores and other public places here and most restaurants would be required to set aside half their seats for nonsmokers under an ordinance awaiting the mayor's signature.


Jersey Struggles to Aid Its Homeless Families
LEAD: Nine months after a landmark court decision expanded the rights of homeless families in New Jersey, county welfare agencies are struggling with a flood of new cases, and in many instances are providing fewer services than before the ruling.


U.S. Plans Tariffs to Punish Europe
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is preparing to raise tariffs on $100 million of annual food imports from the European Community if the 12-nation bloc goes through with a ban it has announced on imports of the meat of animals treated with growth hormones.


Gush Katif Journal; Sun and Fun in Gaza: See the 'Friendly Bedouin'
LEAD: Occupied Gaza Strip - Of all the bizarre contrasts that make up the Gaza Strip, of all the paradoxes per square mile that confront the visitor to Israel each day, surely nothing can top the clash between the Katif Beach Hotel and its surroundings.


CAMPBELL SOUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAMPBELL SOUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,179,100,000
1,114,600,000
Net inc
62,400,000
58,700,000
Share earns
.96
.90


Conservatives Campaigning Against Missile Treaty
LEAD: With less than two weeks before the United States and the Soviet Union are to sign a treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles, conservative groups are scrambling to muster a grass-roots campaign to defeat it.


In the Age of Glasnost, Sekretnost
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev's policy of openness, or glasnost, fills Western news columns with unimaginable scenes: An actress, on stage, decries the fall of Boris Yeltsin, the Moscow party boss.
The emigre dancer Rudolf Nureyev returns to visit his sick mother.
U.S. scientists inspect Soviet chemical weapons plants, and


LASERLAND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LASERLAND CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
291,400
5,400
Net loss
234,600
88,500
9mo sales
742,700
6,900
Net loss
1,323,100
165,300


CATCH A RISING STAR reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CATCH A RISING STAR
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
285,584
25,000
Net loss
270,514
70,284
6mo rev
541,532
50,000
Net loss
680,070
160,171


How Hostages Can Become a Commodity
LEAD: To the Editor:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Becton Dickinson &amp; Co., Paramus, N.J., a maker of health care products, appointed E. Ralph Biggadike group president.


Gilbert Earns Berth
LEAD: Even though he lost in a tournament in Itaparica, Brazil, yesterday, Brad Gilbert of the United States clinched the eighth and final berth for next week's $500,0000 Grand Prix Masters tennis tournament in Madison Square Garden.


AT THE BAR
LEAD: Harvard and Yale are tied for No. 1, but Michigan, Stanford, and Columbia are not far behind.
Penn has dropped to 10th, followed by Texas at 11th and Duke at 12th.
Perennial Pac-10 rivals U.C.L.A. and U.S.C. are 14th and 17th, while Big Ten conference mates Minnesota and Wisconsin are neck and neck at 19 and 20.


JACKPOT ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACKPOT ENTERPRISES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,618,000
6,214,000
Net inc
846,000
603,000
Share earns
.18
.13


Restaurants
LEAD: THE cross-pollination of Eastern and Western cuisines over the last decade has spawned some electrifying food, particularly by leading proponents of contemporary California-style cuisine.
One of the most impressive practitioners of this genre in California is Wolfgang Puck, whose Chinois on Main in Santa Monica blends the esthetics of Oriental cuisines with the whimsy of so-called New American cooking.


THREE EXILES: STANDOFF NEGOTIATORS
LEAD: Jorge Mas Canosa, chairman of the Cuban American National Foundation, is the leader of a group of wealthy Cuban business leaders in Florida.
He is also regarded as the main driving force behind the National Coalition for a Free Cuba, a politcal action committee formed by the foundation.


New Face: Lou Liberatore; The Comic 'Burn This' Roommate
LEAD: LARRY is the perennial best friend, the sympathetic homosexual roommate who is forever listening to someone else's romantic troubles but who carefully avoids getting involved in any of his own.


Lord Duncan-Sandys, 79, Dead; Smoothed Way to End of Empire
LEAD: Lord Duncan-Sandys, the longtime British politician and diplomat who negotiated the independence of nearly a dozen British colonies and territories in the 1960's, died yesterday at his home in London.
He was 79 years old.


TV Weekend; 'Celebrating Gershwin,' in Two Parts
LEAD: THE 50th anniversary of George Gershwin's death -in 1937 at the age of 38 - is being noted this year with television specials the world over.
Public television here has been especially active and is now capping its efforts with a two-part music extravaganza entitled ''Celebrating Gershwin.'' Presented under the ''Great Performances'' umbrella, the first 90-minute segment can be seen tonight at 9 on Channel 13.


Texas A&amp;M Wins Trip to Cotton Bowl
LEAD: Keith Woodside of Texas A&amp;M attempting to catch a pass as Paul Behrman of Texas defended last night in College Station.
The Aggies' 20-13 victory earned them the Southwest Conference title for the third straight year.
They will face Notre Dame in the Cotton Bowl.
Page D11. (AP)


Boss Can Be Sued for Saying Too Much
LEAD: Employers like to talk about the people who work for them.
But if they say too much - or say it to the wrong people - the things they say may be used against them in court.


Advertising; Presidency Is Theme For A.I.G.
LEAD: WHEN Michael Drexler, the agency media mogul, transferred his allegiance to Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt from Doyle Dane Bernbach he brought with him his concept of ''event media,'' a panacea for advertising clutter.
His new bosses welcomed it.


MAY PETROLEUM reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAY PETROLEUM (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
903,000
4,627,000
Net loss
b583,000
3,126,000
9mo rev
11,552,000
16,668,000
Net inc
3,430,000
c14,631,000
Share earns
.23
-
b-After a writedown of $400,000 related to the value of marketable securities at Sept.


Markets In Role of Watchdogs
LEAD: The stock markets' collapse last month has forced governments to take politically unpalatable steps to manage their economies more soundly.


The Talk of Room 9; Get Me Rewrite, Sweetheart: Inside the Tumult of Room 9
LEAD: There are more than 25 rooms in City Hall, and of them, the mayor's office is no doubt the most important.
But just down the hall is a small chamber whose size belies its significance.
It is called Room 9 and, for generations, it has been home to the City Hall press corps.


2 Frenchmen to Be Freed, Beirut Captors Say
LEAD: The Revolutionary Justice Organization, a pro-Iranian group that is holding American and French hostages in Lebanon, said today that it would release two French captives within 24 hours.


LIKE THE NEW PAPER? YOU'LL SOON PAY
LEAD: For two years Steven Brill's publishing company has bought successful legal publications, added some gloss and some more reporters, and then notched up circulation and prices, in that order.


BANGOR HYDRO-ELECTRIC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANGOR HYDRO-ELECTRIC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,933,000
24,045,000
Net inc
1,014,000
1,857,000
Share earns
.21
.34
9mo rev
69,743,000
74,851,000
Net inc
4,924,000
b5,914,000
Share earns
1.03
1.11


ENVIRONMENTAL DIAGNOSTICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENVIRONMENTAL DIAGNOSTICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
584,633
577,575
Net loss
1,240,231
875,884
9mo rev
876,878
1,564,725
Net loss
2,523,927
2,651,110


THREE EXILES: STANDOFF NEGOTIATORS
LEAD: Armando Valladares, a 49-year-old poet and painter, spent 22 years in prison for criticizing Fidel Castro and was finally freed in 1982 after the intervention of President Francois Mitterand of France.


GENOVESE DRUG STORES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 6
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENOVESE DRUG STORES (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 6
1987
1986
Sales
70,221,000
61,247,000
Net inc
411,000
190,000
Share earns
.07
.03
40wk sales
228,484,000
196,326,000
Net inc
2,244,000
987,000
Share earns
.37
.17


Advertising; Drug Chain to Cargill
LEAD: Cargill, Wilson &amp; Acree/Tracy-Locke of Atlanta has become the agency for the Drug Emporium, a retail company based in Worthington, Ohio, that operates 130 health and beauty outlets in 36 markets in 25 states.
The budget is $10 million, the agency said, and the advertising will break on a market-by-market basis.


Policewoman Shoots Her Son, an Officer
LEAD: A 22-year-old off-duty New York City police officer was shot in the knee yesterday, apparently accidentally, by another police officer, his mother, at the home they share in Brooklyn.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 1987
LEAD:  International


LINCOLN N C REALTY FUND reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINCOLN N C REALTY FUND (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,265,000
1,732,000
Net inc
743,000
579,000
Share earns
.37
.29
9mo rev
3,797,000
3,427,000
Net inc
2,214,000
1,732,000
Share earns
1.11
.87


CCX NETWORK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CCX NETWORK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
14,837,000
8,555,000
Net inc
806,000
593,000
Share earns
.19
.15
Yr rev
48,576,000
32,986,000
Net inc
2,530,000
1,911,000
Share earns
.60
.48


L.I. School District Strives to Integrate
LEAD: Education officials here have approved magnet programs for three high schools in an effort to satisfy the state's demands to integrate the schools while keeping local control over the suburban district.


Money Fund Assets Dip
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 411 money market mutual funds decreased $665.2 million, to $262.05 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 111 institutional funds were down $224.3 million, to $74.15 billion.
Assets of the 207 general purpose funds fell $256.8 million, to $78.86 billion.


A Deal to Release Prison Hostages In Atlanta Collapses at Deadline
LEAD: A tentative agreement negotiated by three prominent Cuban-Americans to release some of the 94 hostages being held at the Federal Penitentiary here was reached Thursday night but fell apart shortly after midnight.


Dawkins Traded Again
LEAD: For the second time in less than two months, Darryl Dawkins, who was with the Nets before the season began, has been traded.
The Utah Jazz sent Dawkins to the Detroit Pistons yesterday for second-round draft picks in 1988 and 1990 and an undisclosed amount of cash.


Economic Scene; Taking a Look At P/E Ratios
LEAD: THE wild swings in the stock market last month, with a threatened ''meltdown'' on Black Monday and Terrible Tuesday, force attention to the question of what can be done to prevent crisis-born pessimism from jeopardizing the economy's real growth.


Closings for the Holiday
LEAD: The nation's stock and commodity markets were closed Thursday in observance of Thanksgiving Day.
Government offices, banks and most businesses were also closed.
All stock exchanges and most commodity markets will be open today, as usual.
However, the New York Mercantile Exchange and the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange will be closed.


AFP IMAGING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AFP IMAGING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,458,182
5,027,292
Net inc
163,321
138,474
Share earns
.03
.03


DREXLER TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DREXLER TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Revenue
3,073,000
3,920,000
Net loss
2,305,000
1,441,000
6mo rev
5,919,000
8,876,000
Net loss
4,994,000
1,760,000


Fordham Philosophy: Mix Old and New
LEAD: Tucked away in his tiny office on the sprawling Rose Hill campus of Fordham University, Larry Glueck breathes tradition.


Kasparov and Karpov Agree To a Draw in the 17th Game
LEAD: Gary Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov played just four more moves before agreeing to a draw yesterday in the 17th game of their world championship chess match in Seville, Spain.


SCIENCE MANAGEMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCIENCE MANAGEMENT (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,673,000
16,876,000
Net inc
b544,000
c252,000
Share earns
.20
.10
9mo sales
60,416,000
50,005,000
Net inc
b1,190,000
c305,000
Share earns
.44
.12


Stock Offered to South Africa Miners
LEAD: The Anglo American Corporation, a giant South African industrial and mining conglomerate, announced a $240 million plan today to make stockholders of its 250,000 employees, most of whom are black.


KRISCH AMERICAN reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KRISCH AMERICAN
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,911,501
222,459
Net inc
76,938
b109,566
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
3,585,595
-
Net loss
56,478
-
b-Net loss  The company began operations in August 1986; the year-ago quarter's results include only a two-month period and the 9 months' figures are unavailable.


Lewis George King, Company President, 58
LEAD: Lewis George King, the president of LCP Chemicals and Plastics in Edison, N.J., died of cancer last Friday in the M. D. Anderson Hospital in Houston.
He was 58 years old and lived in Colts Neck, N.J.


Submarines Now Dominate U.S. Nuclear Forces
LEAD: Since President Reagan started to modernize the nation's long-range nuclear forces six years ago, the balance of American striking power has shifted, almost unnoticed, from land to sea.


Antarctica's Ozone Loss Is Duplicated in Lab
LEAD: Scientists report that they have duplicated in the laboratory the same ice-cold chemical reactions that many of them believe lead to the annual hole in the ozone high above Antarctica.


6 Children Killed in Maryland Fire
LEAD: Firefighters outside a house in Seat Pleasant, near Washington, after a Thanksgiving Day fire left six children dead and six adults injured.
The children, ranging from 10 years to 9 months, were trapped in upstairs bedrooms by the blaze, which spread too rapidly to allow firemen a chance at a rescue.


Albuquerque's Oddness Keeps Growth in Check
LEAD: When Albuquerque surveyed corporate executives nationwide about their perceptions of this city a few years back, the results were a bit disappointing.


Building Plants in U.S. Adds Up for Foreigners
LEAD: A combination of protectionist worries, a falling dollar and a strong consumer base is continuing to encourage more foreign companies to build production plants in this country.


INTERNATIONAL INCOME PROPRTY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL INCOME PROPRTY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
564,000
b162,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo net loss
2,312,000
387,000
b-Net income


Art: The Apprenticeship Of Stuart Davis as a Cubist
LEAD: IT might be said that Stuart Davis's career was a protracted love affair with Cubism that began well and ended better.
The end is well known: the bright conglomerations of jagged forms, meandering lines and cursive writing that Davis painted in the decade before his death in 1964 are among the last masterpieces built upon a Cubist foundation.


GOOD GUYS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOOD GUYS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
30,400,000
23,900,000
Net inc
368,000
70,000
Share earns
.08
.02
Shares outst
4,451,000
4,315,000
Yr sales
120,200,000
89,500,000
Net inc
2,609,000
1,401,000
Share earns
.59
.35
Shares outst
4,439,000
4,008,000


7 Hopefuls Get Headstart in TV Ads
LEAD: Alexander M. Haig Jr. assures Americans that he is not trigger-happy.
Paul Simon tells voters that he is tough enough to lead.
Pat Robertson pictures himself as an unsolved jigsaw puzzle.
Michael S. Dukakis portrays the nation as a battered Revere bowl ready for caring hands.
Jack F. Kemp criticizes Bob Dole and Vice President Bush.


Robert B. Hudson, 82, Retired TV Executive
LEAD: Robert B. Hudson, a retired educator and public broadcasting executive, died of pulmonary failure Sunday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 82 years old.


4 Asian Economies Assailed
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is putting new pressure on the four most powerful economies in the developing world - Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong and Singapore - to alter the policies that have made their surpluses the fastest-growing segment of the American trade deficit.


14 INCHES OF SNOW FALLS IN VERMONT
LEAD: A storm dropped up to 14 inches of snow in northern Vermont today, snapping power lines but giving a strong start to the ski season.


A Foster Mother Opens a Big Heart to a Big Family
LEAD: Shatieka Kingsberry, now 13 years old, came to Eve Brown's house for dinner six years ago and never left. ''They said they were going to stop by for dinner,'' Ms.
Brown said yesterday as she prepared her Thanksgiving table. ''But it wasn't really that.
There was no place for her, so she ended up here.


OSHA IS WEIGHING DISEASE MEASURES
LEAD: The Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration said Wednesday that it was formally developing regulations to protect American workers from blood-borne diseases such as AIDS and hepatitis B. The job safety agency's Administrator, John Pendergrass, said the regulations, if put into effect, would be the first by OS


Why Doctors Treat Alcoholism as a Disease
LEAD: To the Editor:


BIOGEN N.V.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOGEN N.V.  (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,692,000
1,699,000
Net loss
6,990,000
7,516,000
9mo rev
9,336,000
8,370,000
Net loss
19,211,000
20,460,000


Chrysler Incentives Set
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation announced today that it would offer buyer incentives on some of its 1987 and 1988 cars.
Buyers can choose a $770 rebate or 7.7 percent financing on 1988 Dodge Lancers, Dodge 600's, Plymouth Caravelles and Chrysler LeBaron GTS's or coupes, as well as on 1987 Plymouth Caravelles and Dodge 600's.


BERRY PETROLEUM reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BERRY PETROLEUM
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,138,000
6,122,000
Net inc
2,592,000
1,274,000
Share earns
.29
.13
9mo rev
29,301,000
26,206,000
Net inc
5,727,000
b6,599,000
Share earns
.64
.67


Varied Hours Gain Support In Workplace
LEAD: Although the day after Thanksgiving is not a national holiday, a majority of the nation's private employers are treating it as one, giving their workers the day off with pay.


SOVIET SPUR SEEN IN CAMBODIA TALKS
LEAD: The Soviet Union has apparently played a major role in persuading Cambodia's Communist leaders to begin negotiating with Prince Norodom Sihanouk, according to foreign residents in this isolated capital.


COMPUTER MICROFILM reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER MICROFILM
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,959,448
2,323,771
Net inc
181,504
162,172
Share earns
.08
.07
9mo rev
8,724,386
7,381,413
Net inc
556,786
392,499
Share earns
.25
.18
The year-ago share earnings adjusted for a 10 percent stock dividend paid August 1987.


A Resignation In Greece
LEAD: The national economy minister, Kostas Simitis, resigned today and said Greece risked losing the benefit of its austerity program because of sudden changes in incomes policy announced by Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou.


BELDEN &amp; BLAKE ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELDEN &amp; BLAKE ENERGY (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,963,401
1,677,533
Net inc
274
b517,924
9mo rev
5,788,929
6,165,498
Net loss
387,728
c5,244,553
b-Net loss  c-Included a non-cash writedown of $4.1 million from a substantial reduction of selling prices.


KURZWEIL MUSIC SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KURZWEIL MUSIC SYSTEMS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,408,000
1,702,000
Net loss
988,000
1,065,000
9mo sales
6,734,000
4,416,000
Net loss
2,662,000
3,722,000


Devils Show Edmonton How to Succeed
LEAD: Who would have thought that after a quarter of the National Hockey League regular season, the Devils, a franchise that has never made the playoffs, would have a better record than the Edmonton Oilers, who have won three of the last four Stanley Cups?


Last Titan 2 Silo Is Dismantled in Arkansas
LEAD: Owen Sims, a cattle farmer, says he is breathing easier now that the last Titan 2 nuclear missile silo, situated over a ridge less than 2,000 feet from his home, has been dismantled.


FREEPORT-MCMORAN GOLD CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FREEPORT-MCMORAN GOLD CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
25,426,000
18,891,000
Net inc
7,317,000
4,494,000
Share earns
.18
.11
9mo rev
71,143,000
46,648,000
Net inc
20,068,000
8,396,000
Share earns
.49
.21


DYNAMIC HOMES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYNAMIC HOMES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,414,400
1,527,800
Net loss
26,300
106,500
9mo sales
3,805,800
3,451,800
Net loss
202,100
581,700


Pop/Jazz; Judy Collins, A Concern And a Bond
LEAD: FOR the contemporary pop singer who must woo and win the ear of a new generation every few years in order to survive, career longevity is a rare blessing.
Judy Collins, who celebrates her 25th anniversary of concertizing in New York at Carnegie Hall this evening, is certainly one of the blessed, having recorded continuously since 1961, beginning in folk music, and branching out into rock, country, theater and art songs.


Determined Nelson On Steady Course Back
LEAD: The letters are stacked by the hundreds in his six-bedroom house in Montvale, N.J.
They generally come from two groups of people: those who have had a similar illness and those who just want to wish him good health and a speedy recovery.


New Jersey Fights the Trash Tide
LEAD: People enjoying the sea and sand along New Jersey's shore one day last August had a nauseating surprise.
From Sandy Hook to Cape May, a 50-mile slick washed ashore carrying used hospital syringes, bags of household trash and thousands of empty crack bottles.
The gruesome garbage was just one of many incidents that closed New Jersey's beaches a record number of times.


CARDINAL DISTRIBUTION reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARDINAL DISTRIBUTION (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1987
1986
Sales
183,896,000
164,700,000
Net inc
1,225,000
1,376,000
Share earns
.25
.28
6mo sales
360,977,000
309,669,000
Net inc
2,411,000
2,559,000
Share earns
.49
.52


CLINICAL DATA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLINICAL DATA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,312,653
3,477,674
Net inc
b214,581
c123,747
Share earns
.07
.03
6mo rev
8,969,160
6,462,871
Net inc
b753,534
c186,179
Share earns
.25
.06
b-Includes tax credits of $78,000 and $176,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Auctions
LEAD:  American Art


The U.N. Today; Nov. 27, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


METRO DATELINE;
LEAD: A Great Neck, L.I., man charged with molesting boys enrolled in his computer school was ordered held on $1 million bond or $500,000 cash bail in a hearing yesterday at which his son was ordered jailed on similar charges, the authorities said.


'We're Going to Vote Anyway, 'Haitians Insist
LEAD: By nightfall, the streets of this city rapidly drain of their bustle and traffic, giving way to an eerie stillness, as Haitians abandon public places to avoid the violent death that each night claims more victims.


Army to Pay Town For Contamination Of Its Water Supply
LEAD: The Army has agreed to pay $9.1 million in damages and build and operate an $8.8 million filtration system for this city, whose water supply was contaminated by chemicals from an ammunition plant.


Vikings Win in Overtime
LEAD: A 24-yard touchdown run by Darrin Nelson with 7 minutes 51 seconds gone in overtime gave the Minnesota Vikings a 44-38 victory over Dallas today and severely damaged the Cowboys' playoff hopes.


Art People
LEAD:  High-Flying Insurance


Tulane Aide Recovering
LEAD: Jeff Seal, the sports information director at Tulane University, was in stable condition after surgery yesterday at Tulane Medical Center for wounds he suffered after he was kidnapped, robbed and shot through the lower back, the police said.
Three men were later arrested by the police in downtown New Orleans and charged in the incident.


Saudi Princess Burned
LEAD: Shoaa Al-Farhan, a Saudi princess and cousin of the late King Faisal, was in critical condition today with third-degree burns over 93 percent of her body, a hospital spokesman said.
The princess, who is believed to be in her early 40's, was flown here by private jet Wednesday night and taken by ambulance to the Baltimore Regional Burn Center at Francis Scott Key Medical Center, Lee Kennedy, the spokesman said.


Advertising; Publication From Omni Is Aimed at Physicians
LEAD: Omni magazine, published by Penthouse International Ltd., is bringing out a special edition for physicians this week that will carry only health-care advertising.


No Dousing This Season
LEAD: THERE are mitigating circumstances surrounding the unexpected demise of the Giants that will comfort their fans in the long off season ahead.
The National Football League players strike obviously played a key role, affecting the Giants more than most teams.


The Coming Foreign Raiders
LEAD: The dollar is falling and that means the British may be coming - and the Germans, the Japanese, the Swiss and the French.


Chicago Honors Its Fallen Mayor
LEAD: Honor guard of police officers carrying the coffin of Mayor Harold Washington into City Hall.
His body will lie in state there until tomorrow night.
Funeral will be held Monday.
Mr.
Washington, the first black to be Mayor of Chicago, died of a heart attack on Wednesday. (AP)


OPPENHEIMER GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OPPENHEIMER GROUP
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
158,300,000
212,600,000
Net loss
16,700,000
b4,400,000
6mo rev
381,400,000
366,500,000
Net inc
41,400,000
5,400,000
b-Net income  The company said the latest quarter's loss is attributed to the results of its Oppenheimer &amp; Co.


A Proper Basso and Hold the Garlic
LEAD: Robert Merrill, known for his singing at the Metropolitan Opera and Yankee Stadium, instructing Santa Claus look-alikes yesterday in the techniques necessary to convey an appropriate merry Christmas laugh.
Mr.
Merrill, national chairman of the Volunteers of America, and the red-suited students were at Lincoln Center for the opening of the organization's annual fund-raising drive.


ALLSTAR INNS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLSTAR INNS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,940,000
-
Net inc
878,000
-
Share earns
.07
-
6mo rev
23,210,000
-
Net inc
2,118,000
-
Share earns
.18
-
Share earnings represent units.


HUDSON FOODS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUDSON FOODS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Revenue
117,646,445
71,249,370
Net loss
1,431,226
b5,356,403
Share earns
-
.43
Yr rev
428,879,698
223,963,123
Net inc
12,918,757
13,477,670
Share earns
1.03
1.17


AMERICAN HEALTH COS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN HEALTH COS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,286,000
8,879,000
Net inc
b1,230,000
c1,595,000
Share earns
.17
.22
6mo rev
22,677,000
20,395,000
Net inc
b4,233,000
c3,628,000
Share earns
.59
.60


GENERAL AUTOMATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL AUTOMATION INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,174,000
9,788,000
Net loss
b923,000
c376,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
5,455,930
4,152,241
b-After extraordinary income of $152,000.


Talks Seen By Texaco, Pennzoil
LEAD: The top officials of Texaco Inc. and the Pennzoil Company held negotiations aimed toward resolving their landmark legal battle this week for the first time since April, an individual close to the companies said today.


NESBITT THOMSON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NESBITT THOMSON INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
44,200,000
42,700,000
Net inc
3,800,000
3,200,000
Share earns
.27
.25
Shares outst
14,400,000
12,900,000
6mo rev
95,100,000
65,400,000
Net inc
10,300,000
6,800,000
Share earns
.72
.57
Shares outst
14,400,000
11,900,000


BUSINESS MEN'S ASSURANCE CO OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUSINESS MEN'S ASSURANCE CO OF AMERICA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
126,663,000
100,332,000
Net inc
b61,228,000
c32,775,000
Share earns
5.84
-
9mo rev
338,179,000
300,336,000
Net inc
b64,378,000
c21,312,000
Share earns
6.14
-


MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC INDUSRIAL CO LTD (JAPAN) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC INDUSRIAL CO LTD (JAPAN) (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,180,700,000
7,180,100,000
Net inc
287,800,000
227,400,000
Share earns
1.47
1.25
6mo sales
16,064,900,000
15,071,200,000
Net inc
523,400,000
523,900,000
Share earns
2.69
2.88


Woman, Denied Admittance at Friars Club, Files Complaint
LEAD: A Los Angeles lawyer filed a sex-discrimination complaint against the all-male New York Friars Club yesterday, charging it with violating a city law that prohibits discrimination by clubs that are not ''distinctly private.''


ARROW ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARROW ELECTRONICS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
156,921,000
127,647,000
Net inc
b5,556,000
c8,852,000
Share earns
.62
-
9mo sales
451,620,000
397,105,000
Net inc
b9,534,000
c25,133,000
Share earns
.82
-


Rationale for Testing a Flawed Alzheimer Drug
LEAD: To the Editor:


36.47 Drop Puts Dow At 1,910.48
LEAD: Concern over the dollar's dropping near its historic lows - and more signs that inflation may be heating up - pushed stock prices sharply lower in sluggish post-holiday trading yesterday.


3 Players Banned
LEAD: Three football players at Northeast Louisiana University have been suspended for violation of team rules, Coach Pat Collins said yesterday.
The announcement came a day before Northeast Louisiana faced North Texas State in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I-AA playoffs.
The three seniors are the starting strong safety, Perry Harper; the second-team fullback, Kenneth Johnson, and the third-team defensive end, Rick Upshaw.


CONNECTICUT ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONNECTICUT ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
21,654,000
17,579,000
Net loss
2,057,000
2,496,000
9mo rev
111,425,000
111,063,000
Net inc
3,765,000
b4,879,000
Share earns
1.07
1.40
b-Includes a $1,911,000 gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


The Nonplussed Vexation
LEAD: Among matters that leave me nonplussed is the question why nobody says ''nonplussed'' anymore.
Now someone will want to write a letter saying: ''Wrong again, Mister Know It All.
I said 'nonplussed' just last Tuesday.''


Harvard Takes Acting to a Higher Level
LEAD: Over the last 200 years, Harvard University has been producing lawyers, doctors and business professionals.
Now, for the first time, it is also producing actors, directors and designers - and they are producing plays.


CETUS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CETUS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,617,000
10,605,000
Net loss
2,654,000
2,740,000


Shopping Hours at Stores and Malls
LEAD: More than 20 million shoppers will troop into stores and malls in the metropolitan area in the next month.


Aides Say Reagan Is Briefed for Talks
LEAD: White House officials, who received some criticism for having poorly prepared President Reagan for a summit conference last year with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, say the President is ready for his meeting with the Soviet leader next month.


U.N. Chief Frustrated Over Gulf Peace Effort
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar is frustrated by Iran's delay in sending an envoy for talks on the Iran-Iraq war but he will continue trying to bring peace to the area, his spokesman said today.


TV: 'Next President,' With David Frost
LEAD: David Frost begins a 13-part series tomorrow night with the men who would be President.
The first program, however, on Channel 9 at 11 o'clock, is about what happens to a candidate after he is elected.
Mr.
Frost speaks with President Reagan and former Presidents Jimmy Carter and Gerald R. Ford.
Mr.


Passing the Test
LEAD: In 265 drug tests administered at random to athletes competing in track and field events throughout Britain over the last 18 months, two positive results were obtained, according to an announcement yesterday in London by the British Amateur Athletics Board.
Sue Howland, an Australian javelin thrower, was suspended after testing positive for steroids at a meet in Belfast, Northern Ireland, last summer, and Jayne Andrews, a British sprinter, tested positive for a stimulant, but appealed successfully because she was taking the drug for a chest infection.


West Held Immune To Gulf Oil Shocks
LEAD: New realities affecting world oil supplies have put the industrial countries in a position to withstand even a major disruption of the flow of petroleum from the Persian Gulf, according to senior officials in the United States and other Western countries.


CORDIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORDIS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
29,717,000
22,594,000
Net inc
b1,179,000
c298,000
Share earns
.09
.02
b-Includes a tax credit of $476,000.
c-After income from discontinued operations of $463,000.


Dollar Drop Continues; Pound Is Above $1.80
LEAD: The dollar continued to slide and gold prices advanced in quiet trading yesterday.


Hyundai Duty Protested
LEAD: Trade Minister Rha Woong Bae protested today to Canada about a preliminary anti-dumping ruling against South Korea's popular Hyundai cars, a ministry spokesman said.
Canada's Revenue and Customs Department decided earlier this week that the Hyundai Motor Company was selling cars in Canada at unfairly low prices.


ENERGAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENERGAS CO
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
38,325,000
44,715,000
Net loss
770,000
1,160,000
Yr rev
232,923,000
236,372,000
Net inc
b5,398,000
3,704,000
Share earns
1.32
.95
b-Includes a one-time charge of $585,000 from repeal of investment tax credits and a one-time pretax charge of $1.2 million for costs associated with an early retirement program.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 41.


SANTA ANITA COS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANTA ANITA COS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,084,000
3,515,000
Net loss
509,000
b1,171,000
Share earns
-
.14
9mo rev
77,834,000
73,527,000
Net loss
10,142,000
b9,072,000
Share earns
-
1.10


Pop: Rosanne Cash Sings
LEAD: Rosanne Cash's warm, tremulous voice and her taste for intelligent lyrics have raised hopes that she will emerge as Nashville's answer to the 1970's Linda Ronstadt - someone who will win country, pop and rock listeners with well-written songs.
In her early set Tuesday at the Bottom Line, the material was carefully chosen as always: nearly every song had something telling to say about jealousy or longing or suppressed rage.


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 1987
LEAD:  International 3-6  The White House pressed for support in the Senate for the American-Soviet missile treaty by providing data to show that the pact contains tighter verification provisions than any previous accord.
Page 1  President Reagan is prepared, ''very well briefed'' and ''confident in our positions'' in advance of his meeting next month with Mikhail S.


Lillian B. Phipps, 81, Active in Horse Racing
LEAD: Lillian Bostwick Phipps, who was active in horse racing and the performing arts in New York for several decades after World War II, died yesterday at her home in Summerville, S.C.
She was 81 years old.


DIBRELL BROTHERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIBRELL BROTHERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
93,200,000
56,700,000
Net inc
3,308,016
2,448,040
Share earns
.96
.69


HEI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEI CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
25,968,000
20,753,000
Net loss
b1,689,000
d316,000
6mo rev
51,686,000
44,256,000
Net loss
b747,000
cd208,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-After a loss of $250,000 for the quarter and income of $1,529,000 for the 6 months, both from discontinued operations.


Rutgers Soccer: 2 Goals
LEAD: There is double enticement for Rutgers to win its Division I soccer playoff match at home tomorrow against Clemson.
Not only would a victory put the Scarlet Knights into the N.C.A.A.
Final Four, but it might also put the Final Four into Rutgers Stadium.


MEDICAL IMAGING OF AMERICA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDICAL IMAGING OF AMERICA INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,064,616
2,134,627
Net loss
530,452
866,049
9mo rev
10,366,740
5,269,527
Net loss
1,663,643
2,647,737
Revenue figures represent revenue under management.


Air Canada Halts Flights
LEAD: Air Canada began a systemwide shutdown today after the Government-run carrier was crippled by a ground workers strike, stranding thousands of passengers from Vancouver to Montreal.
The airline's 8,500 ground workers have been holding rotating walkouts throughout the country because they have been without a contract since June.


Regina Garruto Is Wed To Edward W. Nugent
LEAD: At Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church in Rumson, N.J., Regina Rose Garruto, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony R. Garruto of Monmouth Beach, N.J., was married yesterday to Edward William Nugent, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward E. Nugent of Old Bridge, N.J.
The Rev.
Frank Bruno performed the ceremony.


Life-Size Puppets
LEAD: The Famous People Players, a troupe of Canadian puppeteers who use life-size puppets of Barbra Streisand, Michael Jackson, Liberace and other celebrities, will perform at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Whitman Hall of Brooklyn College at 2 P.M. tomorrow.
The 13-member company uses classical and popular music, black lights and other props for an eclectic program of musical revues and fairy tales called ''A Little Like Magic.


Bond Ready to Sail
LEAD: In 1983, Alan Bond led the Australian challenge that wrested the America's Cup from the United States after 132 years of domination by the New York Yacht Club.
Bond said yesterday in Perth that in view of the decision this week by the New York State Supreme Court to allow America's Cup races to be contested by yachts longer than the models used exclusively for the last 30 years, the San Diego Yacht Club should abide by that finding and announce its intention to conduct a multinational and multichallenger series.


Thomas G. Lanphier Jr., 71, Dies; U.S. Ace Shot Down Yamamoto
LEAD: Thomas G. Lanphier Jr., the World War II fighter pilot who shot down the Japanese airplane carrying the architect of the attack on Pearl Harbor, died Thursday at the San Diego Veterans Administration Hospital at La Jolla, Calif.
He was 71 years old.


EVEREST &amp; JENNINGS INERNATIONATL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EVEREST &amp; JENNINGS INERNATIONATL (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
53,247,000
49,804,000
Net loss
113,000
cd805,000
Share earns
-
.10
9mo sales
152,398,000
144,342,000
Net inc
b20,000
d11,376,000
Share earns
-
1.41


Karpov Takes Timeout In Chess Title Match
LEAD: The challenger in the world chess championship match, Anatoly Karpov, took a timeout today, postponing until Monday the 18th game of his contest with the champion, Gary Kasparov.


Seton Hall Rolls Into N.I.T. Final
LEAD: Since the Big East Conference came into being in 1980, Seton Hall has usually been the league's doormat, counting success by the few victories it could eke out each season.


LASER PHOTONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LASER PHOTONICS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,536,152
1,392,689
Net loss
45,609
36,833
9mo sales
3,672,728
2,739,765
Net loss
48,607
953,460


Strategic Development
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tax and Eased Trade May Be Urged by Tokyo
LEAD: Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita, in his first major policy speech, said today that he might have to call on the Japanese ''to forbear and endure'' in the interest of smooth relations with other countries.


Plane Carrying 159 Is Missing
LEAD: A South African Airways plane with 159 people on board was overdue at the Indian Ocan island of Mauritius early today after reportedly sending an emergency signal as it neared the island, airline officials said.


Amid Tension, Haitians Report No New Killings
LEAD: Gunshots echoed throughout the capital Thursday night and early this morning, but for the first in a week there were no reports of killings or other violence aimed at disrupting the elections scheduled for Sunday.


The Greatest Show on Earth
LEAD: To walk around midtown Manhattan this week was a lot like touring a theater a few days before opening night.
The set was more or less in place, but some of the furniture was still in shrouds and several of the props were still en route.


INDUSTRIAL ACOUSTICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDUSTRIAL ACOUSTICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
17,702,000
12,088,000
Net inc
417,000
b212,000
Share earns
.17
-
9mo sales
49,800,000
42,400,000
Net inc
1,404,000
805,000
Share earns
.48
.28


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.69
N.A.
6.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.63
N.A.
5.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.20
6.14
5.41
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.88
N.A.
6.96
30-YR.


Sports of The Times; No Tuxedo for Earle Bruce
LEAD: THIS is the season for turkeys to be fixed and football coaches to be dismissed.
What, after all, would the holidays be without such traditional fare?


DECOM SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DECOM SYSTEMS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,190,000
3,260,000
Net inc
b59,000
c348,000
Share earns
.02
.13
Yr sales
9,831,000
13,189,000
Net inc
b850,000
c1,135,000
Share earns
.31
.42
b-Includes tax credits of $5,000 and $232,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


HARLEYSVILLE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARLEYSVILLE GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,310,000
c3,441,000
Share earns
.60
.48
9mo net inc
b10,626,000
c8,794,000
Share earns
1.48
1.48
Shares outst
7,169,434
5,942,361
b-After capital gains of $6,000 for the quarter and $377,000 for the 9 months.


PROPERTY TRUST OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROPERTY TRUST OF AMERICA (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
840,000
b800,000
Per share
.17
.16
9mo net inc
2,202,000
b3,385,000
Per share
.44
.67
b-Includes gains on the sale of real estate of $95,000 and $887,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Broadway's First Black Acting Star Is the Subject of a Play
LEAD: Charles Gilpin, who became the first black actor to star on Broadway when he won acclaim in the title role of ''The Emperor Jones'' by Eugene O'Neill, is the subject of a new play, ''The Emperor Charles,'' by Spencer Vibbert.


RIGHTS ABUSES 'DISTRESS' U.N.
LEAD: Members of the General Assembly adopted resolutions today that expressed ''deep concern'' over human rights violations in Iran, Afghanistan and Chile and concern over atrocities committed by Afghan and Soviet forces in their war against Afghan guerrillas.


CARL KARCHER ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARL KARCHER ENTERPRISES (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 2
1987
1986
Revenue
88,501,000
74,175,000
Net inc
b2,093,000
1,781,000
Share earns
.18
.17
Shares outst
11,791,042
10,658,589
9mo rev
280,739,000
240,772,000
Net inc
b11,789,000
4,212,000
Share earns
1.06
.40
Shares outst
11,092,998
10,636,367


Dresser to Buy M. W. Kellogg
LEAD: Dresser Industries said today that it had signed a letter of intent to acquire the M. W. Kellogg Company, an engineering and construction concern, from Henley Group Inc. of La Jolla, Calif.


Like the Oakdale Deal, 26 Yellow Balloons Remain Grounded
LEAD: Twenty-six yellow helium balloons, each inscribed with the name of one of 26 hostages, were set to be released from their ground harness yesterday at the Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Center in Oakdale, La.
The cause of the celebration was the apparent agreement between Government negotiators and rebellious Cuban inmates at the town's


HOSTAGE EXCHANGE BARRED IN ATLANTA
LEAD: Mayor Xavier Suarez of Miami and 13 other Cuban-American leaders spent seven hours with prison officials here today, and some of the visitors offered to trade places with 94 people being held hostage in the Federal penitentiary here.


Doctors Check Wilkins
LEAD: Doctors at the Hughston Sports Medicine Hospital in Columbus, Ga., said yesterday that Dominique Wilkins, the Atlanta Hawks' star forward, does not have structural damage in his sore right knee.
They prescribed exercise and said Wilkins could be back in action soon.
Wilkins was flown to Columbus from Indianapolis, where the Hawks played the Pacers last night, for the examination by Dr.


CONSOLIDATED FIBRES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED FIBRES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
30,807,000
27,313,000
Net inc
b797,000
403,000
Share earns
.40
.20
b-Includes a tax credit of $274,000.


Guidepost
LEAD:  Certificates of Deposit: Best 6-Month Deals


Two Frenchmen Freed in Beirut; Talks Reported
LEAD: Two Frenchmen held hostage in Lebanon were released today by a shadowy group identifying itself as the Organization of Revolutionary Justice.


Weather Service Predicting A Stormy Winter in the East
LEAD: Winter should be wet and stormy on the East Coast, cold in the Midwest and the Deep South, and warm and dry in the Southwest, the Government's chief long-range forecaster said today.


AUDEC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUDEC CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,736
43,089
Net loss
264,205
147,676
9mo sales
29,766
93,471
Net loss
688,719
628,981


Effect of Inflation On Capital Gains
LEAD: To the Editor:


GENRAD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENRAD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 3
1987
1986
Revenue
48,191,000
40,974,000
Net inc
b1,525,000
cd8,739,000
Share earns
.09
-
9mo rev
143,083,000
123,495,000
Net loss
b38,163,000
d28,368,000
b-After a tax credit of $400,000 connected with discontinued operations for the quarter and a loss from discontinued operations of $7,379,000, a tax credit of $890,000 and a provision of $34.5 million for disposition of discontinued operations for the 9 months.


5 Die in Texas Blaze; 6 Killed in Maryland
LEAD: Fire swept through a mobile home in Jasper, Tex., yesterday, killing three boys and two women, officials said.


Reagan Urges Action On Plan to Cut Deficit
LEAD: President Reagan urged Congress today to move quickly on what he termed ''the vital task'' of putting $75 billion in budget cuts into effect.


BRITISH TELECOM PLC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRITISH TELECOM PLC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,126,000,000
3,826,000,000
Net inc
557,000,000
496,000,000
Share earns
.93
.83
6mo rev
8,025,000,000
7,475,000,000
Net inc
1,119,000,000
988,000,000
Share earns
1.86
1.65


Music: Audubon Quartet
LEAD: The Audubon String Quartet earned more gratitude for its introduction of a lucid new piece - Ezra Laderman's Quintet for Clarinet and Strings, with James Campbell as guest soloist - than for its playing of the standard repertory Tuesday at Merkin Concert Hall.


ALPHA 1 BIO MEDICALS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALPHA 1 BIO MEDICALS (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
174,967
6,859
Net loss
498,460
167,490
6mo rev
413,275
1,418,606
Net loss
566,741
b1,116,552
Share earns
-
.49
b-Net income and includes a tax loss carryforward of $497,000.


Dukakis Staff Is Changed, But a Shake-Up Is Denied
LEAD: The press secretary for Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's Presidential campaign resigned today and another top staff member was given a new assignment.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


In a Haiti Town, A Time to Vote Is a Time of Fear
LEAD: Two miles short of St.-Marc, a sleepy coastal town, traffic came to a screeching halt.


ALOETTE COSMETICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALOETTE COSMETICS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,310,000
2,874,000
Net inc
427,000
516,000
Share earns
.15
.18
9mo sales
9,383,000
8,723,000
Net inc
1,241,000
1,478,000
Share earns
.42
.58


Former Teammate Helps Beat Devils
LEAD: Greg Adams, a former member of the New Jersey Devils, scored two goals and had two assists to help the Vancouver Canucks beat the Devils, 4-2, tonight.


Four in Inquiry Were Lauded On Arrest Rate
LEAD: The commander of four New York City transit police officers suspected of making scores of false or improper arrests in the subways used a rating system to reward those who made the most arrests and issued the most summonses with the best assignments and work schedules.


Businesses Don't Need Rent Control
LEAD: As markets for office space tighten up, local governments are tempted by talk of commercial rent control.
In New York City, 19 members of the City Council have succumbed: they offer a bill allowing commercial rents to be set by arbitrators.
The potential for damage to the city's economy from such a restriction on the free market far outweighs any conceivable benefit.


Ex-Judge John F. Scileppi, Author Of Opinion Banning Miller Novel
LEAD: John F. Scileppi, a former associate justice of the New York State Court of Appeals, died of a heart attack Thursday at University Hospital in Stony Brook, L.I.
He was 85 years old.


SIGMA RESEARCH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIGMA RESEARCH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,298,397
1,336,188
Net loss
705,829
988,626


Solemn Duty
LEAD: Governor Cuomo joining more than 1,000 state troopers at the funeral for Trooper Thomas J. Consorte yesterday in Mastic Beach, L.I..


Anton Pieck, Painter, 92
LEAD: Anton Pieck, a painter whose quaint 19th-century scenes have appeared on millions of Christmas cards worldwide, died Wednesday.
He was 92 years old.


PAULEY PETROLEUM reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAULEY PETROLEUM (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
37,320,000
32,422,000
Net loss
b441,000
c1,002,000
Share earns
-
.35
Yr rev
142,042,000
164,991,000
Net loss
167,000
c5,004,000
Share earns
-
1.72


More Non-Catholic Students Trying Catholic Schools
LEAD: Every weekday morning, 7-year-old Jamina Handanovic puts on a plaid uniform and heads for St.
Joseph's Parochial School in lower Manhattan, where she studies reading, writing, math, science and Catholicism.


Syracuse Trounces Anchorage by 95-76
LEAD: Stephen Thompson scored 19 points as Syracuse bounced back from a season-opening loss by routing Alaska-Anchorage, 95-76, tonight in the 10th Great Alaska Shootout.


Family Split 58 Years Ago Has Reunion
LEAD: Five siblings put up for adoption 58 years ago by parents who were unable to feed them reunited over a Thanksgiving feast Thursday and found they had more in common than physical features.


FIDATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIDATA CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,053,000
1,859,000
Net inc
b150,000
cd3,521,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
3,861,000
24,350,000
Net inc
b1,225,000
d15,047,000
Share earns
.28
3.39


U.S. AIDES SAY PACT HAS STRICT TERMS ON VERIFYING ARMS
LEAD: In a campaign to build Senate support for the missile treaty with the Soviet Union, the Administration provided details today to show that the pact contains tougher verification provisions than those agreed to in the past.


GRAND AUTO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAND AUTO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 25
1987
1986
Sales
44,152,000
42,314,000
Net loss
3,378,000
b628,000
Share earns
-
.20
9mo sales
128,221,000
126,377,000
Net loss
3,397,000
b848,000
Share earns
-
.28


Alma M. Santoso Marries Jonathan Lawrence Katz
LEAD: Alma Maria Santoso, a daughter of Virginia Santoso of Jakarta, Indonesia, and the late Vince Santoso, was married yesterday to Jonathan Lawrence Katz at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph J. Katz, in Fairfield, Conn.
Robert Gillette, a justice of the peace in Fairfield, officiated.


Youth Symphony
LEAD: The New York Youth Symphony, conducted by Peter Rubardt, will perform works by Stravinsky, Vaughan Williams and Dvorak, along with the premiere of ''American Slick,'' by William Doerrfeld, at 3 P.M. tomorrow in Carnegie Hall.
The concert is free.
Information: 581-5933.


London Subway Toll at 31
LEAD: The death toll in the London subway fire rose to 31 today, and thousands of mourners lined streets in central London for the funeral of a fire chief killed trying to rescue victims.
The latest victim died in hospital of severe burns.


DOLLAR GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOLLAR GENERAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
136,879,000
133,966,000
Net inc
749,000
737,000
Share earns
.04
.04
9mo sales
398,863,000
378,632,000
Net inc
1,225,000
616,000
Share earns
.07
.03


Treasury Issues Drop Sharply
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities fell sharply yesterday in extremely thin trading.


Bruce, Ohio State Settle
LEAD: John Elam, an attorney for Ohio State, said today that Earle Bruce, who was dismissed as the football coach Nov. 16, had dropped a lawsuit against the university in return for a settlement of $471,000 to be paid in three business days.


Pop: Joe Cocker and Band
LEAD: Joe Cocker, who for more than 15 years has epitomized the ''blue-eyed soul'' shouter, arrived at the Beacon Theater on Wednesday with a whole troupe of musicians.
A strong six-man band was augmented by a horn section and three tambourine-shaking female backup singers.
Together, they kicked up the kind of pop-blues furor that inevitably reminded one of the 1970 ''Mad Dogs and


Runner Appeals
LEAD: Sandra Gasser, a Swiss runner who was banned from competition for two years by the International Amateur Athletic Federation on Sept. 29 after failing a test for steroids at the world track championships in Rome, has filed an appeal that seeks to overturn that penalty as well as the revocation of her bronze medal in the women's 1,500-meter race at the world competition in Rome.


GULF APPLIED TECHNOLOGIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GULF APPLIED TECHNOLOGIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,979,000
6,850,000
Net loss
674,000
cd246,000
Share earns
-
.08
9mo rev
11,774,000
18,099,000
Net inc
b1,832,000
d22,000
Share earns
.56
.01


Miss Rose, a Producer, Marries Alan D. Lafer
LEAD: Susan Robin Rose, a Broadway producer and a partner in ERB Productions, an entertainment production company, and Alan David Lafer, a general partner and the director of research for Lafer Amster &amp; Company, a New York Stock Exchange member firm, were married yesterday.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the New York home of Mr.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 12..


Flanagan and Mraz
LEAD: The duo of Tommy Flanagan on piano and George Mraz on bass will perform at 9:45 tonight and tomorrow at Bradley's, 70 University Place (228-6440).
There is no cover charge or minimum.


The Speaker Who Ruled With an Iron Fist
LEAD: To the Editor:


TRUST AMERICA SERVICE reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRUST AMERICA SERVICE (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
480,000
627,000
Share earns
.14
.28
Shares outst
3,547,493
2,238,740


Fate of Homeless Woman Is Debated in Court
LEAD: The Koch administration urged an appellate court yesterday to permit it to continue to hospitalize Joyce Brown, the first person picked up under a new city program for the mentally ill homeless.


Chopped to the Bone at State
LEAD: The cliche has it that the State Department has no domestic constituency and is therefore vulnerable to ruinous Congressional budgetary cuts.
But the department does have a constituency, though it's amorphous and diffuse.
Every traveler is a constituent; so is every travel agent and every international airline.


Forwood Wiser Jr., Aviation Executive Who Led 3 Carriers
LEAD: Forwood C. Wiser Jr., an aviation executive whose career included stints as president of three airlines, died of Alzheimer's disease Monday at Foothill Acres Nursing Home in Neshanic, N.J.
He was 66 years old and lived in Princeton, N.J.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Skiing  Italian Wins Special Slalom: Alberto Tomba of Italy opened the men's World Cup ski season by scoring his first World Cup victory yesterday in the special slalom in Sestriere, Italy.
Jonas Nilsson of Sweden and Guenther Mader of Austria finished second and third.
Felix McGrath, Alexander Williams, Tiger Shaw and Troy Watts, all Americans, all dropped out in the first heat.


Newark Rips Down Its Projects
LEAD: The Scudder Homes are gone.
The Columbus Homes are going.
All told, Newark is on the way to demolishing nearly one-third of its public housing, even as waiting lists carry the names of 11,000 families.


ENVIRONMENTAL POWER reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENVIRONMENTAL POWER (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
171,948
39,957
Net loss
319,825
243,682
9mo rev
361,291
295,541
Net loss
718,665
461,427


Losses Seen At Allegheny
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc. today estimated its net losses at $215 million for the third quarter and $285 million for the first nine months of 1987.
The company also said it would pay no dividends for the sixth consecutive quarter.


FINE HOMES INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FINE HOMES INTERNATIONAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
183,323,000
-
Net inc
7,561,000
-
Share earns
.25
-
The results are Fine Homes' first quarter as a public company, which went public in June.


ADAMS RESOURCES &amp; ENERGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADAMS RESOURCES &amp; ENERGY INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,861,000
16,387,000
Net inc
b1,058,000
c138,000
Share earns
.14
.01
9mo rev
49,970,000
54,010,000
Net inc
b1,751,000
c1,557,000
Share earns
.21
.18


Suns Hand Nets 4th Straight Loss
LEAD: Mike Sanders scored a career-high 29 points tonight as the Phoenix Suns beat dealt the New Jersey Nets their fourth consecutive loss, 113-107.


MALAYSIA TO ISSUE NEW PRESS CURBS
LEAD: The Government has proposed a bill prescribing bans on publications that alarm public opinion and the suspension of journals that run articles judged to be against Malaysia's national interest.


Just the Trimmings
LEAD: Paul Dugal's relatives had come from as far as Texas for Thanksgiving dinner, but dinner did not go quite as planned. ''I proceeded to roast my turkey on the barbecue pit and I was about ready to dig in,'' Mr.
Dugal said. ''I came in to freshen up and went out to baste it one last time, but when I did the turkey was gone.


EASTOVER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTOVER CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
871,000
846,000
Net inc
b378,000
c269,000
Share earns
.30
.21
9mo rev
2,915,000
2,573,000
Net inc
b1,144,000
c1,461,000
Share earns
.91
1.15
b-Includes gains of $257,000 and $455,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, from the sale of real estate.


Transactions
LEAD:  COLLEGES


Turkey Hunter, 17, Is Slain
LEAD: A 17-year-old hunter was shot to death by a 12-year-old who heard a turkey call made by the older boy, the police said.
The authorities are witholding the names of both boys.
No charges have been filed in the shooting, which has been called an accident.


No Settlement in Bhopal Case
LEAD: District Judge M. W. Deo said today that he would consider a request for interim relief to help surviving victims of the 1984 gas leak from a Union Carbide plant in Bhopal that killed more than 2,800 people and injured more than 200,000.


ELCOTEL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELCOTEL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,247,000
2,459,000
Net inc
1,146,000
559,000
Share earns
.20
.15
Shares outst
5,707,000
3,710,000
6mo sales
10,661,000
4,477,000
Net inc
1,924,000
1,008,000
Share earns
.34
.27
Shares outst
5,708,000
3,718,000


Richard Attenborough On Art and the World
LEAD: ''I don't want to preach to the converted,'' said Sir Richard Attenborough, whose film, ''Cry Freedom'' -about the friendship between the slain South African black leader Stephen Biko and Donald Woods, a white newspaper editor - opened in New York this month. ''But I do want to reach the unknowing and the uncaring.


Carol Vaness Debut
LEAD: Carol Vaness, the Metropolitan Opera soprano, will make her New York recital debut at 3 P.M. tomorrow at Alice Tully Hall.
Miss Vaness, who made her New York City Opera debut in October 1979 and her Met debut four years later, will sing the New York premiere of a song cycle written for her by John Kander, the Broadway composer, as well as works by Richard Strauss, Rossini, Tosti and Chausson.


About New York; Hail to the City: A Media Show Hits Hard Times
LEAD: About five million people have seen ''The New York Experience'' since the tribute to the city opened in 1973, and lately some have been complaining that the sound and light blitzkrieg is getting a little long in the tooth.
This is perfectly understandable, says a spokesman for the enterprise; extensive, expensive updating was planned, but lease troubles have taken priority.


ROHR INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROHR INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Nov 1
1987
1986
Sales
202,641,000
158,532,000
Net inc
7,173,000
8,744,000
Share earns
.40
.50
The company said that effective Aug. 1, it implemented provisions of the Financial Accounting Board for Employers' Accounting for Pensions, resulting in a reduction of pension expense in fiscal 1988, compared with 1987 by $2.9 million, which is not considered to have a material effect on fiscal 1988 results of operations.


Howard Loses Injunction Bid
LEAD: A Federal judge today denied Howard University's request that Saturday's Division I-AA football playoff games be halted while Howard sues the N.C.A.A. over its exclusion from postseason play.
United States District Judge


Patents; Balloon Used in Clamp For Vascular Surgery
LEAD: Dr.
Howard C. Baron of New York received a patent this week for a vascular balloon clamp to be used in surgery involving arteries and veins.
He explains that it is necessary to set clamps above and below an operation site, but hard-jaw metal clamps now in use can injure the artery wall.


More Wheat for Soviet
LEAD: United States farmers will be able to sell an additional 2.35 million metric tons of wheat to the Soviet Union under an expanded export program announced today by the Agriculture Department.
The Government had previously given farmers approval to sell nearly 6.4 million metric tons of wheat to the Soviet Union.


TALKS ARE PUT OFF
LEAD: A tentative agreement was reached today to free 26 hostages held by Cuban detainees here, but it fell apart at the last minute.


PRUDENTIAL REALTY TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRUDENTIAL REALTY TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
1,026,139
955,185
Per share
.09
.09
9mo net inc
3,072,401
3,145,643
Per share
.28
.29


Officers Vow to Tighten Security In Courts, Even if It Slows Cases
LEAD: Officers assigned to guard prisoners in New York State courts will adopt stricter security procedures, their union leaders said yesterday.
They acknowledged the move may greatly increase the time needed to process cases.


Israeli Army Assailed Over Glider Raid
LEAD: The army is traditionally viewed here as a national symbol above reproach, but today its command came under harsh criticism from Israeli newspapers for its failure to stop a Palestinian guerrilla on a motorized hang glider from penetrating the northern border and attacking a military base.


CHARTER-CRELLIN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHARTER-CRELLIN INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,498,000
8,338,000
Net inc
555,000
344,000
Share earns
.35
.22
9mo sales
34,696,000
26,537,000
Net inc
1,910,000
1,431,000
Share earns
1.20
1.17
Shares outst
1,590,000
1,190,000


MET OPERA: MOZART'S 'ENTFUHRUNG'
LEAD: The return of Mozart's ''Entfuhrung aus dem Serail'' Thursday night does not add to the Metropolitan Opera's season.
Jocelyn Herbert's two-dimensional cutouts against a bright blue sky must have had charm when fresh.
Today they look frayed and shabby.
The production is eight years old and has not aged well.


CHAMBERS DEVELOPMENT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAMBERS DEVELOPMENT CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
15,633,000
7,925,000
Net inc
2,641,000
b1,295,000
Share earns
.23
.15
9mo sales
42,662,900
20,580,000
Net inc
6,805,000
b3,308,000
Share earns
.65
.37


Matsushita Plans To Import TV's
LEAD: The Matsushita Electric Industrial Company said it would start importing color televisions from one of its American subsidiaries in late 1988 in an effort to help ease trade frictions between the United States and Japan.
Initial imports of the 25- to 31-inch television sets made by the Matsushita Industrial Corporation at Franklin Park,


Economists Caution on Risks In Continued Drop of Dollar
LEAD: Despite widespread support within the United States for a deeper and deeper depreciation of the dollar, many economists are beginning to warn that, along with the potential benefits, there are significant costs and some substantial risks.


APPLIED BIOSCIENCE INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APPLIED BIOSCIENCE INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,073,000
6,720,000
Net inc
720,000
476,000
Share earns
.23
.16
9mo rev
23,855,000
18,998,000
Net inc
2,058,000
1,460,000
Share earns
.66
.49


Israeli Radio and TV Return To Air After a 52-Day Strike
LEAD: Israel's state-run radio and television stations resumed broadcasting today after a 52-day strike.


Seoul Bars Electioneering in Military
LEAD: The South Korean Defense Minister told his top commanders today not to interfere in next month's presidential election and to allow their soldiers to vote by secret ballot for the candidate of their choice.


BIW CABLE SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIW CABLE SYSTEMS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,381,855
10,402,957
Net loss
610,265
1,435,830
9mo sales
33,977,127
35,411,100
Net inc
b264,116
c3,217,395
Share earns
.12
-
b-Includes a gain of about $2.2 million from the sale of the company's Boston corporate headquarters.


Illinois Got a Third of U.S. Road Repair Fund
LEAD: Illinois got one-third of all the Federal money earmarked for interstate highway repairs in the last two years, a statistic that its officials attribute to the state's old roads and its ability to ''work the system.''


Developers Expanding Role in Social Services
LEAD: For decades real estate developers have played a catalytic, often decisive part in creating the economic character, social profile and sometimes even the government of much of metropolitan America.


BALTIMORE GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for 12mo Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALTIMORE GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
12mo Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,831,039,000
1,824,377,000
Net inc
294,089
276,646
Share earns
3.40
3.18


Your Money; O-T-C Issues: New Wariness
LEAD: DANIEL ZIRINSKY, a Long Island City property owner, has long been an investor in over-the-counter stocks, but after the collapse of the stock market in October he plans to concentrate on securities listed on the major exchanges.


New York's School System in Crisis
LEAD: The burst of pronouncements this past week by Mayor Koch, Governor Cuomo and others about what is wrong with the New York City Board of Education and the all-but-forced resignation of perhaps its most talented member brought into the open what some have long thought: that the school system is in crisis.


How Faculty Should Advise the Student Press
LEAD: To the Editor:


Latin Chiefs Denounce 'Rich Countries' on Debt
LEAD: In sharp and insistent terms, the Presidents of eight Latin American countries today condemned what they characterized as intransigence on the part of the United States and other ''rich countries'' and called for concessions on the region's spiraling foreign debt.


AIRBORNE FREIGHT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIRBORNE FREIGHT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
162,095,000
137,540,000
Net inc
418,000
4,425,000
Share earns
.06
.75
Shares outst
7,033,000
5,891,000
9mo rev
461,716,000
397,074,000
Net inc
4,180,000
7,366,000
Share earns
.65
1.25
Shares outst
6,440,000
5,913,000


Adams Thrives Little by Little
LEAD: The football team at John Adams High School in Queens has an advantage in size over its opponents, even though its players are smaller than most in the Public Schools Athletic League.


AMERICAN SHARED HOSPITAL SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN SHARED HOSPITAL SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,659,702
1,812,663
Net inc
161,250
60,491
Share earns
.08
.03
9mo rev
5,538,240
5,315,952
Net inc
511,043
90,825
Share earns
.24
.04


GMI GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GMI GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,325,000
6,189,000
Net loss
b458,000
c99,000
9mo rev
23,484,000
12,111,000
Net loss
607,000
c178,000
Share earns
-
.07
b-Includes a pretax provision of $220,000 and $427,000 for unrealized loss in the market value of the company's investment in a federal securities fund.


Pop: Bo Diddley Tour
LEAD: Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones made a movie with an idol, Chuck Berry.
Perhaps by coincidence, the other Stones guitarist, Ron Wood, is now touring with another rock-and-roll pioneer, Bo Diddley.
The Bo Diddley beat - part mambo, part blues - is a cornerstone of rock, and the thick, raunchy sound of Mr.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is the worst, most terrifying massacre we've ever seen, and that's including the war years.
This is quite barbaric.'' - Ted Kirby, of the Commercial Farmers Union of Zimbabwe.  [ 1:2. ]


Williams May Miss Match With Giants
LEAD: The Giants, who had expected to contend with Doug Williams as the rival quarterback when they play the Redskins Sunday in Washington, may face Jay Schroeder instead.


Books of The Times; God as a Nuisance
LEAD: OUR FATHER.
By Bernice Rubens. 212 pages.
Delacorte Press. $16.95. ''Veronica Smiles was crossing the Sahara desert, minding her own business, when she ran into God.''


Marianne Faithfull
LEAD: Marianne Faithfull will perform at 8 and 11 P.M. tomorrow at the Bottom Line, 14 West Fourth Street (228-6300).
Tickets are $13.50.


Despite Success, Research Centers Are Rebuffed by 2 Major Universities
LEAD: Telephones at the Center for Strategic and International Studies began ringing off the hook last September as American and Soviet negotiators neared an agreement limiting intermediate-range nuclear weapons.


Peter Hujar Dies at 53; Made Photo Portraits
LEAD: Peter Hujar, a photographer known for his portraits of personalities in the cultural world, died of AIDS-related pneumonia at Cabrini Medical Center on Thursday.
He was 53 years old and lived in Manhattan.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Consumer's World
The cash register of the future is here in time for the Christmas rush.
And a guide to holiday hours and services at major stores and malls.
Page 48.
Joyce Brown's Battle
The debate over Joyce Brown, a homeless woman hospitalized against her will, moved into a New York appeals court.


Bank Puts Off Offering
LEAD: National Westminster Bank P.L.C. said it had postponed for the time being its earlier plans to raise about $:100 million through a public share offer in Japan and to list its ordinary shares on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
It said in a statement that this decision had been taken ''in view of the significant changes which have taken place in the world equity markets since the middle of October.


EL POLLO ASADO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 11
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EL POLLO ASADO
Qtr to Oct 11
1987
1986
Revenue
2,869,145
2,476,063
Net loss
941,328
b261,732
Share earns
-
.07
28wk rev
7,542,695
4,727,030
Net loss
1,197,274
b294,510
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


A Purist's Pursuit Of Cross-Country
LEAD: The sky was clear, the night bright in Alamosa, Colo., when Pat Porter went to bed Wednesday evening.
When he awoke at 5 o'clock the next morning, a blizzard had hit and 10 inches of snow had fallen.
Not surprisingly, his flight to New York was in jeopardy.
Typically, his morning run was not.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD: Awright, Youse Guys!


ADAMS-RUSSELL ELECTRONICS CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADAMS-RUSSELL ELECTRONICS CO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
35,315,000
29,144,000
Net loss
b1,477,000
c759,000
Share earns
-
.12
Yr sales
130,757,000
113,117,000
Net inc
b1,275,000
6,698,000
Share earns
.20
1.06


FOR ZIMBABWE MISSIONARIES, A NIGHT OF TERROR AND DEATH
LEAD: All those who have seen the blood-drenched bedroom at Olive Tree Farm - where eight people, missionaries and their children, were hacked to death - come away grim and tight-lipped.


East Berlin Journal; Strange Bedfellows: Marxists Embrace Nietzsche
LEAD: A re-evaluation of the 19th-century philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche has begun here with the endorsement of the Communist authorities, despite Nietzsche's reputation as one of the principal spiritual fathers of Nazism.


Earthquake Felt in Virginia
LEAD: A minor earthquake registering 3.7 on the Richter scale occurred today in southwestern Virginia, the United States Geological Survey reported.
The quake was centered near Pennington Gap, Va., about 20 miles southeast of Harlan, Ky.
Residents in Harlan and in Wise and Lee Counties in Virginia reported feeling tremors, the Federal agency said.


New York F.B.I. Chief Plans to Retire
LEAD: After only 14 months as head of the flagship office of the F. B. I., Thomas L. Sheer said yesterday that he would retire at the end of the year as assistant director in New York to take a better-paying position as a private security consultant.


E'TOWN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*E'TOWN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,176,476
17,458,978
Net inc
2,852,831
2,442,887
Share earns
1.21
1.02
9mo rev
51,092,218
50,240,334
Net inc
6,865,165
6,640,261
Share earns
2.82
2.75


The Talk of Garden State Plaza; Scene at Mall in Jersey: Toys, Tinsel and Frenzy
LEAD: It's 8:30 in the morning, much too early to be leaning against a wall in a shopping mall, but Joy Vicari is here, waiting patiently outside Child World, a large, well-stocked toy store that today will serve as one of the focal points of this 1.3-million-square-foot center of consumerism.


Why the Cubans Riot
LEAD: Of course the United States has the right to send back to Cuba refugees who never qualified for admission and who have committed crimes in America.
But should it do so?
Not necessarily.


Bangladesh Declares Emergency and Bans Strikes
LEAD: Lieut.
Gen.
H.
M.
Ershad declared a state of emergency in Bangladesh today and banned all anti-Government strikes and protests.


Jerry Carlson, Conductor, 31
LEAD: Jerry Carlson, conductor of the Gay Men's Chorus of Los Angeles, died of complications from AIDS on Monday at his home here.
He was 31 years old.


ACADEMY INSURANCE GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACADEMY INSURANCE GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,192,000
c743,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo net inc
b3,811,000
c9,237,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Includes tax credits of $463,000 and $1,524,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Inquiry On Index Trading
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission is looking into reports of possible manipulation of a sparsely traded stock index futures contract, the Major Market Index, during last month's market collapse, officials of the agency said today.


U.S. Cable Agrees To Acquire Essex
LEAD: The Essex Communications Corporation said it had reached a definitive agreement to merge with a subsidiary of the U.S.
Cable Television Group L.P. for $102.7 million in cash.
U.S.
Cable will also buy the assets of four partnerships affiliated with Essex for $122.3 million.


AMERICAN RELIANCE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN RELIANCE GROUP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,454,000
c1,669,000
Share earns
.55
.63
9mo net inc
b4,868,000
c2,604,000
Share earns
1.84
1.32
Shares outst
2,649,000
1,966,000
b-Includes gains of $339,000 for the quarter and $1,136,000 for the 9 months.


Frank E. Schwartz, 40, Book Publisher, Dies
LEAD: Frank E. Schwartz, a book publisher and marketing innovator, died of a heart attack Wednesday while on vacation in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
He was 40 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Auburn Is Heading for the Sugar Bowl
LEAD: Jeff Burger took Auburn on a 99-yard touchdown drive in the first half and the Tigers defeated Alabama, 10-0, today to win the Southeastern Conference football title and a Sugar Bowl bid to play undefeated Syracuse.


ALLIED PRODUCTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIED PRODUCTS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
123,723,000
111,983,000
Net inc
366,000
4,987,000
Share earns
-
.92
9mo sales
379,623,000
312,779,000
Net inc
7,218,000
13,971,000
Share earns
1.24
3.06
Shares outst
5,013,000
4,187,000


Study Challenges Standardized Test Results
LEAD: If scores on commercially produced standardized tests are to be believed, American children in grade school are like the ones living in mythical Lake Wobegon, Minn.: all above average.


BARRIER SCIENCE &amp; TECHOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARRIER SCIENCE &amp; TECHOLOGY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,230,628
1,504,150
Net inc
89,191
18,163
9mo rev
5,457,604
4,541,725
Net inc
2,010
1,937


Bilzerian Seeks Auction for Singer
LEAD: An investment group led by Paul A. Bilzerian, a Tampa, Fla., financier, has proposed that the Singer Company be auctioned to the highest bidder by Dec. 15.
The military electronics concern had rejected an unsolicited takeover offer of $1.1 billion from the group.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.


Surrogate Will Investigate Management of Estate Settlements
LEAD: The surrogate who supervises the activities of the Manhattan Public Administrator said yesterday that she would begin an inquiry on Monday of allegations that the Administrator through ''profound mismanagement and a dereliction of duty,'' delayed the settlement of thousands of estates worth millions of dollars.


To Help Youths' Transition From Foster Care to Independence
LEAD: To the Editor:


AMGEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMGEN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,618,000
7,414,000
Net inc
b393,000
295,000
Share earns
.02
.02
Shares outst
17,506,000
14,832,000
6mo rev
25,199,000
15,157,000
Net inc
b887,000
769,000
Share earns
.05
.05
Shares outst
17,187,000
14,831,000


Bridge; Players From Accord, N.Y., Win the Blue Ribbon Pairs
LEAD: The Blue Ribbon Pair Championship, one of the most prized titles in the annual calendar, was won here Thursday night by two quiet men from Accord, N.Y.
Playing in the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals, this pair, Fred Stewart and his stepson, Steve Weinstein, scored 62 percent in the final session and surged past the leaders.


Shift Is Seen At Montedison
LEAD: Raul Gardini, the leader of Italy's huge agriculture-business concern Gruppo Ferruzzi, is preparing to take the helm of Montedison S.p.A. away from the chairman who had returned the chemical giant to profitabilty.


BEAR AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE EQUIPMENT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEAR AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE EQUIPMENT CO (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,106,000
18,975,000
Net loss
1,580,000
b440,000
Share earns
-
.07
9mo sales
67,451,000
60,268,000
Net loss
813,000
b2,845,000
Share earns
-
.53


Belzberg Company Has Textron Stake
LEAD: The First City Financial Corporation, which is controlled by the Belzberg family of Canada, has purchased a small stake in Textron Inc. and is seeking regulatory clearance to buy even more.


CHALONE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHALONE INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,329,000
2,109,000
Net inc
56,000
35,000
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
3,906,000
2,736,000
9mo rev
6,562,000
4,511,000
Net loss
136,000
117,000
The company said the increase in 9-month loss is primarily due to increased interest expense arising from the Acacia acquisition and other capital improvements, such as the Chalone vineyard pipeline.


Gold and Silver Prices Climb to 5-Week Highs
LEAD: Futures prices for gold and silver advanced sharply yesterday as the dollar declined again and a variety of commodity prices moved higher.


DESPERATION REIGNS WHERE COAL BOOM WENT BUST
LEAD: The class of elementary and junior high school students at the Pennsylvania School for the Deaf kept up a volley of questions for the novelist who had come to call.
Courteously and with humor, the novelist, Douglas Bullard, tried to answer them all.


Econocom Raises Offer for Decision
LEAD: Econocom International N.V. said it had increased its cash tender offer for the Decision Industries Corporation to $8.75 a share, from $7, to match a competing bid for the company.
Econocom' s offer, which had been scheduled to expire yesterday, was extended until midnight Dec. 10.


Stores Rush to Automate for Holidays
LEAD: As shoppers surge into department stores this holiday season many will encounter a new phase of technology at the checkout counter.


Rock: John Cougar Mellencamp
LEAD: ''Growing up leads to growing old and then to dying,'' John Cougar Mellencamp sang on his 1983 album, ''Uh-huh,'' ''And dying to me don't sound like all that much fun.'' Yet since then, Mr.
Mellencamp, now 36 years old, has been making an effort to grow up.


CAPITAL WIRE &amp; CABLE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPITAL WIRE &amp; CABLE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
32,693,000
27,721,000
Net inc
1,177,000
1,021,000
Share earns
.30
.26
9mo sales
83,638,000
72,431,000
Net inc
3,351,000
3,041,000
Share earns
.85
.89
Shares outst
3,961,000
3,431,000


Pretoria Censors to Let 'Cry Freedom' Be Seen
LEAD: Government censors today unexpectedly approved the release of Sir Richard Attenborough's movie on South Africa, ''Cry Freedom,'' without any cuts or restrictions.


COPING: With Charity Appeals
LEAD: This is the season of charity appeals, as anyone with a mailbox knows.


MCM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCM CORP
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b1,762,000
c96,000
9mo net inc
b2,087,000
c5,913,000
Share earns
.45
1.26
b-After investment gains of $773,000 for the quarter and $7,049,000 for the 9 months, an extraordinary expense of $798,000 for the quarter and a tax credit of $34,000 for the 9 months.


COMPUTER TELEPHONE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER TELEPHONE CORP
Qtr to Sept 25
1987
1986
Sales
4,218,511
3,369,913
Net inc
53,125
b28,712
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
8,295,013
6,853,000
Net inc
110,637
67,497
Share earns
.07
.05
b-Net loss


Greyhound Deal
LEAD: The Greyhound Corporation said it expected to complete its $390 million purchase of the in-flight catering and terminal concessions businesses of Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Company on Sunday.
Under the deal, announced in May, Carson Pirie Scott shareholders will receive for each current share $30 in cash and a share in a newly formed company that would hold the retailing operation and other business lines.


Students Get Rare Lesson At School Zoo
LEAD: A passer-by on West 18th Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues might never imagine what hides behind the doors of the High School for the Humanities.
On its second floor, enclosed within an old storage room, is Manhattan's only student-run zoo.


HEARINGS SET ON PARKWAY TOLL PLAN
LEAD: THE proposal to double the tolls on the Garden State Parkway has inspired the predictable adverse public reaction and calls for hearings and investigations by state lawmakers.


Hanging On in the 'Muni' Market
LEAD: EARLY in the morning in an outrageously messy office at the New York headquarters of the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation, the talk was about airplanes and money.
To expand, the Memphis International Airport had to raise about $100 million.
The five men sprawled in the sloppy office sipping from Styrofoam coffee cups were municipal bond specialists.


ATLANTA INMATES AND AGENTS SHARE TENSIONS
LEAD: Cuban inmates late Saturday delivered a list of demands to officials at the Federal penitentiary here and said that they would release the 94 hostages they are holding if all demands are met.


STARTING OVER: TV'S GRANT TINKER
LEAD: Today's television sitcoms are a far cry from what one used to think of as ''recreation,'' defined by Webster as ''refeshment of strength and spirits after work.''


Less Strain, More Gain
LEAD: WITHIN THE EVER-WIDEN-ing stylistic spectrum of modern dance, the art of Erick Hawkins remains steadfast.
Although his dances are charged with variety, their underlying esthetic and physical premise never alters.
For Mr.
Hawkins, whose company begins a six-day engagement at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday, to dance is to move naturally, without strain, without tension and without artifice.


CAREFUL SHOPPER
LEAD:  Gift Mart at Temple Features 35 Vendors  The Larchmont Temple Gift Mart is next weekend - opening Saturday at 7 P.M. and closing at 10 P.M. and reopening next Sunday, when the hours are 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
The price range is $5 to $600, and 35 vendors are participating this year.
Gift certificates are available.


A Ballet's New Clothes
LEAD: SOME people find Christian Lacroix's fashion designs overly theatrical.
But that is precisely why Mikhail Baryshnikov, the artistic director of the American Ballet Theater, chose Mr.
Lacroix to design costumes for a revival of Leonide Massine's ''Gaiete Parisienne,'' which will be on the bill for the company's season opening gala at the Metropolitan Opera House on


BANGLADESH BANS PROTEST COVERAGE
LEAD: The Government banned all reports on the political opposition or on anything deemed to be criticism of the authorities today, a day after President H. M. Ershad imposed a nationwide state of emergency.


The Uses of Literature
LEAD: To the Editor:


JERALEA F. HESSE WEDS A PROFESSOR
LEAD: The marriage of Jeralea Fooshee Hesse, the director of social services at the Silver Hill Foundation in New Canaan, Conn., to Dr.
Robert John Levine, a professor of medicine at the Yale University School of Medicine, took place yesterday at the couple's home in Woodbridge, Conn.
The Rev.
William B.


OVERLOOK IS TREATING AFGHAN REBEL, 20
LEAD: ''BY THE grace of God, I am here in this country,'' the young man said. ''By His grace, I am still alive.
And by the same grace of God, I will return to carry on the fight.''


Two Tell of Harsh Captivity in Beirut
LEAD: The hostages spent months chained to a wall, told to keep silent in the solitude of their dark, windowless rooms.
They were treated, one of them said, ''like an animal, like a dog,'' often not able to get a drink, to wash, to go to the bathroom.
They saw only masked gunmen.


ELISE UDOLF AND MICHAEL LEOPOLD, LAWYERS, WED
LEAD: Elise Michelle Udolf, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Udolf of West Hartford, Conn., was married there last evening to Michael Douglas Leopold, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mortimer Leopold of North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Harold Silver officiated at Temple Beth Israel.


Inquiry Into Alaska Air Crash Looks at Weight Distribution
LEAD: Investigators looking into the crash of a heavily loaded commuter plane that killed 18 people have turned their attention to the question of how the weight was distributed, a Federal official says.


Giants' Fans Find a Separate Peace at Last
LEAD: ON this Sunday last year, we were 9-2 and coming off ''Fourth and Seventeen'' and the whole world could see we were headed for Pasadena.
I didn't know one Giants' fan, however, who believed we would make it to Pasadena.


MAKING HAY IN IOWA
LEAD: FRED GRATZON, FOUNDER AND CHAIR-man of The Great Midwestern Ice Cream Company in Fairfield, Iowa, doesn't follow politics closely.
But he's hoping to turn a sweet profit on the battle for the Presidency.
He has established the nation's first and only Presidential ice cream poll.


An Academic Way to Beat the Market
LEAD: WHAT investor would not be pleased to have the insider's edge, that boardroom's-eye view of corporate plans that would surely mean money in the market?


Giving Away A Jetliner
LEAD: FOR three months, the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia tried to give away a prime exhibit, a 70-ton Boeing 707 jetliner.
There were no takers.


French Report Seizing Terrorist in Gunfight
LEAD: The French police announced today that they had arrested the last fugitive leader of Direct Action, the left-wing terrorist group that shook France for years with dozens of bombings and the shooting of police officers and business leaders.


160 Die at Sea in South Africa Jet Crash
LEAD: A South African Airways Boeing 747 crashed into the Indian Ocean 125 miles southeast of Mauritius early today.
Transport Minister Eli Louw said all 160 passengers and crew aboard were feared dead.


Nancy Shrair Is Wed
LEAD: At Temple Beth El in Springfield, Mass., Nancy Shrair, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Shrair of Longmeadow, Mass., and Michael Schreiber, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Al Schreiber of Brooklyn, were married last evening by Rabbi Herbert Schwartz.
The bride, an associate editor at the Book-of-the-Month Club in New York, graduated from the Boston University College of Communications.


U.S. FUNDS SCARCE FOR U.N. AGENCIES
LEAD: The United States is expected to pay only about 60 per cent of its budget share this year to the 44 United Nations and other international bodies to which it belongs, according to Administration and United Nations officials.


E. F. Hutton Goes on the Block
LEAD: E. F. Hutton is for sale.
The stock market collapse last month and the likelihood of a downgrading in its credit rating were the final blows to a securities firm that has been struggling since it pleaded guilty two years ago to a check-kiting scheme that defrauded banks of millions of dollars.
Last year, when most of Wall Street was awash in profits, Hutton had a loss of $90.3 million.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD: THINKING IN PICTURES: The Making of the Movie ''Matewan.'' By John Sayles. (Houghton Mifflin, Cloth, $21.95; Paper, $9.95.) If you've ever wondered how some of the sillier dialogue gets into movies, John Sayles has a convincing explanation.
Give a studio executive a script for a western, and there will come a time when, unable to visualize the stampeding buffalo herd, he will wonder, ''Couldn't one of the Indians say, 'Here come the buffalo'?


MARY KIRK, CHEF, WEDS N. L. EASTMAN, ACTOR
LEAD: Mary Elizabeth Kirk, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elijah Thomas Kirk of Louisville, Ky., was married there yesterday to Nicholas Lieder Eastman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffery Eastman of Essex Fells and Bay Head, N.J., and Stratton Mountain, Vt.
The Rev.
David Searfoss performed the ceremony at the Calvin Presbyterian Church, assisted by Msgr.


FOE OF APARTHEID SEEKS UNIFIED LAND
LEAD: Govan A. Mbeki, a prominent leader of the outlawed African National Congress, talked of political hope and reconciliation in his first public speech since being freed from a South African prison early this month.


MOUNTIES SEEK HELP WITH COSTS
LEAD: A few years ago, thanks to a fund-raising campaign, that included bumper stickers reading ''Hot to Trot,'' the Hartford Mounted Police was established.
A 10-horse stable was built, the horses were donated, and, before long, a police officer astride a horse became a familiar sight in city parks.


Schroeder to Replace Cuomo As Questioner in Iowa Debate
LEAD: Governor Cuomo of New York has withdrawn from a debate in Iowa and will be replaced by Representative Patricia Schroeder, a Colorado Democrat.


ANGEL POWER
LEAD: ROBERT C. MCCRAY STEERS HIS gray Chevrolet slowly around the common in Amherst, N.H., taking in favorite details: the swings in the yard of the brick schoolhouse, the steeple atop the Congregational Church, the white rail fence that hugs the town green.
There's a Civil War monument, of course, and an old water trough and a flagpole.


THE EXECUTIVE COMPUTER
LEAD: THIS time of year, many companies are afflicted with the Peter Pan syndrome.


Lisa B. Brinkman Marries Reporter
LEAD: Our Lady of Fatima Roman Catholic Church in Wilton, Conn., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Lisa Benson Brinkman, the daughter of Richard Gene Brinkman of Wilton and Jensen Beach, Fla., and the late Audrey Benson Brinkman, to Michael Charles Jensen Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jensen of New York and Peekskill, N.Y.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  'BASICALLY BASSOON'  Whether he's playing Vivaldi, Scott Joplin, Mozart or Beethoven, Daniel Smith does it all on the bassoon.
And no wonder; these days, the Syosset resident is known as the world's most recorded (and lauded, by critics) bassoon soloist.
Naturally, he's determined to spread the news and the sound of what he considers a wonderfully expressive solo instrument.


LIBERTY STATE PARK IS IMPERILED
LEAD: ON JULY 4, 1986, Liberty State showcased to a national television audience.
Millions of Americans saw a prime-time Boston Pops concert and fireworks show that highlighted Liberty Weekend.


MAINE LOSES IN OVERTIME, 31-28
LEAD: Tim Foley's 42-yard field goal in overtime completed a comeback from an 18-point halftime deficit today as Georgia Southern, seeking its third consecutive national championship, edged Maine, 31-28, in the opening round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I-AA playoffs.


POSTINGS: Co-op Seminar; Sponsors And Boards
LEAD: Thirty-five years ago, long before apartment ownership took hold in New York City, a small group of residential cooperatives in Queens formed a support group, the Federation of New York Housing Cooperatives.


A MACHINE LEARNS TO SPEAK: MIMICKING THE NEUROLOGICAL NETWORKS
LEAD: DURING the last eight years, the number of research reports presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience has more than doubled, exceeding 6,600 this year.
In an attempt to keep up, more than 11,000 scientists and onlookers gathered for the 1987 convention, which was held in New Orleans this month.


Trump-Koch-O'Connor Gardens
LEAD: What started as a proposal for the world's tallest building is turning into New York's most welcome coalition: Donald Trump, Mayor Koch and John Cardinal O'Connor.


Racism in Sports And Society
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


NEW YORK FAULTED ON NO-BID TOWING PACTS
LEAD: A system of no-bid contracts for emergency towing on limited-access highways in New York City has been allowed to remain in place despite a New York City Comptroller's audit in 1981 that showed it had engendered widespread fraud, a Bronx grand jury asserted yesterday.


An Ambitious Plan to Revitalize Meriden
LEAD: LAST month, Mayor Joseph J. Marinan Jr. of Meriden announced a $48 million plan to bring 19 downtown acres out of the doldrums. ''Those five square blocks are an untapped resource,'' Mayor Marinan said. ''They produce only $130,000 in property taxes - the same as two residential streets.''


LORENZO BRAVES THE AIR WARS
LEAD: FRANK LORENZO, CHAIRMAN OF THE TEXAS AIR CORPO-ration, personifies the grand social experiment called airline deregulation.
Pioneer of the low fares that brought air travel within reach of millions of Americans, ruthless competitor and union-buster, he has since 1980 transformed a feisty regional carrier into the largest airline enterprise in the non-Communst world.


Father Held in Slaying Of 2 Sons in Foundry
LEAD: A father stopped by the foundry where he works on his way to Thanksgiving dinner and killed his two young sons by putting them in a large ladle and heating it, the authorities charged Friday.


Students Told to Lift Grades Or Give Up Dormitory Rooms
LEAD: Officials at Southern Connecticut State University are taking a new attitude toward the overwhelming demand for student housing these days - put up or get out.


INSIDE
LEAD:  160 Die in Plane Crash
A South African jet crashed into the Indian Ocean near Mauritius, and all 160 people aboard were believed to have been killed.
There was no sign of survivors in the sea where floating debris was spotted.
Page 3.
AIDS and Diplomats
The State Department has started trying to keep its employees from being exposed to the deadly AIDS virus and to keep infected people from serving in most posts.


Simon Stumps in Oklahoma
LEAD: Senator Paul Simon, seeking the Democratic Presidential nomination, said today that the Reagan Administration's farm policies had helped only the corporate farming industry.
In a 90-minute stop here, the Illinois Senator told a crowd of about 100 people that farm programs should be redesigned to benefit the family farmers.


MARK BYRNE WED TO MISS COCHRAN
LEAD: Calvary Episcopal Church in Summit, N.J., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Elizabeth Ann Lovejoy Cochran, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Cochran of Summit, to Mark James Byrne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Byrne of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
William Strain performed the ceremony.


'THE HUNGARIAN AVANT-GARDE 1914-1933,' IN STORRS
LEAD: THERE are Hungarians galore in 20th-century art - Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, Victor de Vasarely, Zoltan Kemeny and the photographers Brassai and Andre Kertesz are some that come immediately to mind.
But famed though it is for its emigres, who also include Franz Liszt, Bela Bartok and several movie moguls, not to mention the Gabor sisters, Hungary itself hasn't had so much as a walk-on part in the


Delay in Plans
LEAD: THE San Diego Yacht Club has delayed until Wednesday any announcement of its plans for dealing with New Zealand's challenge for the America's Cup.
Club officials are apparently trying to enlist the support of other potential United States syndicates in a unified stand against New Zealand.


RESIDENTIAL RESALES
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended Nov. 14  MANHATTAN  Gramercy Park Area  $136,000  201 East 25th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 650-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, parquet floors; maintenance $469, 40% tax-deductible (Broker:


BRITONS ON THE PROWL
LEAD: LATE IN THE FALL OF 1973, A 6-FOOT, 4-INCH BRITON named Gordon White marched into the Pierre hotel in Manhattan, took over a one-bedroom suite on the 37th floor and set about building an empire.


N.I.T. Honors
LEAD: HIS team didn't make it to the Big Apple N.I.T. finals this weekend, but Troy Lewis, the standout Purdue guard, was acclaimed at Madison Square Garden, anyway.
Lewis, whose team was knocked out of the N.I.T. tournament by Iowa State last week, was one of four men honored by the tournament before last night's championship game.


Under Fire: Once-Praised New York Blood Center
LEAD: Almost 20 years ago, New York City's hospitals and medical institutions helped create the world's largest regional blood supply organization.


In the End, a Hero
LEAD:  THEY CALL ME MOSES MASAOKA  An American Saga.
By Mike Masaoka with Bill Hosokawa.
Illustrated. 383 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.95.


10 Policemen Die in Beirut
LEAD: Ten policemen were killed and 19 were wounded today when two tank rounds from militia fighting hit their barracks, the police said.
The police said the rounds slammed into the Warwar Police Academy barracks, 10 yards from the line that separates the predominately Christian and Moslem sections of Beirut.


From Russia With Scorn
LEAD: THE CENTRAL FIGURE OF ''Repentance'' is Varlam the dictator - the mayor of a Georgian city who looks vaguely like Mussolini but also has some of Hitler's madness and Stalin's cunning and something, too, of the Georgians' own Lavrenti P. Beria, Stalin's murderous secret police chief with his glittering pince-nez.


FOR ELECTION, TURKEY WEARS ITS WESTERNNESS
LEAD: TURKEY'S 22 million voters are going to the polls today in their first civilian-supervised general elections since the military relinquished its hold over NATO's easternmost member in 1983.
The outcome, however, is less of an issue than how the election will affect the country's long and flawed campaign for membership in a Western community of nations that are inspired, in


CHARGES DISMISSED
LEAD: FEW tennis players think of calling their game ''lawn tennis,'' a name inappropriate except at Wimbledon and a few tradition-minded places, to distinguish it from the historic game of ''real tennis.''


Photo of Israeli soldiers at funeral for one of six soldiers killed by a Palestinian guerrilla (AP)THE WORLD; ISRAEL PAYS THE PRICE OF TAKING A BREAK
LEAD: THE Palestinian guerrilla crossed the electrified Lebanon-Israel border fence on a moonless night last week, dangling from a motorized hang glider, passing the shimmering lights of the town of Qiryat Shemona, landing in a thorny field next to the Gibor Israeli army base.
Within minutes, the guerrilla killed six


When Money Talks, Athletes Whine
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


What the Amazons Taught Her
LEAD:  THE FIREBRAND  By Marion Zimmer Bradley. 608 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Grocers' Gifts Found To Go to Farm Panels
LEAD: Political action committees representing the interests of the grocery industry have been aiming substantial sums of campaign money at members of the Congressional Agriculture Committees, two consumer advocacy groups said in a report today.


Bulls Rule Texas Freeway
LEAD: Twenty-one Brahman bulls escaped from a corral at the Mesquite Rodeo Arena Friday in a bull-riding lesson and swarmed across the Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway and lawns in this Dallas suburb.
Motorists slammed on their brakes.
Some took photographs.
One bull made his way into a subdivision and was roped in front of a $500,000 home.


On the Wild Side
LEAD: THERE WILL BE NO STEEL BARS.
There will be a walk-through rain forest with birds flying freely overhead.
There will be state-of-the-art artificial trees, designed by Jonquil LeMaster-Rock (above).
There will be 200 species, including polar bears, penguins, puffins, muntjac, macaques and leaf-cutter ants.


Deaf Writer Asks Questions That Echo for Young
LEAD: The class of elementary and junior high school students at the Pennsylvania School for the Deaf kept up a volley of questions for the novelist who had come to call.
Courteously and with humor, the novelist, Douglas Bullard, tried to answer them all.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I have been advised that when I close my summer home for the winter, I should leave the heat on at a low setting of about 40 degrees to protect the wood paneling, built-ins and furniture.
Do you think heating is necessary when the house is unoccupied?


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


CAN THE MENNONITES SURVIVE SUCCESS?
LEAD: I enjoyed Paul Cohen's thoughtful article on the Mennonites.
A considerable number of your readers are not attracted to yuppie-type articles about Wall Street, fashion or Madison Avenue.
ADAM PENENBERG  New York, N.Y.


INVESTOR PROFILES: Yields Improve the Quality of Life; Saving for Kids And College
LEAD: IF Steven and Susan Moel's investment strategies work according to plan, their children, 5-year-old Andrew and 2-year-old Erin, will have a substantial financial cushion for college and beyond.


Giants-Redskins a Ho-Hum-er
LEAD: Last season, the Giants played (and beat) the Redskins three times, and each team played each game as if it were for a championship.
On Sunday, they will meet again before the usual sellout crowd at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium in a game means little in the standing.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  A STEP IN TIME  Having trouble perfecting your schottische, quadrille, turkey trot or galop?
Not to worry.
The Vintage Music &amp; Dance Society of West Hartford will hone your skills in workshops from 10 A.M. to noon and from 1:30 to 4 P.M.
Saturday, then give you an opportunity to show off at a grand ball from 8 P.M.


Ward Melville Gains Title
LEAD: The Ward Melville Patriots upset the West Islip Lions, 27-14, yesterday to win the Suffolk County Conference I championship.


THE CONTRADICTIONS OF BOB DOLE
LEAD: Martin Tolchin and Jeff Gerth intimated that Senator Dole had ''championed'' the right-to-life position only in recent years to earn more support from the conservative wing of the Republican Party.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


A Continent Left Behind
LEAD:  SQUANDERING EDEN  Africa at the Edge.
By Mort Rosenblum and Doug Williamson.
Illustrated. 326 pp.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $19.95.


Injury Keeps Taylor Out
LEAD: For the first time in his seven years with the Giants, Lawrence Taylor will miss a regular-season or playoff game for which he was on the roster.


POSTINGS: For Preservation; Window Workshop
LEAD: To many people, windows are commonplace artifacts of urban life that require attention only when they get too dirty to see through.
But to those sensitive to architectural values, windows are prime design features that must be maintained with care and replaced with even greater care only when the originals no longer serve.


On to Judgment
LEAD: Even in the horrific company of Nazi concentration camp commanders, Josef Schwammberger stood out as a bestial man, according to wartime Austrian police files that were recently made public.
Mr.
Schwammberger, now 75 years old, admitted shooting 35 Jews during questioning in 1945.
He escaped from detention that year and later surfaced in Argentina, where he was arrested this month and now faces extradition to West


Maine Addresses Child Deaths
LEAD: Maine's rate of accidental deaths of children, nearly twice as high as in some other New England states, is prompting questions and some answers from the state's pediatricians.


DEMYSTIFYING POP-UP DRAINS
LEAD: POP-UP drains in bathroom basins may seem mysterious, but actually they are simple to repair.
Knowing how they operate is useful.


Irish Blown Away by Miami
LEAD: All week long, the talk leading up to today's game between Miami and Notre Dame centered on the last meeting between the teams.
Two years ago, Miami stomped the Irish by 51 points, and memories of that were supposed to fuel Notre Dame's bid for an upset.


REAGAN GETS PLEA TO FREE PENSIONERS EARNINGS LIMIT
LEAD: Top officials at the Department of Health and Human Services are urging President Reagan to seek repeal of a law that reduces Social Security benefits for elderly people who earn more than $8,160 a year.


TRY PASTA DISHES AS A FIRST COURSE
LEAD: THE problem of choosing a first course at a small dinner is easily solved by pasta.


The Professionals' Edge
LEAD: IN the heat of a bull or a bear market, when investors are experiencing the pleasure of profit or the pain of loss, it is hard to keep emotions out of decisions.


Question Of the Week; Who Should Win the Heisman Trophy?
LEAD: Don McPherson led Syracuse to an undefeated season, thus ending a 24-year absence from a New Year's bowl date.
Consider another aspect of McPherson's exemplary season.
Back in 1961 Syracuse University's Ernie Davis became the first black man ever to receive the coveted trophy.
Would it not be judicious and historically correct to award the Heisman to the first black quarterback from that same fine university?


HOW NOW TO SELL A COW?
LEAD: IN A PASTURE ON A WELL-tended ranch near North Zulch, Tex., John J. Francis stood in 100-degree heat, watching three black bull calves. ''This is very exciting,''


CELIA P. REA WED TO W. F. GIBNEY
LEAD: Celia Paige Rea, the director of membership for the American Medical Women's Association in New York, was married in New York yesterday to William Francis Gibney, a community associate and a public health educator with the New York City Department of Health.
The Rev.
Kevin Madigan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.


REAGAN AIDES SEEK WAY FOR CONGRESS TO HELP CONTRAS
LEAD: The Reagan Administration, preparing for a crucial vote on renewed aid to the Nicaraguan rebels early next month, is trying to determine if Congress will allow a requested $30 million for non-lethal supplies to be used for helicopters and military training, according to officials in the White House and


On Language; Old and Novel
LEAD: IN TODAY'S BOOK-stores and libraries, you can get hold of just about any kind of dictionary, from the 12-volume-plus-supplements Oxford English to dictionaries of foreign languages and back-and-forth dictionaries (English-Swahili, Francais-Esquimau, etc.) to dictionaries of slang, of computerese, of dirty words and even of multilingual insults.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Amityville  $227,000  289 South Bay Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 26-year-old contemporary; den, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.
Hauppauge  $182,000  58 Heller Place  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 23-year-old ranch; basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,700.


MARY GANNON MORAN IS WED TO MADISON L. FORD
LEAD: At the Brick Presbyterian Church in Manhattan, Mary Gannon Moran, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Thomas Moran of Holland, Mich., was married yesterday to Madison Lewis Ford, a son of Mary Hope Lewis and F. Richards Ford 3d, both of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Heidi Hudnut-Beumler officiated.


'Assassination Is the Sincerest Form of Flattery'
LEAD:  STALIN IN THE BRONX  And Other Stories.
By Suzanne Ruta. 154 pp.
New York: Grove Press. $16.95.


Smoking-Rule Smoke
LEAD: When New York's highest court last week upheld two previous court rulings, it did not uphold smoking in public.
It said that the State Public Health Council had gone too far in issuing new rules on public smoking.
The council, said six of the seven judges on the Court of Appeals, had ''usurped'' legislative power.


O'Neill Up and Walking
LEAD: Former House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. is recovering well from his rectal cancer surgery, a hospital spokeswoman said Friday.
Mr.
O'Neill, who is 74 years old, was walking around his hospital room on Thanksgiving Day, according to Louise Homer, a spokeswoman for


INVESTOR PROFILES: Yields Improve the Quality of Life; Payouts For Social Concerns
LEAD: RUTH SHEREFF, now 44 years old, bought stock on her own for the first time just two years ago.
Her father, who had been managing her money until then, said that it would have been better had she lost money the first time out so she would learn caution and humility.
Instead, she made a killing.


Defending Met Trades
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Beaverkill
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chicagoans Brave Cold Drizzle to Mourn Hero
LEAD: In the cold drizzle and the gloom, Nathaniel Gibson stood in line Friday night, his Marine Corps veterans cap clamped tightly on his head, as he waited to pay his last respects to Mayor Harold Washington.


MICHAEL JAKUBIK AND MISS TRENT PLANNING TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Trent of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nancy Trent to Michael Jakubik, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin Jakubik of Dover, Mass.


One Was Found
LEAD: To the Editor:


A CLARIFICATION ON LAMOTTE STATEMEBT
LEAD: The article ''Northern Democrats Assess Gains in Election''  [ Nov. 15 ]  reported on Patty Hotchkiss's victory over Ursula LaMotte in County Legislative District 2.
It said some believe ''Mrs.
Hotchkiss was greatly aided by a last-minute campaign by some who portrayed Mrs.
LaMotte as an opponent of legalized abortion.


Simple Fruit Pies From Tuscany
LEAD: THE dough that is the basis of the Tuscan crostata, a shallow one-crust pie usually topped with fruit or homemade fruit jam, is to an Italian what pate a foncer fine is to a French pastry chef, a classic sweetened crust for a tart.
Any Italian knows know to make pasta, mixing eggs into a mound of flour, but only the most able cooks can create the flaky, butter-laden base that is the truth of a celestial crostata.


TOWN TRIES TO BUILD ITS OWN HOUSES
LEAD: FOR many of Wilton's town employees, it's a nice place to serve, but they can't afford to live there.


DEMYSTIFYING POP-UP DRAINS
LEAD: POP-UP drains in bathroom basins may seem mysterious, but actually they are simple to repair.
Knowing how they operate is useful.


Pension Funds
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Showcase for Art Of Children's Books
LEAD: SOME of the most enchanting art has been in children's books.
Until recently it remained between covers, haunting the memories of the adults and children who had turned the pages.
However, in 1984 Emily and Sam Bush of Norwich, Vt., brought it off the shelves and onto the wall.


WHERE COWS PLODDED, HORSES NOW CANTER
LEAD: WHILE most dairymen have fled Fairfield County for environs where real estate is less costly, horsemen have stepped in to fill the void.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: New York State Offices; The Tainted Move From the World Trade Center
LEAD: AS New York State nears the end of its colossal move of agencies from the World Trade Center, a former official is standing trial on bribery charges, while relocated employees are complaining of leaky pipes, frontier locations and excessive rents.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I have been advised that when I close my summer home for the winter, I should leave the heat on at a low setting of about 40 degrees to protect the wood paneling, built-ins and furniture.
Do you think heating is necessary when the house is unoccupied?


GERSHWIN PASTICHE IN MILLBURN
LEAD: IN COMMEMORATION of the 50th anniversary of the composer's death, the Paper Mill Playhouse is having its own George Gershwin celebration, presenting the breezy pastiche ''My One and Only.''


Old Van Cortlandt Yields U.S. Titles
LEAD: The grave site, complete with a number of family members and a little of the history of New York City, stands in disrepair squarely in the middle of Van Cortlandt Park.
The iron fences are collapsing, the monuments are badly twisted, the name Van Cortlandt is barely legible amid the weeds.


MELISSA S. Warner TO MARRY IN JUNE
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Warner of Fairfield, Conn., have made known the engagement of their daughter, Melissa S. Warner, to Lawrence Alleyne Norton, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Adelbert Norton of Dedham, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.


40% of Americans Fear They Will Contract AIDS, a Poll Indicates
LEAD: More than 40 percent of American adults are concerned that they will contract AIDS, and fear of having the deadly disease is prompting many people to change their sexual behavior and take other precautions, the latest Gallup poll indicates.


Future of Bowdoin Fraternities Is Being Weighed
LEAD: The president of Bowdoin College, A. Leroy Greason, has asked a special panel to study whether fraternities on campus should be allowed to continue in light of recent reports of excessive drinking and abusive behavior in the houses.


Exploring Audio's Outer Limits
LEAD: UNLIKE THE HUGE EX-hibits of electronic home equipment staged each year in Chicago and Las Vegas, the much smaller Hi-Fi Show held last month in New York City was not just meant for the trade.
It was open to anyone.


Fighting Color In Old Movies
LEAD: TELEVISION audiences like color - so why not color the old, classic black-and-white movies, say the proponents of an electronic process known as colorization.


42 KILLED IN INDONESIAN QUAKE
LEAD: At least 42 people were killed and many were missing after an earthquake caused landslides and a tidal wave on a remote island in eastern Indonesia, officials said today.


DONNA RAYNER IS WED TO BRANDON BALTHAZAR
LEAD: Donna Rayner, a daughter of Alice Rayner and Ahmed Rayner Jr., both of Chicago, was married there last evening to Brandon Balthazar, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Don J. Balthazar of White Plains.
The Rev.
Michael Ivers performed the ceremony at St.
Columbanus Roman Catholic Church.


Salzburg
LEAD: To the Editor: While it is no doubt possible to spend $100 for dinner for two at the places Mr.
Millard mentioned, prospective visitors to Salzburg should not be discouraged by the prices quoted.


Nevada Allows Ousted U.S. Judge to Practice Law
LEAD: The State Supreme Court has decided that Harry E. Claiborne, removed as a Federal district judge by the Senate through impeachment last year because of his conviction for income tax evasion, may practice law in Nevada.


ARTFUL MIX OF 3 CUISINES IN NORWALK
LEAD: THE highway strip along Route 7 in Norwalk has never been a source of prime-time dining.
With the arrival of Three Flags, that has changed.
You might not know it from the exterior of the new brick building, which could easily suggest a fast-food eatery.
The name rings bells that evoke a theme park more than a first-class restaurant.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Air Force Wins On Tower Issue


The Business World/Magazine Part 2
LEAD: These special reports:


Whose Words?
LEAD: To the Editor:


SIGHS OF ANOTHER CONNECTICUT WINTER
LEAD: CHANGE is not merely in the air, it is here.
Just look at what happened Oct. 4.
Talk about a harbinger of worse things yet to come!
I get depressed enough between November and April.
I don't need a freak snowstorm in the first week of October to remind me that winter is on its way.


SOUTHERN SUMMIT REKINDLES OLD DREAMS OF LATIN UNITY
LEAD: FOR the first time, the presidents of eight Latin American nations are meeting without a United States presence to discuss solutions to their regional problems.
The agenda for the conference, which is to conclude today, ranges from the conflicts in Central America to the region's foreign debt of nearly $400 billion.


DESPITE SPOTTY PLAY, KORCHNOI WINS PRAISE
LEAD: ''KORCHNOI is the only grandmaster in the world from whom I can still learn a lot, especially about the middle game,'' said the Dutch grandmaster Jan Timman after the Interpolis International Tournament in Tilburg, the Netherlands.


Sondheim's Winding Paths
LEAD: ''THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT A WAR'' goes the title of a song that was written for, but never used, in Stephen Sondheim's first musical as a Broadway composer, the 1962 ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum.'' There's something about a Stephen Sondheim musical that's something like a war - and, until the arrival of his latest and perhaps most tranquil show, ''Into the Woods,'' that war had threatened to rival the Thirty Years' War in duration.


Fight to Overcome A Criminal Past
LEAD: EDWARD LOSS graduated near the top of his class in law school, was certified by the Illinois Supreme Court's Committee on Character and Fitness to become a lawyer and was waiting for a swearing-in date when the court barred his certification.


Broadcast TV
LEAD: Writers deserve star billing in a handful of films on the small screen this week.
Harold Pinter's adaptation of ''The French Lieutenant's Woman'' (1981) - Saturday at 8 P.M. on Channel 11 - entwines John Fowles's story of a Victorian outcast with a modern tale of illicit love, not always successfully.


SOCIETIES AND THEIR HOMELESS
LEAD: WHEN Joyce Brown was removed from a sidewalk in front of a hot-air vent on Second Avenue at 65th Street in Manhattan last month -and went to court to fight for release from the psychiatric ward to which she was taken - it was only the latest skirmish in an age-old battle for control of the urban landscape.


Town Near Plant Waits New Evacuation Drill
LEAD: Winter will bring another season of anxiety to those who live within breathing distance of a chemical plant that has drawn wide attention.


Power at the Work Site
LEAD:  THE FALL OF THE HOUSE OF LABOR  The Workplace, the State, and American Labor Activism, 1865-1925.
By David Montgomery. 494 pp.
New York: Cambridge University Press. $27.95.


Texas and New Mexico Battle Over Remains of Fallen Confederate Soldiers
LEAD: When a landowner digging a foundation for his new house uncovered a mass grave here last summer, Civil War enthusiasts immediately guessed its contents: the remains of Confederate soldiers slain at the battle of Glorieta.
The brief but intense encounter, part of an ill-fated Confederate campaign in the Far West, was fought on


BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 29, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE TOMMYKNOCKERS, by Stephen King.
(Putnam, $19.95.) Two writers' zealous attempt to
unearth mysterious artifacts creates nightmares
in a Maine village.
2
1
6
KALEIDOSCOPE, by Danielle Steel.


Seton Hall Falls to Florida in Final Seconds
LEAD: Vernon Maxwell promised to lead his Florida teammates to a championship if they reached the semifinals of the preseason National Invitation Tournament, and last night, he made good on his word.


STREETSCAPES: 95th Street Rowhouses; Central Park West Anomalies In a Landmark Battle's Vortex
LEAD: THE five rowhouses at the northwest corner of 95th and Central Park West are not obviously anything special.
But these structures, done in a rather tame neo-Renaissance style, are now the focus of a legal and preservation battle that casts light on the strengths and weaknesses of New York City's landmarks law.


GENERATIONS
LEAD: King Lear.
Pygmalion.
The Old Testament.
Greek tragedies.
If you substitute the nouns and verbs, you could write the family business owner's story. . . .
His problems are the problems of humanity, and the business funds and fuels them.
It's a family passion play, with the business founder center stage, usually alone.


Adopted School
LEAD: IT'S always nice when an alumnus makes good and gives a little something to his alma mater, even nicer when a virtual stranger makes the gift.
It was especially nice the other day then when Benoit Benjamin of the Los Angeles Clippers presented a $10,000 check to Southern University in Baton Rouge, La., and promised to send another fat donation to the school every year he plays in the N.B


Broadway Flea Market Benefits AIDS Victims
LEAD: Prospective customers poring over items for sale yesterday in Shubert Alley, west of Broadway between 44th and 45th Streets.
The market was sponsored by the cast of ''A Chorus Line'' and Actors' Equity, and the proceeds were donated to members of the union who have contracted AIDS. (NYT/Dith Pran)


Under Cover, or Out of Control?
LEAD:  COVERT ACTION  The Limits of Intervention in the Postwar World.
By Gregory F. Treverton. 293 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $19.95.
THE PERFECT FAILURE  Kennedy, Eisenhower, and the CIA at the Bay of Pigs.
By Trumbull Higgins. 224 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $17.95.


ZIMBABWEAN VOWS TO PUNISH KILLERS
LEAD: Enos Nkala, Zimbabwe's Minister of Home Affairs in charge of the country's police force, today viewed the macabre scene at Olive Tree Farm near here where 8 of 16 murdered missionaries were hacked to death Thursday.


Gone, for Now
LEAD:  IT CAME FROM OUTER SPACE  Starring Richard Carlson, Barbara Rush, Charles Drake, Russell Johnson, Kathleen Hughes and Joe Sawyer.
Directed by Jack Arnold. 1953.
Good Times Home Video. 80 minutes. $9.95.


PSYCHOLOGY IS DELICATE IN STRATEGY OF ARMS CUTS
LEAD: BEHIND the esoteric acronyms and intricate statistics that dominate the Soviet-American negotiations on arms control, there stands a psychological equation, one so delicate that it seems strangely out of place amid the awesome power of mutual destruction held by the leaders in Washington and Moscow.


Q &amp; A
LEAD:  Credit Report on a Tenant  Question: I am trying to rent a one-family home.
I plan to use a standard application form for prospective tenants.
Aside from checking to see if people are employed, is there any way that I can get a report from a credit-reporting company to learn about the finances of people I might rent to?


C.E.O.'S ARE HIS NECTAR
LEAD: AT 10:15 ON A SPARKLING AUTUMN morning, Gerard R. Roche - the Old Master, the High Priest, the Grand Acquisitor, the King of the Executive Headhunters - is seated at his desk on the 32d floor of the American Brands Building on Manhattan's Park Avenue, doing the thing he does better than anyone else.


DOUGLAS'S LETTERS CAST LIGHT ON LIFE
LEAD: Justice William O. Douglas of the Supreme Court thought Federal agents were trying to plant marijuana at his ranch in the West and he thought a Pennsylvania mob was going to lynch him for his role in the Rosenberg spy case, according to a new book, ''The Douglas Letters.''


A Children's Museum Adjusts to a New Brooklyn
LEAD: Nearly 100 years ago the Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences built a museum where children from the surrounding middle-class neighborhood of Crow Hill could ''stimulate their powers of observation and reflection.''


Linguistic Differences
LEAD: To the Editor:


SCOTT I. ROSEN IS WED TO DEBRA LYNN STEIN
LEAD: The marriage of Debra Lynn Stein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Stein of Allentown, Pa., and Scott Ira Rosen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Rosen of Wayne, N.J., took place last evening at Loews Glenpointe Hotel in Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi Moishe Cohen officiated.


Girl Found Alive Among Dead
LEAD: An 18-month-old girl was found alive Friday in a house with an infant and two adults who had apparently been dead for several weeks, the police said.


ATTEMPTING TO RELIEVE JOB-RELATED STRESS
LEAD: AN unmarried man in his early 30's gets a big promotion.


ST. JOHN'S SMOTHERS HARVARD IN OPENER
LEAD: Jayson Williams, a sophomore reserve forward, scored all of his game-high 22 points in the second half yesterday to lead St.
John's to an easy 105-60 victory over Harvard in the opening round of the 13th annual Joe Lapchick Tournament at Alumni Hall.
In the championship game today, the Redmen will face Loyola Marymount, which defeated Tennessee


Kemp's Combative Tone Sounds Off Key to Some
LEAD: After months of showing the voters what a smart guy he is, Representative Jack F. Kemp is now trying to prove that he can be a tough guy as well.


PEGGY AUCHINCLOSS WEDS IAN STRACHAN
LEAD: Peggy Auchincloss, a vice president of the First Boston Corporation in New York, and Ian Strachan, a finance executive in London, were married yesterday at the River Club in New York.
Associate Justice E. Leo Milonas of the Appellate Division, First Department, of the State Supreme Court officiated.


CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of a transcription error, a phrase was dropped in last week's article by Robert J. Geiger.
The complete sentence is as follows: The time has come to switch places if we are to move effectively into the 21st century: The builder must think like an environmentalist and the environmentalist must think like a pragmatic business person.


Envoy Suggests Mexico As Refuge for Cubans
LEAD: Vernon A. Walters, the United States Ambassador to the United Nations, suggested today that a third country, possibly Mexico, might agree to accept the rebellious Cuban inmates.


Retirees Resettling in College Towns
LEAD: WHEN John K. Kittredge retired as an insurance executive early this month, he and his wife, Betty, sold their home in Summit, N.J., and moved, not to Florida or Arizona, but to Chapel Hill, N.C., a town with which they had no ties.


On the Phone?
LEAD: Jackie Presser, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, made a point of keeping the Federal Bureau of Investigation up to date on certain Teamster activities for more than a decade, according to documents filed in Federal Court in Cleveland last week.
Mr.
Presser, who has headed the Teamsters since 1983, was said to have kept the bureau informed of ties between union officials and organized crime groups since 1974.


King Olav Visits Minnesota
LEAD: King Olav V of Norway says he is thrilled to be making his sixth visit to Minnesota, where one-sixth of the state's residents are of Norwegian descent. ''I have been enormously impressed by the unfailing interest in Norway here in this country,'' the King said at a dinner in his honor Friday night.


Rather Stay Flabby Than Fit
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Argentina's Government Is Shaken by Setbacks
LEAD: The Argentine Government has been thrust into crisis and confusion by the loss that President Raul Alfonsin's Radical Civic Union suffered in September by-elections, according to critics and supporters of the Government.


America's Heartland, After the Fall
LEAD: STOCKS may have crashed, but if recession follows it is likely to come on little cat feet.


Books From The Times
LEAD:  CHOREOGRAPHY OBSERVED.
By Jack Anderson. (University of Iowa, $25.) In this anthology of criticism, the New York Times dance critic Jack Anderson concentrates on the one aspect of dance that fascinates him most - choreography.
Choosing among his articles in The Times and other publications to form this collection, Mr.


TAP DANCE TO SCIENCE
LEAD: Crossroads Africa Dec. 2 - Since its founding in 1957, Operation Crossroads Africa has sent more than 8,000 young Americans to rural African and Caribbean communities to work on development projects in medicine, agriculture, education and construction.
And over the past 23 years, more than 3,200 young African political leaders and professionals have visited schools and other institutions in the United States.


Federal Judge, Facing Impeachment, Ties Woes to Racism and Vows Fight
LEAD: A thousand miles south of Washington, where a Congressional subcommittee is slowly putting together pieces of a puzzle that will decide his fate, Federal District Judge Alcee Lamar Hastings is a troubled and angry man.


Question Of the Week; Who Should Win the Heisman Trophy?
LEAD: The naming of Gordie Lockbaum, Holy Cross' great scholar and two-way star, will greatly enhance the Heisman Trophy.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  WHITE LIGHT.
By Patricia Volk. (Atheneum, $18.95.) This inventive if flawed first novel is half comic strip, half yuppie spiritual crisis.
When 35-year-old May Graves, an art director at a magazine for teen-agers, makes an ill-received comment at a meeting, trouble begins.
A month away from New York City is what she needs, and soon May is in a hotel in the Adirondacks trying desperately to return to a simpler state.


A TIMES POLL OF M.B.A.'S
LEAD: THE REAGAN ADMINIS-tration's tolerant attitude toward increasing size and concentration in American business finds considerable favor with a select group of business people.
They generally approve of the recent wave of corporate mergers, and the Government's less-than-aggressive enforcement of antitrust laws.


The Fine Art of Managing Change
LEAD: SOME day one of our advanced business schools will offer a graduate course in how to become a chief executive.
It will probably attract armies of the brightest of the bright.
But of course it will not work because in no office in the business universe is the crucible of experience more essential.
Nor is experience itself the answer.


CHARITY BRINGS OUT IVAN LENDL
LEAD: IVAN LENDL is doing everything he can to get Cindy Davenport to hit a tennis ball back across the net at the Tennis Club of Trumbull.
But the 7-year-old Bridgeport girl, despite encouraging words of advice from the world's best tennis player, can barely get her racket on the ball, let alone hit it over the net.


Advice About Radon Called Ill-Advised
LEAD: In his Oct. 18 Opinion Page article, ''Bad Advice About the Problems of Radon,'' Prof.
Leonard A. Cole  [ of Rutgers-Newark ]  criticized the state's Department of Environmental Protection for its adoption of the 4-picocurie/liter of air standard for radon remediation.


BUSINESS AFFAIRS
LEAD: There is no book of sexual manners in the office, because sex simply doesn't belong in the office. - 'Letitia Baldriges's Complete Guide to Executive Manners'


Collecting Art? Beware the Wrinkles
LEAD: COLLECTING art requires a great deal of faith.
One has to trust one's tastes, the art dealer and the market.
But even with art prices soaring - a trend underscored earlier this month by the astronomical $53.9 million that Van Gogh's ''Irises'' brought at auction - faith can take you just so far.
Increasingly, buying and selling is being regulated through legislation and case law, and consumers need to be aware of their rights to negotiate better deals.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: The Border War THERE'S a mini-border war going on between Smithtown and Huntington, and since the United Nations is otherwise engaged, the towns are taking their dispute to Suffolk County.


New Drives Are On to Restore Walden Pond
LEAD: Across the road from this town's dump is a fenced-off pond where marked walking trails lead to a public bathhouse with emergency medical facilities, and at the shoreline a sign reading ''No lifeguard on duty'' juts from greenish water.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Prose Buds in Spring Too  Part sermon, part celebration, nature writing is like taking one's prose style mountain climbing.
This is Gretel Ehrlich observing spring in Wyoming.
She is one of many writers in ''The Best American Essays 1987'' (Ticknor &amp; Fields), edited by Gay Talese.


SUSAN WILLIAMS WEDS DANIEL SCHECTER IN MARYLAND
LEAD: Susan Williams, a research analyst at the Rand Corporation in Santa Monica, Calif., and Daniel Schecter, a management consultant for the LEK Partnership in Los Angeles, were married yesterday at the Chapelgate Presbyterian Church in Ellicott City, Md.
The Rev.
Dr.
Donald Kinloch performed the ceremony.


Protecting the Chesapeake's Striped Bass
LEAD: ALTHOUGH there has been an improvement in the spawning of striped bass in many of the rivers entering Chesapeake Bay, the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission announced earlier this fall that it would continue its current recommendation for a 33-inch minimum-length limit for migratory coastal stocks of the species.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  CANDLELIGHT CONCERTS  Richard Kapp and his Philharmonia Virtuosi chamber orchestra will open the Candlelight Concerts of Larchmont series at 7:30 P.M. today in St.
Augustine's Church, on Larchmont Avenue.
The 13-year old ensemble has performed at Alice Tully and Avery Fisher Halls in Manhattan, the Kennedy Center in Washington, on tour throughout the Far East, and at the State University of New York at Purchase every year since the college's Performing Arts


On Ice Skates, 'Sleeping Beauty' Wobbles
LEAD: ''THE SLEEPING BEAUTY,'' A ballet on ice conceived for television, which will be shown next Sunday evening at 7 on Channel 13, banks on the current popularity of three key elements within the production: dance, skating and a renewed interest in fairy-tale themes.
These are supposedly magic ingredients, but they do not automatically jell into a unified result.


West Bank Choice
LEAD: In a region of extremity and violence, Mubarak Awad is a curious political being.
He is an Arab, born in Jerusalem, who tells his fellow Palestinians that nonviolent methods offer the best hope of ending Israel's 20-year occupation of the West Bank.


Social Policies
LEAD: To the Editor:


GET YOUR MAGNIFYING GLASS
LEAD: EAB Bank officials are having a contest to guess the exact number of lights on their 80 feet high Norway Spruce christmas tree. ( Hint: it was more than 20,000 last year.) If you can't count them from this photo, try it in person.
The gala tree lighting ceremony takes place at the EAB Bank Plaza in Uniondale this Friday (Dec 4) starting at 4:30 p.m.


KATHERINE HOWARD ENGAGED TO MARRY WILLIAM BINGHAM BOLTON IN THE SPRING
LEAD: The engagement of Katherine Howard to William Bingham Bolton, a son of Mrs.
Edward L. Meister of Waite Hill, Ohio, and the late Representative Oliver Payne Bolton of Ohio, has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert G. Howard of Marblehead, Mass.
The couple plan to marry in May.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE TWILIGHT OF THE PRESIDENCY: From Johnson to Reagan.
By George E. Reedy. (NAL, $17.95.) When George E. Reedy, who had been President Johnson's longtime press secretary and special assistant, first published this book in 1970, it was fairly hailed as a distinguished and thoughtful - and sometimes frightening - essay on government.


&gt;DONNA GOLDBACH IS WED
LEAD: Donna E. Goldbach, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Goldbach of New York, was married in New York yesterday to Paul Stephen Appelgren, the son of Charles Appelgren of Montrose, Colo., and Irma Appelgren of Lakewood, Colo.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenneth O. Jones performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church.


Art: 'Arches for Galveston,' at the Cooper-Hewitt
LEAD: AS part of a general effort at urban renewal and civic image-building, the city of Galveston, Tex., commissioned seven architects to design arches for its 1986 Mardi Gras celebration , the first held in the city since 1946.
Their widely varying results, shown in photographs, models and drawings, make up the amusing ''Arches for Galveston'' exhibition on view at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum through Jan.


Prospects
LEAD:  Diamonds Still Dazzle


TV SHOW EXAMINES NEWARK RIOTS
LEAD: THE black-and-white film is grainy, but its impact is as powerful today as it was nearly 20 years ago.


Scientists Hope to Solve Riddle of the Ice Ages
LEAD: By drilling to the bottom of the ice sheet in the heart of Antarctica, Soviet and French scientists are determined to solve the riddle of the ice ages by acquiring a year-to-year record of climate for the last half-million years.


COURT BATTLE CONTINUES OVER VALUE OF PET DOG
LEAD: NOW 16 years old, Tucker is quite deaf, nearly blind and walks very slowly.
But his owner, Elissa Zager, said recently that the family pet ''still has a sparkle in his eyes.''


A Stage Wizard Conjures Much From Little
LEAD: THERE ARE SEVERAL MO-ments in Hugh Whitemore's ''Breaking the Code'' when Derek Jacobi fulfills our conventional expectations of a major actor.
He expresses pain, anger, grief, desolation and, once or twice, a curious mix of them all, making one's eyes pop at the authenticity of his emotions and the potency of his performance.


Reagan to Stress Regional Conflicts at Talks
LEAD: President Reagan asserted today that military intervention by the Soviet Union in other nations was ''a major impediment to improved U.S.-Soviet relations.''


Luggage
LEAD: To the Editor: Apropos your Practical Traveler ''Finding Lost Luggage'' (Travel, Sept. 27), I would like to share our experience with your readers.
On Sept. 24 we checked in at the Eugene, Ore., airport bound for Kennedy International Airport by way of San Francisco.
The cheerful, courteous United Airlines clerk agreed that the layover of half an hour might be too short if there were a delay at Eugene and rerouted us to Denver where the layover was a bit longer.


NOT MANY JUDGES PRACTICE WHAT THE PRESIDENT PREACHES
LEAD: ALTHOUGH no President since Franklin Delano Roosevelt has been able to appoint more judges than Ronald Reagan, the Federal court system has not yet become the conservative bastion that he and his supporters had intended.
It has not been for lack of trying.
By the end of his term, Mr.
Reagan will probably have named more than half of the nation's 743 Federal judges.


TRY PASTA DISHES AS A FIRST COURSE
LEAD: THE problem of choosing a first course at a small dinner is easily solved by pasta.


WHEN TO KEEP AND WHEN TO DISCARD
LEAD: LAST weekend I attended a conference of photography curators and archivists.
They were not exactly a typical bunch of photo buffs even though many were carrying point-and-shoot cameras.
But one of the most hotly contested topics of conversation involved a question that every photographer has to face at one time or another: how to decide which pictures to keep and which to throw out.


Soviet Voice Grows Clearer
LEAD: TELEVISION AWAITS MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV; the Soviet leader arrives in Washington on Dec. 7, but already there are arguments.
Soviet officials had suggested that Mr.
Gorbachev make a 10 A.M. speech to a joint session of Congress.
The time difference would have allowed him to appear live and in prime time in Moscow.


Pointing Toward Vietnam
LEAD:  THE KOREAN WAR  By Max Hastings.
Illustrated. 389 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


Chairs With Some Backbone in Them
LEAD: GEORGE WASHINGTON furnished the porch of his Mount Vernon home with 27 bow-back Windsor chairs.
Thomas Jefferson is said to have sat swiveling in a Windsor as he drafted the Declaration of Independence.
And Charles Eames told a reporter in the 1970's how much he admired this furniture: ''I have always hoped my chairs would be regarded as the


'THE PROBLEM IS GETTING WORSE'
LEAD: THE death of a 5-month old baby in New Britain after he spent the night in a car with his homeless parents has focused attention once again on the plight of Connecticut's homeless and the fear that winter will bring more tragedy.
Typically in winter, there is more attention focused on the homeless, a group whose number appears to be increasing as the state's stock of low-income housing and residential hotels diminishes.


Philippine Typhoon Toll Said to Be At Least 500
LEAD: At least 500 people were killed when giant waves churned up by Typhoon Nina smashed coastal towns and villages in southern Luzon, a provincial governor said today.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  GOOD-BYE AND KEEP COLD  By Jenny Davis. 210 pp.
New York: Orchard Books/Franklin Watts. $12.95. (Ages 12 and up)


DEMYSTIFYING POP-UP DRAINS
LEAD: POP-UP drains in bathroom basins may seem mysterious, but actually they are simple to repair.
Knowing how they operate is useful.


Persistent Rent Control
LEAD: To the Editor:


TRY PASTA DISHES AS A FIRST COURSE
LEAD: THE problem of choosing a first course at a small dinner is easily solved by pasta.


THE MAKE-OVER AT ESTEE LAUDER
LEAD: LEONARD A. LAUDER, president and chief executive officer of the Estee Lauder cosmetics empire, is barreling through a Bullock's department store in Southern California, an entourage of a dozen trying to keep pace.
It is the sixth store he has visited today to critique the way his products are displayed.


Military Supplier to Plead Guilty in Parts Scheme
LEAD: A military contractor and its president have agreed to plead guilty to charges of passing off used electrical connectors as new ones for military aircraft, a Federal prosecutor said Friday.


A 'Real' Supply-Sider Views Reagan's Legacy; Don't Focus on Deficit
LEAD: To the Editor:


ACCOLADES FOR ITALIAN FARE
LEAD: A DISTINGUISHED silver-haired couple are entertaining a friend from England at La Pace restaurant in Glen Cove.
It's apparent that these people are familiar with the restaurant and its menu.
They choose knowingly.


Bridge Players From New York Region Lead Reisinger Field
LEAD: Three players from the New York metropolitan region led the field at the end of qualifying play in the Reisinger Board-a-Match team championship here Friday night.


Cutter Sunk to Create Artificial Reef Off Keys
LEAD: The first of two aging Coast Guard cutters was scuttled Friday night to create an artificial reef for marine life and a new attraction for divers off the Florida Keys.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 27 about Chicago misidentified the architect of Lake Point Tower.
The architects were Schipporeit-Heinrich Associates, not Mies van der Rohe; George Schipporeit and John Heinrich, principals at the time of design, were students of Mies.


BATTEN DOWN THE GARDEN
LEAD: THE thermometer acts like a yo-yo at this time of year.
Its up-and-down readings should remind gardeners that more of the same lies ahead.
To help plants survive, here are some reminders to get the garden ready.


CANS CASHED IN FOR SMOKE DETECTORS
LEAD: THE Stamford Fire Department is running a program to collect returnable bottles and cans and to cash them in for money to buy smoke detectors.


Shopping in London For Record Bargains
LEAD: NOT too many moons ago, a visitor had merely to step off the train or bus from Gatwick Airport at Victoria Station to find a W. H. Smith book-and-record shop with long-playing record treasures beyond imagining.
Alas, the W. H. Smith store at Victoria contains no records these days.
And the Our Price Records shop in the same station (now a subsidiary of W.


Luggage
LEAD: To the Editor: Isn't it time the airlines did something about the carry-on luggage situation?


Corruption Found In Czech Soccer
LEAD: More than 40 people associated with the Liaz Jablonec soccer club were tried by a district court for bribery and corruption and sentenced to jail terms of up to two years, Czechoslovak publications reported today.


Cubans in Louisiana Insist On Bishop to Mediate Talks
LEAD: The refusal of Government negotiators to allow rebellious Cuban inmates to meet with outside mediators appears to have become a stumbling block to the release of 26 hostages held at a Federal detention center here.


CLASP CENTER, BY THE NUMBERS
LEAD: I would like to express my appreciation for the Nov. 8 articles on day care on Long Island and at our center, Clasp.


Adams Storms Into Title Game
LEAD: Arthur Dennis was as surprised as anyone.
He had just scored six of the eight touchdowns John Adams made in beating Midwood, 55-21, yesterday in a Public Schools Athletic League semifinal game in Ozone Park.


150 Anti-Abortion Protesters Seized in Jersey
LEAD: More than 150 anti-abortion protesters were arrested on trespassing charges today during a rally in front of a women's health clinic that performs abortions here.


Headliners; On the Rise
LEAD: When Li Peng was named Acting Prime Minister of China last week, some Western diplomats voiced concern not only with his plans for the future, but also with his schooling in the past.
Mr.
Li, who is assured of being named Prime Minister on a permanent basis at the National People's Congress next spring, is a 59-year-old Soviet-educated engineer who, in the eyes of some Westerners, has not enthusiastically supported the economic policies of China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, and might even have ''pro-Soviet'' leanings.


SARAH HOFSTADTER MARRIES DOV WISNER
LEAD: Sarah Katherine Hofstadter, the daughter of Mrs.
Theodore H. White of Bridgewater, Conn., and the late Richard Hofstadter, was married yesterday to Dov Wisner, a son of Tova Wisner of Haifa, Israel, and the late Moishe Wisner.
Judge Stuart R. Pollak of the San Francisco Superior Court performed the ceremony at the bride's home in Oakland,


FIRST AID FIRST AID
LEAD: FACING a gloomy fiscal picture, the Monmouth County community of Roosevelt held an Arts and Crafts Fair last Sunday to raise money for its First Aid Squad.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  CIRCLES OF DECEIT.
By Nina Bawden. (St. Martin's, $14.95.) The British novelist Nina Bawden's latest work is aptly named, since most of its characters are deceiving someone, not infrequently themselves.
The unnamed narrator, a painter, has even elevated the practice to an art.
He makes finely detailed copies of important works by the masters - always for legitimate purposes - and uses the income to finance his smaller output of originals.


'Tamara' From the Ground Floor Up
LEAD: ''I'M DEVELOPING A NEW THEORY of 'Tamara,' '' says the 31-year-old Canadian playwright John Krizanc.


Food Inspection Results
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 24 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


WEDBING PLANNED BY LISA GRUNWALD
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Anatole Grunwald of New York and Vineyard Haven, Mass., have announced the engagement of Mr.
Grunwald's daughter Lisa Grunwald to Stephen J. Adler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Adler of Baldwin, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.


About Men; A Case of Colic
LEAD: THE TIGHTER I HELD HER, THE more she stiffened, arching her back and pummeling her heels into my midsection.
And her continuous high-pitched shriek made my skull reverberate.
It had been going on for nearly five hours.
Seldom in my life had I felt so rejected by anyone.
My 6-week-old daughter had colic.


Dance
LEAD: Among the most stimulating of choreographers are those whose productions combine intellectual curiosity with theatrical flair.
One choreographer known for her flamboyant theatricality is Katherine Dunham, whose achievements will be honored during the season by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater that opens Wednesday night at City Center, 131 West 55th Street.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  JAZZ BAGPIPER  Rufus Harley, who says he is the world's first professional jazz bagpiper, will perform tomorrow - St.
Andrew's Day, no less - at Princeton Theological Seminary.


PANHANDLING LAW IN USE IN SEATTLE
LEAD: The city's new law against aggressive panhandling has gone into effect, but the police say they did not have to use it the first day of the holiday shopping season.


SHOWS AND SALES FOR THE HOLIDAY SEASON
LEAD: SEASONAL flurries of craft fairs and sales are scheduled next weekend in different parts of the state and just across the border.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article about Iceland in today's Travel section incorrectly gives the times of sunrise and sunset on the winter solstice, Dec. 21.
The sun rises at 11:23 A.M. and sets at 3:34 P.M., resulting in about 20 hours of darkness.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  THE BERKUT.
By Joseph Heywood. (Random House, $18.95.) Adolf Hitler killed himself in the spring of 1945 as the Red Army advanced on his bunker in Berlin.
Or did he?
Groan.
Not another novel about how Hitler or one of his henchmen survived to sin another day.
But don't despair.
Joseph Heywood's second novel isn't your run-of-the-mill Nazi-hunting twaddle.


YOUTHS WARN PEERS ON DRUG USE
LEAD: Seven teenagers climbed out of a station wagon and a Toyota and walked into the Branford High School recently.
As they walked down a couple of long hallways, they blended right in with the students, wearing denim jackets, untied sneakers and t-shirts sporting names like Bon Jovi and Beastie Boys.


MISS ROBBINS MARRIES M. R. WEISS IN JERSEY
LEAD: Betsy Rae Robbins, a health-program analyst with the Mayor's Office of Municipal Labor Relations, and Mark Robert Weiss, an associate at the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler, were married last evening at Congregation Beth El in Cherry Hill, N.J.
Rabbis Howard Kahn and Isaac Furman and Cantor Jeffrey


Teen-Ager Is Killed by Police In Shootout in Portland, Ore.
LEAD: A 14-year-old boy was killed by the police in a shootout Friday after he chased his mother from his home, the police said.


A Landlord-Tenant Vendetta on East 89th
LEAD: CROWDED into a New York State hearing examiner's room on John Street one Friday afternoon this month were enough big guns to fight a major battle, even though only a skirmish was at hand.


Message for Dorsett
LEAD: IN case Tony Dorsett hasn't gotten the message, Tom Landry, the coach of the Dallas Cowboys, made it all but explicit last week.
While he stopped short of saying the 33-year-old running back would be asked to retire after the season, Landry told The Dallas Times Herald that Herschel Walker represented the team's future.


Hitting the Skids (and House)
LEAD: Cars skidding out of control on an iced parking lot struck Kathleen Dauphin's automobile and her home twice on Thanksgiving night, but her sense of humor survived serious injury.


In New Mexico, Pinon Fires And Pueblo Dancers
LEAD: ON Christmas Eve at the San Juan pueblo in northern New Mexico, every family puts up a small pile of logs in front of their home.
As the sky darkens over the pueblo, the wood is ignited into fires called luminarias.
Dancers known as Matachines appear, in many-colored silk capes and streaming ribbons, led by a blanket-draped figure holding a cross.


N.F.L. Notebook; PROPOSAL IS BREWING TO KEEP CARDINALS IN ST. LOIUS
LEAD: A BEER company may ultimately have more clout than three major cities that are attempting to induce the football Cardinals to leave St.
Louis.


McNeil Finally Finds the Key
LEAD: The brawny, but quick, outside linebackers have become such an intimidating power in the National Football League that even the slithery Freeman McNeil has been forced to change his style.


A WALK THAT OPENED MY EYES
LEAD: I HAVE never tallied the hours I spend driving on errands or playing chauffeur, but sometimes it seems that the car is an extension of my body and I am connected to the gas stations along Route 25A by a giant umbilical cord.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.  $355,000  101 Burns Place  5-bedroom, 3-ath, 15-year-old frame raised ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, deck, walk to stores; taxes $7,180.
South Salem, N.Y.  $352,000  Hoyt Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 16-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceiling, deck, greenhouse, lake rights; taxes $3,350.


4 MUFFLERS LATER, A LOVE STILL STRONG
LEAD: LIKE your first kiss, I guess you never forget your first new car.
It inspires memories of pleasure and pride, shiny metal and lusty acceleration that linger.


New-Age Music Booms, Softly
LEAD: NEW-AGE MUSIC IS OOZING TOWARD THE big time.
Once found alongside seaweed and Tarot cards at an occasional macrobiotic outlet, new-age music has evolved from a shared secret to a trendy commodity.
In the last year, two of its stars, the Swiss ''electroacoustic harpist'' Andreas Vollenweider and the Japanese synthesizer player Kitaro have played to full houses at Radio City Music Hall.


ON LAND, CADETS CONQUER SEA
LEAD: Cadets at the U.S.
Coast Guard Academy in New London are learning how to steer a ship without having to set foot on one.


Talks on Gibraltar Airport
LEAD: Britain and Spain failed to settle their dispute over Gibraltar Airport today, but said they would hold fresh talks next week.
Foreign Secretary Sir Geoffrey Howe of Britain told reporters he would meet his Spanish counterpart, Francisco Fernandez-Ordonez, in London on Wednesday for a previously unscheduled round of negotiations with both countries' transport ministers.


NEW ACADEMIC LEVELS SOUGHT
LEAD: IF the thought of job security was ever far from the mind of Jimmy Johnson, the University of Miami head football coach, it was brought back with a shiver last week with the news out of Columbus, Ohio.


East Bloc Technology Spy Ring Is Reported Foiled
LEAD: Greek, Cypriot and NATO security agencies have jointly disrupted a Bulgarian intelligence network that stole military-oriented Western technology for the Eastern bloc, according to business people who were formerly involved in the network.
Greek security officials confirmed the account.


Question Of the Week; Who Should Win the Heisman Trophy?
LEAD: One great athlete stands alone:Craig Heyward of the University of Pittsburgh.
ALEXANDER N. COLONNA
Amagansett, L.I.


SARAH VALENTINE BECOMES A BRIDE
LEAD: Sarah Gray Valentine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Massie Valentine of Richmond and Virginia Beach, Va., was married last evening to Jesse Thompson Ellington 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ellington Jr. of San Marino, Calif.
The Rev.
Frank F. Fagan performed the ceremony at St.
James's Episcopal Church in Richmond.


OUT OF THE CELLAR
LEAD: YOU'RE SITTING IN the office doing the books when the phone rings.
A guy you know says, ''How'd you like to get your hands on some terrific old stuff, maybe 10,000 bottles in all?'' This happened to Peter Morrell and his sister, Roberta, about a year ago.
Both of them are involved in Morrell &amp; Company, the wine and spirits retailer at 535 Madison Avenue.


A SCHOOL DAY AT THE OPERA
LEAD: Connecticut has found itself with about 7,000 new opera aficionados in recent weeks, and they are all between the ages of 5 and 12.


Music
LEAD: Lovers of the soprano voice, and more particularly the soprano voice as espoused by the younger American generation of singers, should be in clover this week.
Three representatives of the breed - Carol Vaness, Leona Mitchall and Dawn Upshaw -will be giving recitals in a four-day span.


This Feast Leads To Famine
LEAD: WE'RE BEING OVERRUN.
THEY'RE COM-ing from Paris, London, Rome, Hollywood, New York, Seattle, Hoboken and Palermo -from Zimbabwe, Mexico, China, Zaire, Japan, Sweden, Canada, Israel, plus points in between, as well as out of the woodwork.
Some arrive preceded by dignified, majestic pronouncements as to their Importance.


Photography
LEAD: Mitch Epstein and Len Jenshel are leading members of a generation of photographers who are not afraid of the sensual, picturesque qualities of color film.
Because their pictures are lush and luminous, they are often paired in their audience's mind.
But as their shows on opposite sides of Spring Street this month suggest, their styles and their sensibilities are quite distinct.


Borg's First Return
LEAD: POOR Bjorn Borg.
When the former tennis champion moved back to Sweden a couple of years ago after a decade of tax-happy exile in Monte Carlo, he apparently had to leave most of his money behind.
That, at least, is one conclusion suggested by some figures from the first income tax return Borg has filed in 11 years.


The Neediest, Visible and Invisible
LEAD: A New York woman named Joyce Brown recently achieved national notice for persuading a judge that the city had no right to hospitalize her, even though she lived on the streets.
While the case inspired policy debate, it also distorted the problem of the homeless.
Whatever one makes of their civil rights, few of the homeless enjoy life on the street.


HILL HOMES ARE FOUGHT IN CROTON
LEAD: PRICKLY PEAR HILL was not supposed to be mentioned at a recent public meeting in Croton-on-Hudson, under ground rules set by the chairman.
But every so often, the words slipped out.


Donations Are High In Coat Drive for Poor
LEAD: A laundry owner who offered to clean used coats and distribute them to the poor said Friday he was overwhelmed by the response.


ETHICS QUESTION VEXES REP. LENT
LEAD: REPRESENTATIVE Norman F. Lent of East Rockaway, the ranking Republican on the House Energy and Commerce Committee, is known in Washington as a man who can work with the opposition and shepherd complex commercial legislation through his panel.


Incinerator Project Is a Divisive Issue in Vermont
LEAD: The idea seemed seductively simple five years ago.
The City of Rutland and neighboring towns would pool their garbage and burn it in a huge incinerator, producing electricity.
The garbage, which had been threatening to overflow landfills, would be gone and the electricity would be cheap.


The Father of the Bride Loves the Mother of the Groom
LEAD:  STORIES FROM THE WARM ZONE AND SYDNEY STORIES  By Jessica Anderson. 246 pp.
New York: Viking. $15.95.


A Wooden Soldier's Duty
LEAD: Tauno Schwelnus greeting children as he stood guard yesterday at Fifth Avenue and 58th Street.


Sweet Judy Blue Eyes
LEAD:  TRUST YOUR HEART  By Judy Collins.
Illustrated. 275 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $18.95.


A 'Real' Supply-Sider Views Reagan's Legacy
LEAD: To the Editor:


For the Near-Term, Allocate Assets Conservatively
LEAD: In the wake of the stock market collapse of Oct. 19, and its fallout on the economy, investors are reassessing their financial and investment strategies.
To help them do so, Fred R. Bleakley and Jan M. Rosen of The New York Times staff discussed these issues with two Wall Street professionals: Jonathan A.


Planners Must Take the Offensive
LEAD: WE SHOULD be demanding more from our planners.
Not necessarily longer hours at the meetings of the planning boards, but more in the sense that we look to them for the quality of life in the built environment.


JOHN BASSETT WED TO LILLIAN FRIEND
LEAD: Lillian McClure Friend, a daughter of Charles Wood Friend of London and Mrs.
Michael Turnure of Salisbury, Conn., was married in San Francisco yesterday to John Washington Bassett, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John Washington Bassett of Portland, Ore.
The Rev.
Thomas Cummins performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal


ONE MAN'S KIDS
LEAD: I felt the warm rush of support from a kindred spirit as I read Daniel Meier's essay ''One Man's Kids'' (About Men, Nov. 1), about his life as a first-grade teacher.
A newly minted clinical psychologist, I recently chose among several job offers, settling on a child-care agency run largely by women.


From Generation to Degeneration
LEAD:  CIGARETTES  By Harry Mathews. 292 pp.
New York: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $17.95.


Verbatim; Remembering Nixon
LEAD: ' I have long held and often expressed the view that Richard M. Nixon had it within his grasp to be our greatest post-World War II President. . . .


Gospel: McIntosh Shouters
LEAD: THE McIntosh County Shouters, who gave their first New York concerts Friday and Saturday at Washington Square Church under the auspices of the World Music Institute, perform ring shouts, an archaic black music tradition that was long thought to be extinct.
The ring shout, which was first described by visitors to plantations in the deep South as early as the 1840's, seems to have survived longest in isolated island communities off Georgia and South Carolina.


A Hot Medium for the Message
LEAD: AT this time of year, mailboxes overflow with requests for charitable contributions.
Before long, however, your mailman may be bringing you something more eye-catching than a letter - a videotape.


Venice
LEAD: To the Editor: We had a trouble-free trip to Italy this May and great pleasure and excitement until we arrived at the Troncetto, the artificial parking island for the trip to Venice.


&gt;KIMBERLY PHELPS TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Kimberly Wynn Phelps to Christopher Smith Marrs has been announced by Mrs.
Warren Thomas Hoar of San Luis Rey, Calif., and Gordon Stuart Phelps of West Hartford, Conn., parents of the bride-to-be.
Her fiance is a son of Mrs.
Robert Sherwood Marrs of Essex, Conn., and the late Mr.


DATA BANK: November 29, 1987
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,831.2
$3,795.3
$3,683.3
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.1
2.5
2.9
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'87
I Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$134.5
$136.6
$138.0


South Shore Gets A Place in Final
LEAD: South Shore lost its star tailback for almost half the game, and its star wide receiver in the final period.
But the Vikings managed to battle back from a 26-12 deficit and defeat John F. Kennedy of the Bronx, 29-26, in an overtime shootout yesterday in a Public Schools Athletic League semifinal football playoff.


Music
LEAD: Lovers of the soprano voice, and more particularly the soprano voice as espoused by the younger American generation of singers, should be in clover this week.
Three representatives of the breed - Carol Vaness, Leona Mitchall and Dawn Upshaw -will be giving recitals in a four-day span.


CYNTHYA MARGAUX BLETTER MARRIES MICHAEL D. PALLACK
LEAD: Cynthya Margaux Bletter, a daughter of Gladys Ketcher-Bletter of Great Neck and Westhampton Beach, L.I., and the late Sydney Bletter, was married last evening to Michael David Pallack, a son of Mati Pallack of Great Neck.
Rabbi Robert S. Widom officiated aboard the yacht Paco Rabanne at the Water Club in New


DIANE W. HUNTER WED TO WILLARD MACKEY JR.
LEAD: At St.
Michael's Lutheran Church in New Canaan, Conn., Diane Webb Hunter, a jewelry designer, was married yesterday to Willard Clyde Mackey Jr., former chairman of McCann-Erickson Worldwide, an advertising agency in New York.
The Rev.
Elwood L. Stark performed the ceremony.


Augustana Streak Is Ended at 60
LEAD: Dave Jones rushed for 219 yards and three touchdowns today as Dayton ended Augustana's 60-game unbeaten streak with a 38-36 victory in a National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III quarterfinal game.


Islanders Beat Frustrated Rangers
LEAD: When the Islanders scored their fourth goal for a 4-2 lead, Jari Gronstrand, the culpable Ranger defenseman, sank to his knees as if immobilized by failure.
When the well-rehearsed Islanders scored their fifth goal, John Vanbiesbrouck angrily rapped his stick on the crossbar of the goal, and Coach Michel


Lelia Pardee Has Wedding
LEAD: Lelia Erdice Pardee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Trevor Pardee of New York and Rio Dulce, Guatemala, was married yesterday to John Frederick Haller, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Boyd Haller of Carmel Valley, Calif.
The Rev.
Robert Jensen of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints performed a nondenominational ceremony at the home of David Bates, a cousin of the bride, and Mrs.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I have been advised that when I close my summer home for the winter, I should leave the heat on at a low setting of about 40 degrees to protect the wood paneling, built-ins and furniture.
Do you think heating is necessary when the house is unoccupied?


The Times's Neediest Cases Fund Opens 76th Annual Appeal
LEAD: Against a backdrop of heightened urgency, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund opens its 76th annual appeal today on behalf of the hungry, the homeless and the underprivileged in the New York metropolitan region.


BRIDGET E. FARRELL TO WED F. DAVID CAMPBELL IN MAY
LEAD: Bridget Elizabeth Farrell, an associate at the New York law firm of Bower &amp; Gardner, and F. David Campbell, a senior vice president of Key Bank of Central New York in Syracuse, plan to be married in May.


WEDDING IN WASHINGTON FOR BETSY HOY AND CLYDE REETZ, REAL-ESTATE BROKE
LEAD: Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in Washington was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Elizabeth Hoy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas L. Hoy of Bethesda, Md., and Clyde Edwards Reetz, a son of Gay Edwards Reetz of Bronxville, N.Y., and John H. Reetz of Bradford, Pa.
The Rev.
Peter Beck performed the ceremony.


Albany Notes; Meeting Set to Weigh Special Session
LEAD: Governor Cuomo has summoned top legislators to Albany tomorrow to discuss whether to reconvene the Legislature in special session.


Against the Master and His Men
LEAD:  A MIND OF HER OWN  The Life of Karen Horney.
By Susan Quinn.
Illustrated. 479 pp.
New York: Summit Books. $22.95.


An End to El Rukn Chic?
LEAD: In Arabic, El Rukn means ''the foundation.'' On Chicago's South Side, it means trouble.
Thanks to a tough Federal prosecutor and a two-and-a-half-year investigation, El Rukn may have foundered.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 1987
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 3-29  Preparing for a vote on contra aid, the White House is trying to determine if Congress will allow $30 million in nonlethal supplies to be used for military training.
Page 1  Cuba should be invited to rejoin regional organizations from which it was expelled more than two decades ago, the presidents of eight Latin American countries have agreed.


POSTINGS: $2.5 Million Infusion; A Major Renovation for Mahopac Mall
LEAD: It seems that the Mahopac Outlet Mall in Putnam County was jinxed from the start.
Since it opened on Route 6 and Miller Road in 1973, three anchor stores in succession closed after the bankrupt chains of which they were a part went out of business.
Those failures crippled smaller retailers there.


HALPIN PRESSES POLICE CHIEF SEARCH
LEAD: As he continued preparations to name a transition team that will help cement the structure of a new Suffolk County government, Patrick G. Halpin, the incoming County Executive, last week announced a restructured search committee for a new police commissioner and outlined some changes he thinks are necessary for the beleaugured department.


TRY PASTA DISHES AS A FIRST COURSE
LEAD: THE problem of choosing a first course at a small dinner is easily solved by pasta.


MORE AND MORE, AMERICANS ARE CHOOSING TO SAVE LESS
LEAD: WHEN Eben Price became a father, he and his wife did what his parents had done for him 17 years earlier: They opened a savings account. ''After three and a half years of a marriage in which we'd never managed to maintain a savings account,'' said Mr.
Price, a 32-year-old Dallas lawyer, ''we knew we'd never develop that kind of financial discipline any other way.


Broadcast TV
LEAD: Writers deserve star billing in a handful of films on the small screen this week.
Harold Pinter's adaptation of ''The French Lieutenant's Woman'' (1981) - Saturday at 8 P.M. on Channel 11 - entwines John Fowles's story of a Victorian outcast with a modern tale of illicit love, not always successfully.


8 Latin Chiefs Urge Cuba Role In Their Region
LEAD: The presidents of eight Latin American countries, meeting here for their first conference held without the participation of the United States, agreed today that Cuba should be invited to rejoin regional organizations from which it has been excluded for more than two decades.


TEMPORARY FRIENDSHIP IS NO CAUSE FOR LAMENT
LEAD: IN ''A Little Visit With a Big Surprise''  [ Opinion Page, Oct. 25 ] , Herbert Hadad laments the apparent failure of a bond, built during a holiday encounter with some beautiful people, to survive separation.


GORBACHEV SEES VISIT AS A CHANCE TO DO BUSINESS
LEAD: DURING his short visit to Washington next week, Mikhail S. Gorbachev plans to spend two hours with 60 American business leaders - a sign of the importance the Soviet leader attaches to an improved economic relationship with the United States.


Sports of The Times; PARCELLS, WALTON IN DOUBT
LEAD: IN the autumn of their discontent, Bill Parcells doesn't want to talk about next year's Giants team and Joe Walton doesn't want to talk to this year's Jets team.
Perhaps without realizing it, each has put a question mark on his future.


WHEN MONEY SLOSHES 'ROUND THE WORLD
LEAD: Speculative disasters are an ancient curse.
Even the Roman Forum most likely had its Black Fridays and Shattering Mondays.
Now we have experienced our own panic, whose history cannot yet be written, but whose place in history can perhaps be tentatively assessed.
A glimpse of the past may even help us peer into the future.


A LA CARTE
LEAD: The hunting season makes serious eaters start thinking of game.
In spite of easy, year-round availability, game is rarely found in home kitchens on Long Island.
As a result, people who enjoy game dishes, eat them at restaurants.


A MODERN SCROOGE BY A NEW COMPANY
LEAD: How to save the American musical theater?
Kevin Connors, who lives in Westport, thinks he's found a way.


ADVICE ABOUT RADON CALLED ILL-ADVISED
LEAD: Leonard Cole's article focuses on the uncertainties surrounding the radon issue.
It fails to take into consideration one of the certainties about radon: By and large, people are asleep about the problem.


THE SONGS CARRY 'SOUND OF MUSIC'
LEAD: SOMEWHERE the hills may be alive with the sound of music, but at Theater Three they are barely humming.


WHEN THE DAY NEVER ENDS
LEAD: THE SUN WAS JUST RISING OVER MY tiny garden apartment in Tokyo when I placed the call to my boss in New York.
I was in urgent need of some instructions to complete a multimillion-dollar deal.
My sleeves were rolled up, my morning coffee was steaming on the kitchen table and I was in high gear.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:  STEAL THIS URINE TEST: Fighting Drug Hysteria in America.
By Abbie Hoffman with Jonathan Silvers. (Penguin, Paper, $5.95.) Drug abuse is a serious national problem, but part of that problem is public and governmental misunderstanding and over-reaction: that is the important theme of ''Steal This Urine Test,'' and it's one that the book documents thoroughly.


THE CONTRADICTIONS OF BOB DOLE
LEAD: I read with astonishment that Senator Dole whispered to me, during a House-Senate conference, that I should ignore his pronouncements on austerity and press for expansion of Medicaid coverage of prenatal care.
No such conversation took place.


VICTORIAN HOUSE IS A PRODUCT OF CHANGE
LEAD: Maria Stieglitz suggests painting our old houses in bright San Francisco colors  [ ''Why Victorian Drab?
Try Tangerine Gables!'' Opinion Page, Nov. 1 ] .
It might be a good idea.


INVESTOR PROFILES: Yields Improve the Quality of Life; Funding An Active Retirement
LEAD: BARBARA and Joseph Suarez started life with very little money.
But late last year, when they decided to retire and move to Florida, they found that their house in Westchester County - for which they had paid $50,000, 20 years before - was worth close to $300,000.
Between that and some savings, they had a lump sum of $325,000.


Using Plastic to Rev Up Revenues
LEAD: SOME consumers have recently received solicitations for ''affinity cards'' - bank credit cards offered in conjunction with a nonprofit charity or association.
The sponsoring bank promises to help the organization every time the customer charges a purchase with the card.


Practical Traveler; What You Can Expect From a Travel Agent
LEAD: YOU'RE a smart person; do you really need a travel agent for your vacation trip?
An agent is probably not going to save you a lot of money on an air trip, unless you are shy about calling a lot of airlines on 800 numbers and asking what the cheapest fare is to that place.
But if you would rather do something other than this research, you probably need a travel agent.


The Stakes Are Too High
LEAD: THE kinds of investments that get the most publicity are often the least appropriate for the average investor, say the experts.
Because they involve too much risk, have poor potential for return or require the time and attention that only the most sophisticated professionals can devote to them, these investments are best avoided by anyone whose primary attention is elsewhere, for instance, on a demanding job.


U.S. ACTS TO PROTECT ISLAND TERN
LEAD: THE roseate tern, which nests in the Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge off southwest Connecticut, has been declared an endangered species by the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, effective Dec. 2.


PORTENTS OF TURNS FOR THE WORSE-OR THE BETTER
LEAD: EVER since the Oct. 19 stock market collapse, most analysts have been saying that the economy would slow down as a result, perhaps enough to send the nation stumbling into recession.
They argue that consumers, who account for two-thirds of the gross national product, have lost both wealth and confidence and will pull in their horns accordingly.


A POPULAR CHOICE FOR FLORAL DESIGNS
LEAD: TRIM hedges, and if evergreen, store the clippings outdoors to use for making wreaths, door swags or table centerpieces.
Clean out the tool shed.
Go over catalogues and discard those no longer needed to make room for new ones due in January.
Popular Flower


In Scotland, a Double Portion of Cheer
LEAD: THE celebration of the New Year is usually here today and gone tomorrow, except in Scotland, where the joys of the season and the pleasures of the flask linger a full two days.
Scots allow Jan. 2 as well as Jan. 1 for a double measure of oblivion, and count their blessings twice over.
Not till Jan.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption on Nov. 1 with a guide to cruises misidentified a ship off Grand Cayman.
It was the Holiday of the Carnival Cruise Lines, not the Norway of the Norwegian Caribbean Lines.


WHAT ARE WE DOING WITH A UNIFORM IN THE HOUSE?
LEAD: THE 7-year-old boy can not sleep tonight.
His uniform is laid out beside his bed, and he keeps getting up to put on his blue and yellow cap, to finger the engraved buckle of his blue webbed belt, to gaze at the insignias decorating his brand-new blue shirt.
My husband had bought the entire outfit, including the yellow kerchief and various metal buttons, for more money than he had paid for his own fall jacket.


NEW YORKERS, etc.
LEAD: ACCORDING to a certain genre of romantic novel, there's a ''no better than she should be'' seductress simmering inside many a discreet black dress, and an adventurous swashbuckler lurking behind a lot of blue pin-stripe suits.
Stick with these romances and inevitably passion flares, a volcano erupts.


Zola Family Battles the Dreyfus Affair Anew
LEAD: Emile Zola's famed newspaper expose, ''J'accuse,'' which defended Capt.
Alfred Dreyfus from charges of treason, has once again become a cause celebre - this time within the Zola family.


ARTS AGENCIES SEEK SHARE OF BOND ISSUE
LEAD: AT A SMALL Italian restaurant here, Allen W. McCracken fidgeted during a recent lunch and conceded he was somewhat nervous.


MUSIC VIEW
LEAD: WOULD ANYONE ARGUE AGAINST THE proposition that the ear is the body's most important organ in the perception and evaluation of music?
Not likely.
Even the more presumptuous opera directors might concede, at least in principle, that there is more to music than meets the eye.
But it is also true that seeing while listening can sometimes add a dimension to a problematical work and make a believer of a skeptic.


PERSPECTIVES: Waterfront Development; City Efforts Trapped in Multiple Reviews
LEAD: By ALAN S. OSER


A RARE U.S.-CUBAN DEAL BRINGS VIOLENT CONSEQUENCES
LEAD: AS prison disturbances in Atlanta and Oakdale, La., lurched toward an uncertain ending last week, Washington policymakers were again confronting the consequences of America's fractious relationship with Cuba's Fidel Castro.


The Other Side Of Bruce Affair
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


DRAWING UP PLANS TO FIGHT CORRUPTION IN CONSTRUCTION
LEAD: WITH 14 Federal and local agencies scrambling - sometimes competing with one another - to expose corruption, New York City's construction industry seemingly has a plethora of watchdogs.
But top aides to Governor Cuomo now say the administration is poised to add two more units to clean up and regulate the diffuse mix of developers, contractors, suppliers and labor unions.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.96
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.64
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.83
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
9.67
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


CORRECTION
LEAD: An art review last week about an exhibition at the Firehouse Gallery of Nassau Community College carried an incorrect identificaton for an artist, supplied by the gallery.
She is Shoshana Ron.


Pollsters Try To Tap Mind Of the Chinese
LEAD: Wu Xin thinks the Government ought to know how people feel, and he is not alone.


FUTURE IS DEBATED ON 8 IDLE REACTORS
LEAD: Eight reactors that helped put the punch in the United States arsenal of nuclear weapons sit silent along the Columbia River today as Federal officials ponder a report that suggests what could be done with them.


Question Of the Week; Who Should Win the Heisman Trophy?
LEAD: For the first time in college football history, the Heisman Trophy should be awarded to an outstanding football team, not an individual.
A team truly representative of amateur athetics with enough guts to get on the field with anybody -win or lose. . .
Columbia University.
MURRAY H. SALIT


HUNTER SLOAN HAS WEDDING
LEAD: At the Trinity College Chapel in Hartford, Mary Hunter Sloan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward W. Sloan 3d of Farmington, Conn., was married yesterday to Mario A. Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Terrence B. Smith of New Milford, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Borden W. Painter Jr., an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.


Children Were Only Allowed to Whisper
LEAD:  THE THIRTIETH YEAR  By Ingeborg Bachmann.
Translated by Michael Bullock. 181 pp.
New York: Holmes &amp; Meier. $19.95.


Them, Uz and Annie
LEAD:  SELECTED POEMS  By Tony Harrison. 204 pp.
New York: Random House. $15.95.
SELECTED POEMS  1954 to 1982.
By John Fuller. 175 pp.
North Pomfret, Vt.: Secker &amp; Warburg/David &amp; Charles. $25.95.


&gt;PAMELA KOVAR TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Harold S. Kovar of Clifton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Ann Kovar, to Dr.
Baruch Toledano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Toledano of Brooklyn.
Miss Kovar is a physical therapist and a doctoral student at Teachers College of Columbia University.
Her fiance is a resident in orthopedic surgery at the New York University Medical Center.


Soviet Beginning to Crack Down On the Unofficial Political Clubs
LEAD: The Moscow authorities have begun to crack down on unofficial political groups in the aftermath of the Yeltsin affair, breaking up meetings and making some arrests, according to members of several groups.


Yeltsin's Fall Is Good For the Soviet Reform
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHORAL CONCERTS AND DANCE TAKE CENTER STAGE
LEAD: CHORAL concerts and dance programs are moving to the front, starting Wednesday with the first of four consecutive 8 P.M. performances by the Manhattanville Dance Ensemble.


92-YARD RUN DEFEATS WASHINGTON &amp; JEFFERSON
LEAD: Rodney Beville's 92-yard touchdown run highlighted a 17-point third quarter that carried Emory &amp; Henry to a 23-16 victory over Washington &amp; Jefferson in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III South Regional playoff final today.


ROBIN RUSKIN TO MARRY BRIAN LINDER IN MARCH
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Ronald Ruskin of New York and Menands, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Robin Hope Ruskin, to Brian David Linder, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome J. Linder of Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ruskin, the consumer marketing director of American Baby, a monthly publication and a division of Cahners Publishing Company in Manhattan, graduated from the University of Colorado.


DR. P. P. VESSA JR. AND MS. OZIMEK ENGAGED TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Kimberley Cordeaux Ozimek to Dr.
Paul Peter Vessa Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vessa of Bergenfield, N.J., and Del Ray Beach, Fla., has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Richard T. Ozimek of Rye, N.Y.


Mush From the Wimps
LEAD: Tomorrow, Congress and the Administration will start trying to keep their timid promise to cut the Federal budget deficit by a token $30 billion.
Just how timid and just how token can be gauged by comparing their promise with the economic plan that Jimmy Carter proposed in his last year in office.


ELIZABETH MURDOCH TO WED PHYSICIAN
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Murdoch Jr. of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Patterson Murdoch to Dr.
Henry Clinton Maguire 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Maguire Jr. of Merion Station, Pa.
A January wedding is planned.


Photography
LEAD: Mitch Epstein and Len Jenshel are leading members of a generation of photographers who are not afraid of the sensual, picturesque qualities of color film.
Because their pictures are lush and luminous, they are often paired in their audience's mind.
But as their shows on opposite sides of Spring Street this month suggest, their styles and their sensibilities are quite distinct.


Congressmen Urge 'Marshall Plan' for Manila
LEAD: A bipartisan group of legislators, fearful of the consequences of mounting economic problems on the fragile democracy of the Philippines, called on President Reagan today to put together the equivalent of a Marshall Plan to channel $1 billion more a year to that country over the next five years.


Amy Jill Maneker To Wed in March
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Deanna C. Maneker of Westport, Conn., and Morton M. Maneker of New York City of the engagement of their daughter Amy Jill Maneker to Dr.
Brian Robert Herts, a son of Dorothy Herts of Roslyn, L.I., and Harry Herts of Scottsdale, Ariz.
A March wedding is planned.


Foreign Coins Push 'Change for Good'
LEAD: YOU'VE just come home from a vacation abroad, and your pockets jingle with pfennigs, francs or other foreign coins.
While they accept bills, most banks will not exchange coins for you - the amounts are small and the sorting can be tedious.


HAITI VOTES TODAY FOR A PRESIDENT
LEAD: Twenty-two months after the collapse of the Duvalier family dictatorship, Haitians vote Sunday in their first presidential election in 30 years.


Dance
LEAD: Among the most stimulating of choreographers are those whose productions combine intellectual curiosity with theatrical flair.
One choreographer known for her flamboyant theatricality is Katherine Dunham, whose achievements will be honored during the season by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater that opens Wednesday night at City Center, 131 West 55th Street.


Sunday Observer; Name That Carcass
LEAD: MRS.
CARLA P. OF Houma, La., writes to ask, ''What is this Iowa carcass I keep hearing about politicians running in?
A friend told me they have the world's biggest hogs up there in Iowa and every year they slaughter the biggest one they can find, clean out the carcass and make all the politicians run around in it to show they have real Iowa grit.


JESSE JACKSON AIMS FOR THE MAINSTREAM
LEAD: THERE IS A STORY HIS former professors tell about Jesse Jackson, that he tells about himself, in fact.
It goes back to the time when he was a student at the Chicago Theological Seminary and took Preaching, a required course.
Jesse Jackson was a star student preacher - exciting, persuasive, fervent, in the inspirational Southern black


Shaky but Ready, Haitians Are Mapping Voting Strategy
LEAD: A money-changer sat in the shade of a tree overhanging the Rue Pavee, ordinarily one of the capital's busiest commercial strips, yesterday.


DEMYSTIFYING POP-UP DRAINS
LEAD: POP-UP drains in bathroom basins may seem mysterious, but actually they are simple to repair.
Knowing how they operate is useful.


FOR CHRISTMAS, GIFTS MADE BY HAND
LEAD: THE mail-order catalogues have been examined, the local shops resplendent with Christmas displays explored, and you've still not found the definitive gifts for those very special people on your Christmas list.
It's obviously time for a fresh approach.


Florida State Overcomes 14-3 Deficit and Wins
LEAD: Derek Schmidt kicked four field goals, and Dayne Williams scored twice on 1-yard runs today as Florida State rallied to beat Florida, 28-14, and end a six-game losing streak in the rivalry.


Sid Caesar: Ich Speaken German at Met
LEAD: THE SCENE IS THE SITTING room of a suite in a midtown hotel, where a 65-year-old man sits in an old-fashioned flowered chair.
He is Sid Caesar -noticeably older and somewhat balder than the Sid Caesar we remember from ''Your Show of Shows'' and ''Caesar's Hour'' in the 50's, but also a lot trimmer and much more in shape - even though he's not quite recovered from a broken hip he suffered in September when he fell while walking his dog.


IRISH REBUILDING FOR PAST GLORY
LEAD: TOM FREEMAN is a 22-year-old graduate student and left guard for Notre Dame.
He wishes he could play four more years for Lou Holtz, the second-year coach.


Dinkins Says Report Ignores Effect of Racism on New York
LEAD: In a written rebuttal to the report of Mayor Koch's Commission on the Year 2000, the Manhattan Borough President, David N. Dinkins, said the commission had failed to recognize racism as a factor in the city's persistent problems of poverty, crime and homelessness.


Comparing Feminisms
LEAD: To the Editor:


Call It an Awakening
LEAD: I HAD just finished interviewing Henry Roth, the author of ''Call It Sleep,'' when as if by some dramatic design, a large, flat package was delivered to his New York hotel room.
It was an advance copy of Mr.
Roth's first book in 53 years, ''Shifting Landscape,'' a complete collection of his shorter writings along with many excerpts from letters and interviews, lovingly assembled by his gifted Italian translator, Mario


At the Met, a Bedchamber Fit for a King
LEAD: MUCH WAS EXPECTED OF the Louis XIV state bedchamber that has just been inaugurated, together with its adjoining entrance gallery, at the Metropolitan Museum.
Thanks to Pierpont Morgan, Louis Untermeyer and other collectors of an earlier generation, the Met had some majestic Louis XIV pieces.
For years, Mr.


'Brain Gain' From Europe Is Hurting Young American Professors
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wagner Rolls by Fordham to Gain National Semifinal
LEAD: Wagner, a big, fast football team with many skills, swept Fordham aside yesterday, won its second postseason playoff game and advanced to the N.C.A.A.
Division III semifinals.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Basketball  Tolentine Upsets Molloy: A standing-room only crowd of 1,200 squeezed into the gym at Archbishop Molloy High School in Queens last night to see the Stanners upset by St.
Nicholas of Tolentine, 76-72, in the season opener for both teams.
Tolentine, a school with an enrollment of 400, one-quarter the size of Molloy, outmuscled the Stanners with their bench strength.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 29, 1987
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
(Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.
2
4
GARDEN OF SHADOWS, by V. C. Andrews.
(Pocket, $4.95.) The beginnings of the evil that
beset the Dollanganger family in four previously
published novels.


THE BEST WOMAN IN THE HALL
LEAD: The Women's Professional Billiard Association was pleased with Roger Starr's article on women's pocket billiards and Jean Balukas (''The Best Woman in the Hall,'' Oct. 18).


LIVING AND WRITING THE PEASANT LIFE
LEAD: NO one goes to the Vallee du Giffre.
In the Michelin Guide to the French Alps, it is mentioned only in passing, a place to get around or quickly through.
There are no curiosities in its tiny villages, and its mountains - its jagged, hulking mountains - offer few gentle slopes for le ski moderne.
It is one of those parts of the region known as the Haute-Savoie that time has left to the Savoyard peasants; and that, I was told more than once in Paris, where I was to get my train to the Alps, was reason enough to stay away.


IN MT. KISCO, MASTER PRINTER AT WORK
LEAD: A QUIET intensity marks the atmosphere at Tyler Graphics Ltd., the industrial-sized workshop in Mount Kisco where editions of prints by some of America's leading artists are produced.


Wilkins Leads As Knicks Click
LEAD: With the Knicks at 1-7 and Gerald Wilkins not into the flow of Rick Pitino's motion offense, the coach made a change in his starting lineup.
He replaced Wilkins at shooting guard with Trent Tucker, the better outside shooter.


REAGAN WANTS END OF TWO-TERM LIMIT
LEAD: President Reagan says that after leaving office he ''would like to start a movement'' to repeal the constitutional amendment that limits Presidents to two terms.


A PROTEIN IS IMPLICATED: NEW CLUES TO ALZHEIMER'S
LEAD: DURING the last eight years, the number of research reports presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience has more than doubled, exceeding 6,600 this year.
In an attempt to keep up, more than 11,000 scientists and onlookers gathered for the 1987 convention, which was held in New Orleans this month.


OUTLOOK FOR THE MARKETS: Equities at Risk; Bonds Promising; Picking Funds to Match Objectives
LEAD: WHATEVER its impact upon the public's psyche and pocketbook, the recent stock market collapse does not alter the basic argument for investing in mutual funds, provided individuals consider the funds' shortcomings as well as their advantages.


Q AND A
LEAD: Passports  Question: On the immigration forms of foreign countries, I have always written ''U.S.A.'' in stating where my passport was issued.
Recently, on entering Thailand, I was asked to be specific.
What is the proper way of answering this question? - D. W., White Plains  Answer: The correct response is to name the city, the passport division of the United States Bureau of Consular Affairs says.


Artists Brace for Entry Of Cameras Into Courts
LEAD: Ever since the newspaper wars of the 19th century, the whispering of charcoal and pastels against paper has blended with somber pronouncements, lawyerly rhetoric and tearful testimony at trials across New York.


MISS BONA PLANS TO WED STUDENT
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick E. Bona of Boonton Township, N.J., of the engagement of their daughter Dawn Elaine Bona to Robert A. Rizzo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Amedeo A. Rizzo of Broomall, Pa.


On Doctorow
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pass Along the Costs to the Consumer
LEAD: OUR firm recently conducted an investigation into the issue of unfunded liabilities associated with retirement medical benefits.
Among 40 major corporations studied, most cited liabilities ranging from $25 million to $1.5 billion.
So far, these liabilities remain a closely guarded secret, but the situation is rapidly changing.


DATA UPDATE: November 29, 1987
LEAD:  HOUSING COSTS: N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Oct.
from Sept.
from Oct. 86
Rents [1]
133.9
0.3
5.5
Homeowner's costs [1]
137.8
1.9
9.4
Fuel and utilities [2]
363.3
-3.8
0.1
*Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.


HOW-TO
LEAD:  Touche Ross Video Tax Guide 1988  MasterVision. 75 minutes. $29.95.
Similar to the one made by Touche Ross and MasterVision last year, this video guides individuals through a number of the intricate elements of present-day tax planning.
The forward look this time is toward 1988, when additional changes stemming from the 1986 tax reform act become effective and new rules affecting taxpayers and their tax returns come into play.


Protecting Assets in Tough Times
LEAD: FOR individual investors - indeed, for anyone with any type of financial decision to make - the world changed dramatically six weeks ago when the stock market came tumbling down.


THE GIFT OF GARB
LEAD: Weekly, I look forward to the humor in your magazine, and ''The Gift of Garb'' (Works in Progress, Nov. 1) gave me an extra, albeit choked, laugh.
Costume designer Patricia Zipprodt reports her ''hideously materialistic'' costume plans for ''The Sleeping Beauty'' are patterned after the 17th-century French, and reflect the ''ornate tastelessness of these people.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Make no mistake.
The Soviets are and will continue to be our adversaries, the adversaries indeed of all who believe in human liberty.'' - President Reagan  [ 6:3. ]


CENTRAL AMERICAN PACT AIDS THOSE IN POWER
LEAD: SINCE it was signed in August, the Central America peace treaty has prompted tentative political steps which, if followed up, could alter the way Central American states treat their internecine and ideological quarrels.


'Dear Mr. Emerson'
LEAD:  THE SELECTED LETTERS OF LIDIAN JACKSON EMERSON  Edited by Delores Bird Carpenter.
Illustrated. 343 pp.
Columbia: University of Missouri Press. $42.


CHANGING SYNAPSES: TEACHING OLD NEURONS NEW TRICKS
LEAD: DURING the last eight years, the number of research reports presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience has more than doubled, exceeding 6,600 this year.
In an attempt to keep up, more than 11,000 scientists and onlookers gathered for the 1987 convention, which was held in New Orleans this month.


City Island
LEAD: IN 1895, the seafaring residents of City Island were promised a new school building and bridge to the mainland if they would leave Westchester County and join New York City.
With 900 ballots cast, the city beat the county by only two votes.


In 'Flora' Two Music Men Return to an Early Love
LEAD: ONE AFTERNOON NOT LONG ago, John Kander and Fred Ebb were attending a rehearsal at the tiny Vineyard Theater of a revised version of their first Broadway musical, ''Flora, the Red Menace.'' As Veanne Cox, who plays the title role, began singing ''It's a Quiet Thing,'' the composer and lyricist, who were sitting in different parts of the theater, each began to weep.


STARTING OVER: TV'S GRANT TINKER
LEAD: ''Starting Over: TV's Grant Tinker'' (by Diane K. Shah, Oct. 25) - give me a break.
When you have Mr.
Tinker's money and connections, you do not start over; you move on.
KAY KAUFMAN  Forest Hills, Queens


WE OWE THE WILD THINGS A WARMER WELCOME
LEAD: AN extraordinary sight met my eyes one evening in late summer.
My two cats were on the lawn facing something sitting between them.
That ''something'' was black with white stripes.
All three animals were frozen into immobility; the cats weren't taking their eyes off the skunk and the skunk wasn't certain just where to turn or what to do next.


ABOUT BOOKS
LEAD: IN HER book ''The Biological Clock'' (Doubleday, New York, $18.95), Molly McKaughan of Montclair gives a new meaning to the term ''clock watchers,'' her phrase for most of the 5,000 women who replied to a 1985 survey on motherhood in Working Woman magazine.


Moscow Is Seen at Turning Point In Its Intervention in Afghanistan
LEAD: The Soviet Union's eight-year intervention in Afghanistan is at a crucial moment, Western diplomats here and in Moscow say, with Moscow increasingly desperate to find a way to pull out its 115,000 troops when the Afghan regime is losing ground to the Islamic rebels.


A STORE HE BUILT HIMSELF
LEAD: ALL that afternoon, as I followed Robert Pucciariello through the labyrinthine aisles of his Book Emporium in Sea Cliff, I was reminded of my son Frederick the Younger.
Fred does not sell books.
He is a cabinetmaker and master carpenter; he works with his hands and his head.
But so does Mr.
Pucciariello.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  LANDIS VALLEY CHRISTMAS


DID MADAME BOVARY DO DISHES?
LEAD: DID Madame Bovary take arsenic to avoid doing dishes?
While I was washing the previous night's dinner-party plates and platters, this question raced through my mind like turbulent waters through the Proustian floodgates of memory.


Question Of the Week; Who Should Win the Heisman Trophy?
LEAD: Don McPherson of Syracuse wins hands down.
He accounted for well over half of the Orangemen's touchdowns and total yardage this season.
When McPherson's game was on, (as was the norm), the team won easily.
When he struggled (as in the West Virginia game) so did the team.
Overall, he combined great running with great passing to lead Syracuse to an undefeated season.


Next Week; Is Larry Holmes Too Old To Fight?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Man Charged With Impersonating a Nurse
LEAD: A man that authorities said had been impersonating a nurse at a Harlem hospital for three months has been arrested, setting off a review by the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation of the credentials of about 3,500 nurses registered with a referral agency, officials said yesterday.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption on Oct. 18 about a bust on display at the Palais des Beaux-Arts in Brussels, misidentified the work.
It is of Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy.


WITH TIME, A MOTHER GROWS ACCEPTING
LEAD: THE phone call to my mother would not, I was sure, be the easiest I'd ever made.
She was then in her early 80's, but enjoyed making people think of her as quite a bit younger.


HISTORIC TRANS-ATLANTIC COVERS TO BE AUCTIONED
LEAD: PORTIONS of a collection made by the late David Beals will be offered at public auction by Richard C. Frajola, Inc. on Saturday at 12:15 P.M. at the Danbury Hilton Inn, Danbury, Conn.
The auction will feature items of United States and Confederate States postal history.
Included are Kansas and Missouri Territory, military history, trans-Atlantic and Confederate States covers.


PLANS FOR HOMELESS GET MIXED REVIEWS
LEAD: A PLAN to expand services for homeless people in Nassau County reverses years of denial by county officials that a problem exists but falls woefully short of what is needed, advocates for the homeless say.


Rights Group Reports Continued Abuses of Liberty in Turkey
LEAD: Despite steps taken by the Turkish Government to stop human rights abuses, violations of citizens' liberties still continue, according to a 1987 report issued last week by the Helsinki Watch Committee.


U.S. TAKES A LOSS OVER 3 WINDMILLS
LEAD: Three of the world's largest windmills, which less than a decade ago cost a total of $60 million, are being torn down by a contractor who bought them at a Government surplus sale for $28,000.


Flight Attendants' Union Asks for Strike Vote
LEAD: Leaders of the flight attendants' union at American Airlines are asking members for authorization to call a strike before the busy holiday travel season.


AUDIO VISIONARY: Ray M. Dolby; The Quest to Build a Better Noise Trap
LEAD: AS befits the inventor of the most successful noise-reduction system in the recording business, Ray M. Dolby speaks with a soft voice.


Because It's There
LEAD: THERE are certain people who cannot see a mountain without wanting to go up it.
I am one of those people.


Lively Follow-Up to the Short Dress
LEAD: SOMETHING has been added to the new shorter-length dresses for evening.
Often, it is a long train of taffeta, shaped like a fishtail or an icicle.
Sometimes, it is a cascade of ruffles made of netting.


OLD MASTERS, NEW TYCOONS
LEAD: IT USED TO BE A FAIRLY QUIET BUSINESS,'' SAYS a veteran London purveyor of Old Master paintings, describing the field he has tilled for more than 30 years. ''That is,'' he adds with a sportsmanlike smile, ''until Mr.
Feigen came along.'' He is referring to Richard L. Feigen, a hyperactive, high-profile New York dealer, who spends a good deal of time in the staid art precincts of St.


HIDDEN ASSETS
LEAD: Embroiled in divorce proceedings, the dress manufacturer's wife was struggling to get what she considered to be her fair share of the assets accumulated over 12 years of marriage.
Her husband claimed that his company's annual sales had dropped from $2 million to $800,000, but she suspected there was more there than met the eye - in the form of off-the-books cash sales.


SATIRIST TEES OFF ON NEW TARGET, GOLF


Howard Ruling Pleases N.C.A.A.
LEAD: Dick Schultz, the executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, said today that he felt relief when a Federal judge in Washington denied a request by Howard University to delay the start of the Division I-AA playoffs.


Strikeouts and Hits Allowed Show Correlation
LEAD: GIVE a manager his choice and he'll pick a pitcher who can strike out batters over one who uses other means to secure outs.
Results of pitchers' performances this past season support that choice.


The Lake Atop Bolivia
LEAD: BOLIVIA'S tourist attractions encompass a string of superlatives, starting with La Paz, at 11,909 feet the highest large city in the world.


BOWEN REVIEWS HIS YEARS AT PRINCETON
LEAD: WITH the same quiet efficiency that has been the hallmark of his presidency, William G. Bowen of Princeton University is spending his final weeks in office conducting business as usual, and then some, as he gets ready to leave on Jan. 8 to head the Mellon Foundation.


J. J. PERTICONE JR. AND SUSAN TELLIER TO MARRY JAN. 16
LEAD: Susan Elizabeth Tellier and Joseph James Perticone Jr., a son of Mary C. Perticone of Baltimore and the late Mr.
Perticone, plan to marry Jan. 16, the bride-to-be's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Tellier of Mamaroneck, N.Y., have announced.


Professors' Dismissal Will Be Investigated By Bar Association
LEAD: The American Bar Association's Accreditation Committee has ordered an immediate investigation of the cases of four professors at the New England School of Law who were dismissed last year.


Whose Words?
LEAD: To the Editor:


BOOS, CHEERS AND YAWNS FOR NEW STATION
LEAD: THE new Stamford Transportation Center made little impression on Eli Halpern last Monday.
The Stamford resident, who regularly commutes to New York City on the Metro-North Commuter Railroad, was unaware that the long-awaited and oft-troubled train station had finally started service.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''This is more fallout from the crash.''  - eter Cohen, chairman of Shearson Lehman, potential bidder for E. F. Hutton


Moves to Make Before Yearend
LEAD: AS the year 1987 winds down, millions of Americans are casting about for last-minute ways to minimize the tax burden that awaits them April 15.
Although year-end opportunities for tax savings are not so plentiful now as they were prior to the Tax Reform Act of 1986, they do exist.
For one thing, all tax benefits have not been abolished: Retirement savings plans, for example.are still available.


One-Man Luge Team With Tale of 2 Flags
LEAD: IT wasn't much more than a year ago that the final approval was granted, and the Philippines had itself a Winter Olympics team for the first time since 1972.
Although there were dark moments in the campaign, like the time a government official was detained at the airport in Manila and forced to turn over important papers intended for the nation's Olympic


POSTINGS: 35-Story Office Tower
LEAD: For years, the New York Hilton Hotel on Avenue of the Americas at 53d Street held on to a site it owned to the west of its parking garage in case it wanted to expand.


THE CONTRADICTIONS OF BOB DOLE
LEAD: Between George Bush (''I've already been everything, so you might as well make me President'') and Pat Robertson, I was beginning to take a shine to Robert Dole, as perhaps the least dangerous and most pragmatic Presidential candidate. (''The Contradictions of Bob Dole,'' by Martin Tolchin and Jeff Gerth, Nov.


A Jury Sides With Vermont In Sex Discrimination Case
LEAD: A jury has ruled in favor of the state in the sex discrimination case brought by Nancy Graff, a former acting editor of the magazine Vermont Life.


The Importance of Being Affectionate
LEAD:  THE HEALTH OF NATIONS  True Causes of Sickness and Well-Being.
By Leonard A. Sagan. 233 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $19.95.


FROMNEW COMPANY, A MODERN SCROOGE
LEAD: HOW to save the American musical theater?
Kevin Connors thought he'd found a way.
And when Roger Ludlowe High School in Fairfield, Conn., was closed last year, Mr.
Connors knew he'd found the place.


Kevin Roche Finishes a Trio And Changes His Tune
LEAD: WHEN KEVIN ROCHE'S 1 United Nations Plaza, the hotel and office tower at the corner of First Avenue and 44th Street, was finished in 1976, the most notable thing about it was the extent to which the tower's shimmering glass-and-metal form broke rank with everything around it.
The building is an exquisite minimalist sculpture; its abstract form has nothing to do with any of the buildings near it, except for the allusions its blue-green glass makes to the United Nations Secretariat building across First Avenue.


DOCTORS URGE A RISE IN STUDY OF ALLERGIES, GROUP'S REPORT SAYS
LEAD: The study of how the body develops immunities has become important to every medical speciality, and additional courses in the field are needed in medical schools, doctors say in a report.


More Than Just Baubles, Bangles And Bright Shiny Beads
LEAD:  THE HISTORY OF BEADS  From 30,000 B.C. to the Present.
By Lois Sherr Dubin.
With photographs by Togashi. 364 pp.
New York: Harry N. Abrams. $60.


3 U.S. Legislators Barred
LEAD: Haiti has barred three members of Congress from taking part in an official American delegation to monitor the election Sunday.
An official here said the three - Representative Benjamin A. Gilman of upstate New York, a senior Republican on the House Foreign Affairs Committee; Representative Jaime B.


IMITATION OF LIFE
LEAD: It is gratifying to see that fashion designers are beginning to realize that furs and animal skins can be utilized in fashion without inflicting the cruelty that accompanies the use of genuine animal skins (Fashion: ''Imitation of Life,'' by Linda Wells, Nov. 1).
The message is that real people wear fake furs.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  ACROSS, by Peter Handke.
Translated by Ralph Manheim. (Collier/Macmillan, $6.95.) The Austrian writer Peter Handke uses fiction to explore the ways in which we can escape from the labyrinths of language into subjective realms.
His novel about Andreas Loser, an archeologist who literally gets away with murder, is ''one of the most arresting and expansive'' of his books, Lawrence Graver said in The Book Review last year.


AIR FORCE SENDS UP MILITARY SATELLITE
LEAD: An Air Force Titan 34D, the nation's most powerful unmanned rocket, roared into space tonight with a secret military satellite that a civilian expert said would provide instant warning of an enemy missile attack on the United States.


James McShane, 64; Aided U.S. Inquiries
LEAD: James T. McShane, a former F.B.I. agent who helped in the Federal investigations into the conduct of Hamilton Jordan, the former Presidential aide, and Raymond J. Donovan, the former Secretary of Labor, died Friday at the Hospital of Saint Raphael in New Haven after a long illness.
He was 64 years old and lived in Madison,


TALKING: Modulars; Assessing The Jigsaw Alternative
LEAD: BUYERS seeking a new home -whether a single-family house or a town-house-style unit - are increasingly likely to find that builders are offering modular construction.


Bryan Ferry's Scenes of Obsession and Consequences
LEAD: THE MAN IN FORMAL EVENING wear pauses to adjust one of his gold cuff links, and listens.
From the balcony of his hotel he can hear drumming, muffled but insistent, borne by the breeze from somewhere beyond the perimeter of the new town's stark electric lights and flickering neon. ''Voodoo Warning is calling, down in Limbo,'' he croons softly to himself.


MARCIA NEUHAUS WED TO DAVID SPECK
LEAD: Marcia Eve Neuhaus and David G. Speck were married last evening at the bridegroom's home in Alexandria, Va., by Rabbi Sheldon Ezring.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:  RINGER.
By Marshall Terry. (Corona/ Texas Monthly, $16.95.) ''Ringer'' is a self-conscious retelling of the biblical story of the prodigal son, with characters who never rise from their flat landscape.
An elderly widow, Eliza MacDuff Ringer, has been transplanted from a small Texas town to an apartment in Dallas so she can be close to her one responsible son, Bill.


Spain Sees Arrests Damaging Basque Separatists
LEAD: Government officials here believe they have permanently damaged the Basque separatist organization E.T.A. after a second round of arrests this week of several of the group's major figures.


On Wilde's 'Salome'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Near the Oakdale Center, a Long Vigil but Not a Lonely One
LEAD: Scott Sutterfield was never afraid of his job as a guard at the Federal detention center in Oakdale, La., but he had a feeling that something unwelcome might happen when he went to work Nov. 21.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Lakewood  $84,000  1360 Lanes Mill Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; 2-car garage.
W/W carpets, 2-car garage; taxes, $1,179.
Livingston  $205,000  37 Grand Terrace  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 47-year-old Tudor; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, full basement, den; taxes $2,543.


Inspectors Criticize Eastern On Delays in Plane Repairs
LEAD: A special Government inspection of Eastern Air Lines in June found that the airline's practices on postponing aircraft repairs was a ''misuse'' of Federal policy and that pressures on Eastern's crews posed a potential safety hazard, according to a report.


TIMETABLE SET FOR YONKERS HOUSING SITES
LEAD: A FEDERAL judge rebuked Yonkers last week for ''continuing intransigence and defiance of a court order'' to build public housing and he set a new timetable that he said was intended to have construction begin by next spring.


WHAT'S DOING AROUND: MONTEREY
LEAD: Jutting into the Pacific Ocean about 100 miles south of San Francisco, the Monterey Peninsula was among the first ports of call visited by Spanish seafarers who explored California in the 17th century.
It still draws visitors from afar.
Many come nowadays in search of a movie star who serves as mayor of one of its cities or to see the playful otters on exhibit at a three-year-old aquarium on Cannery


MOVIES
LEAD:  La Ronde  With Simone Signoret, Danielle Darrieux, Gerard Philippe, Jean-Louis Barrault.
Directed by Marcel Ophuls.
Nelson Entertainment. 97 minutes. $29.95.
Sex is the subject of ''La Ronde,'' Marcel Ophuls' memorable 1950 treatment of the popular Arthur Schnitzler play.
The place is Vienna, in spring 1900, but the movie is given a strong Gallic flavor by such luminaries as Danielle Darrieux, Simone Signoret, Gerard Philippe and Jean-Louis


17 Inmates Protest Internment in Manhattan
LEAD: Seventeen inmates at the Federal Immigration and Naturalization Service detention center in Manhattan have gone on a hunger strike to protest their internment.


Mystery Envelops Case Of Judge Found Hanged
LEAD: Until last week, Richard L. Nahley was a pillar of this city's legal and political structure - a popular 51-year-old lawyer with a seemingly successful practice, a former corporation counsel and the city's Probate Court judge.
He was active in raising money for charities and was an avid golfer and churchgoer.


SARI LYNN KALOMEER WED TO GREGORY SHOLOM ON L.I.
LEAD: At Temple Sholom in Lawrence, L.I., Sari Lynn Kalomeer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Kalomeer of Matawan, N.J., was married last evening to Gregory Seth Sholom, a son of Ronald Sholom of New York and Cornwall Bridge, Conn., and Susan Norwalk of Floral Park, Queens.
Rabbi Ephraim Buchwald officiated.


CHRISTMAS CONCERT
LEAD: The Orchestra of St.
Peter by the Sea, whose founder and maestro, the Rev.
Alfonse Stephenson, is the former conductor of the musical ''A Chorus Line,'' will return to its home at St.
Peter's Church in Point Pleasant Beach for a Christmas concert Saturday.


CHRISTMAS CONCERTS IN AN EARLY START
LEAD: CHAMBER Music Plus is continuing its Thanksgiving tradition this afternoon at 3 with its eighth annual post-holiday concert at the Old State House in Hartford.


GAY GORDON WED TO D. C. LACY 3D
LEAD: Marion Gay Gordon, the daughter of Mrs.
Carleton Walker Borden of Wilmington, Del., and Buck Hill Falls, Pa., and the late James Gay Gordon 3d, was married yesterday to Donald Cameron Lacy 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lacy Jr. of Richmond and Virginia Beach, Va.
The Rev.
Adam Lewis performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Christiana Hundred in Greenville,


Lynda Eisenstat Is Married
LEAD: At the Beth Israel Congregation in Vineland, N.J., Lynda Luby Eisenstat, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald M. Eisenstat of Vineland, was married last evening to Mitchell Alan Dorf, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Dorf of Fox Point, Wis.
Rabbi Murray Kohn and Cantor Miriam Frishman officiated.
The bride is a sales representative in Atlanta for Vie de France, a bakery chain based in McLean, Va.


MICHIGAN SHOCKED BY ARIZONA, 79-64
LEAD: It was the Big Ten against the Pac-10, and the bodies were flying.
But it wasn't the Rose Bowl.
It was the semifinals of the 10th Great Alaska Shootout.
Arizona beat Michigan, 79-64, today to advance to the title game.


Celebrations of the Season; In Germany, Markets Full Of Toys, Tinsel and Sweets
LEAD: TO say that the Germans invented Christmas undoubtedly taxes the imagination - and patience - of historians beyond the tolerable, even if many trimmings of the event, including its celebration around the winter solstice, have undeniable pagan Teutonic elements.
But even skeptics will acknowledge that, in all likelihood, Christmas markets had their origins somewhere between the Rhine and the Oder, the North Sea and the Alps.


The Falling Dollar
LEAD: To the Editor:


Food; WINTER VEGETABLES
LEAD: FOR ME, FALL IS A TIME OF nostalgia.
Cascading leaves and a nip in the air remind me of the impending holidays and the comfort of home.
It is a season for moving indoors, crackling fires and celebration of robust fare.
Tables laden with juicy roasted game birds, thick soups and stews laced with hearty winter vegetables reflect our need to stave off the cold.


Rooting for Armageddon
LEAD:  ARMED AND DANGEROUS  The Rise of the Survivalist Right.
By James Coates. 294 pp.
New York: Hill &amp; Wang. $17.95.


IN PRAISE OF NIANTIC
LEAD: Poor Niantic!
She will never grow up to be Essex (the doyenne of precious villages that flank her to the east and west), but surely this humble little town is undeserving of the ugly duckling status conferred upon her in your article ''A Main Street Shows the Signs of Stress''  [ Oct. 18 ] .


WHAT WE KNOW: OUR INTERNAL UNIVERSE IS EXPANDING
LEAD: DURING the last eight years, the number of research reports presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience has more than doubled, exceeding 6,600 this year.
In an attempt to keep up, more than 11,000 scientists and onlookers gathered for the 1987 convention, which was held in New Orleans this month.


New M.I.T. Police Chief Is Ready for Stern Tests
LEAD: When Anne P. Glavin began patrol work for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Campus Police in 1975, her supervisor would insist that she be picked up by a squad car every night after her beat on a remote area of campus that then was considered dangerous for women, but not men.


Salzburg
LEAD: To the Editor: In two articles on Salzburg and environs (Travel, July 5 and Aug. 16), Oscar Millard correctly described what the females wear as Dirndls.
What the men wear he called flannel.
The stuff is Loden.
The only resemblance is that both are gray.
PAUL SINGER  Summit, N.J.


Two to Cross The Country
LEAD: When the best high-school cross-country runners in the nation gather for the Kinney National Championships Dec. 12 in San Diego, it will mark the second visit for Nnenna Lynch but the first for Ramon Espinosa.
They qualified yesterday by being among the top eight finishers in their divisions during the Northeast Regional championships at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx.


Get a Prudent Edge
LEAD: WHILE many Wall Street professionals were looking for ever-greater rewards in a bull market that was defying economic gravity earlier this year, Lawrence A. Krause, one of the nation's leading financial planners and head of his own firm in San Francisco, was busily writing ''Sleep-Tight Money,'' (Simon &amp;


ADVICE ABOUT RADON CALLED ILL-ADVISED
LEAD: The Cole article seemed to assert that the state's official position on radon - all homes in the northern part of New Jersey should be tested within a year - is premature and ill-advised, and will result in an unnecessary expense to homeowners and windfall profits for companies that have jumped on the radon bandwagon.


Distributing Pain of the Pensioner Boom
LEAD: To the Editor:


RAKE, RAKE, RAKE. THEN BAG, BAG, BAG.
LEAD: AN unwritten law of nature requires that falling leaves must be gathered and properly disposed of, or the grasses underneath will die. ''Rake, rake, rake!'' cautions the garden editor. ''Bag, bag, bag!'' says the Town of Brookhaven.


CAN THE MENNONITES SURVIVE SUCCESS?
LEAD: As a Mennonite and as a law student at Columbia University, I found Paul W. Cohen's description of Mennonites in his article ''Can the Mennonites Survive Success?'' (Nov. 8) insightful and disturbing.


Nastique Is $16.20 Winner
LEAD: Nastique scored a mild upset when she rallied from seventh in a field of 11 to win the 117th running of the Ladies Handicap by 8 1/2 lengths yesterday at Aqueduct.
The race, which had a purse of $244,800 this year, is the country's oldest stakes race for fillies and mares.


In Maine, Much Rides on Whether a Forest Is Also Called 'Wilderness'
LEAD: From atop Caribou Mountain in western Maine, hikers see the towering peaks of the Presidential Mountain Range sweeping north to south 20 miles in the distance.
They see sparkling lakes and huge tracts of forest land.


Chad Reports Troops Fought Libyan Soldiers From Sudan
LEAD: Chad said today that Government troops had clashed with Libyan forces that entered Chadian territory from Sudan, the second time in less than a week Chad has reported fighting with Libya in violation of a cease-fire accord.


2 Big West Side Projects Fuel Anti-Development Sentiment
LEAD: Two gigantic building projects proposed for the West Side of Manhattan have prompted a groundswell of opposition so broad and deep that a number of urban experts and politicians say it has changed the way New Yorkers look at their skyline and feel about their government.


Goetz Confession Offered as Stocking Stuffer
LEAD: When Bernhard H. Goetz surrendered to the police in Concord, N.H., almost three years ago and admitted shooting four teen-agers on a Manhattan subway, he probably never imagined that his confession would one day become a home videocassette, sold in stores alongside such films as ''Rambo'' and ''Death Wish.


Garcia's 12 Barns at the Noyes
LEAD: ALL EVIDENCE to the contrary notwithstanding, everything has not been said and done about Abstract Expressionism and its derivatives.
Bearing witness to this is a show of the works by the late Mario Garcia that comes to the Noyes Museum here courtesy of the Princeton Gallery of Fine Arts.


WILLIAM WEGMAN: THE ARTIST AND HIS DOG
LEAD: IN WILLIAM WEGMAN'S STUDIO in New York's Hudson Valley, the blond floors appear to be stenciled in an abstract floral pattern.
In fact, after prolonged efforts to keep his dog out of the way of workmen during construction, Wegman took a different tack: he painted his dog's feet green and let her loose inside.


The Making of 'Mac Tonight'
LEAD: BRAD A. BALL couldn't get the melody out of his mind.
For months during early 1986 he was haunted by ''Mack the Knife,'' written by Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht for ''The Threepenny Opera'' and a No. 1 hit for Bobby Darin in l959.
What made the song stick was its irresistible connection to one of his biggest clients, the McDonald's Operators Association of Southern California - and, of course, to the Big Mac.


YUAN TO INVEST
LEAD: IT WAS THE MORNING RUSH HOUR IN SHEN-yang.
A cloud of smog hung over the city of three million as the 41 members of the United States-Sino Securities Management Delegation boarded the bus at the Friendship Hotel.
Our destination: a Chinese stock exchange.


Daughter of Ex-Governor Is Found Drowned
LEAD: A daughter of former New Jersey Gov.
William T. Cahill was found dead in her apartment here after drowning in a bathtub, the woman's family and law-enforcement authorities said Friday.


WHAT'S NEW IN FUND RAISING
LEAD: LAST year, Americans gave $87.22 billion to charity, a 9.4 percent increase over 1985, according to the American Association of Fund-Raising Counsel, which represents fund-raising advisers.
For 1987, experts predict somewhat smaller increase in the wake of the October stock market collapse.


QUESTIONS ABOUND IN HOSPITAL DEATHS
LEAD: IN the two weeks since the arrest of Richard J. Angelo, the former Good Samaritan Hospital nurse charged with injecting a patient with a powerful muscle-paralyzing drug, more questions have been raised than resolved.


Teen-Age Shoppers: Desperately Seeking Spinach
LEAD: QUIETLY, with few people noticing apart from a handful of social researchers, the economic power of America's teen-age population is mushrooming, changing the nation's consumer tastes as well as its family life.


Bay Area Bread
LEAD: To the Editor: S. Irene Virbila's article about the wonders of Bay Area bread (Travel, Nov. 1) could only bring a feeling of self-righteousness and I-told-you-so to those of us who always brought an empty suitcase to San Francisco in order to fill it with bread to bring back to New York.


Music: Kronos Quartet in Contemporary Program
LEAD: LINCOLN CENTER'S Great Performers series took a leap into the 20th century Friday night when the Kronos Quartet played the first in its three-concert series at Alice Tully Hall.
Like most Kronos concerts, the program featured premieres and recent compositions (the oldest, Bill Evans's ''Waltz for Debby,'' dated back to 1956).


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the belief that Thomas Jefferson maintained a long intimate relationship with one of his slave women misstated the history of Frances Trollope's book ''Domestic Manners of the Americans.'' It was published in 1832.


DOCUMENTARY
LEAD:  The Gospel According to Al Green  Produced and directed by Robert Mugge. 1984.
Magnum Entertainment 94 minutes. $29.95.
From the opening ballad (''I Love You With All My Heart'') to the rafter-raising sermon and gospel hymn (''The Lord Will Make a Way Somehow''), Al Green carries this marvelous film along with his voice and his smile.


Inmate Drowns in Escape
LEAD: An inmate who tried to escape by crawling through a drainage culvert drowned after a night of heavy rain, officials said Friday.
Jean Ulysses, 29 years old, formerly of Haiti, had pried loose a grate leading to the pipe Thursday night at Tomoka Correctional Institute, and heavy silt hampered Volusia County sheriff's divers who tried to rescue him, the authorities said.


Question Of the Week; Who Should Win the Heisman Trophy?
LEAD: The Trophy should go to one of the outstanding and most overlooked running backs of this season, Kenny Gamble of Colgate.
This season he broke several school and Division I-AA yardage and scoring records.
Even when compared with the better-known players from larger schools, Gamble has shown himself to be almost a one-man team.


KRISTINA L. DAHL WEDS JOSEPH G. HYLAS ON L.I.
LEAD: Kristina Louise Dahl, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Robert Dahl of Manhasset, L.I., and Hancock, Mass., and Joseph Gerard Hylas, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Hylas of New York, were married yesterday.
Bishop Robert P. Varley performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Manhasset.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Exeter, N.H.; Condos Replace Riverfront Mill
LEAD: FOR more than a century, this city's mill complex, perched downtown on the Squamscott River, churned out millions of yards of cotton fabric and formed the backbone of the local economy.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I have been advised that when I close my summer home for the winter, I should leave the heat on at a low setting of about 40 degrees to protect the wood paneling, built-ins and furniture.
Do you think heating is necessary when the house is unoccupied?


Fear of AIDS Prompts State Department to Act
LEAD: Fear of AIDS has come to the State Department.


MS. BUSSIERE MARRIED TO SUNG-IL CHOI ON L.I.
LEAD: Elizabeth Bussiere, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Bussiere of East Setauket, L.I., was married yesterday to Sung-il Choi, the son of Shin-jae Kim of Reston, Va., and In-kyu Choi.
The Rev.
Stephen Eddington performed the ceremony at the Unitarian-Universalist Fellowship Hall in Stony Brook, L.I.


OUTLOOK FOR THE MARKETS: Equities at Risk; Bonds Promising; It's Win-Win For Bonds Now
LEAD: THE rout on Wall Street has reversed last summer's bond slump. ''We think it's win-win for bonds now,'' said Robert J. Barbera, senior vice president and chief economist for E. F. Hutton &amp; Company.


On Doctorow
LEAD: To the Editor:


PERFORMING ARTS CENTER: REVIEWING A DECADE
LEAD: After a decade of presenting theater, dance, classical music and jazz in the county, the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase celebrates its 10th anniversary to mixed reviews from its audiences.


A FANTASY MEN DECLINE: TO BE WOMAN FOR A DAY
LEAD: A GROUP of female friends, who happen to be therapists, were discussing Marilyn French's latest book, ''Beyond Power,'' at a cocktail party recently.
When asked if I had read it, I had to confess that I hadn't, although I scored points for having read her two novels, ''The Women's Room'' and ''The Bleeding Heart.


The End Of the Affair
LEAD: When the Reagan Revolution was in its formative stage in the late 70's, and its outriders were starry-eyed about cutting the monster called Big Government down to size, Cap Weinberger used to regale Reaganauts with the Legend of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.


CORRECTION
LEAD: Credits were reversed on two cartoons in The Week in Review last Sunday.
One, showing President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua sitting on a shipment from Moscow, was drawn by Steven Turtil of the Charleston (W. Va.) Daily Mail.
The other, showing a contra leader as a puppet on President Reagan's foot, was by Rainer Hachfeld of the Hamburger Rundschau in West


CAN LEGACY OF VIOLENCE BE VOTED OUT?
LEAD: IT was nearly midnight when two young men, one carrying a piece of pipe, the other a length of lumber, marched down the middle of a deserted boulevard in the heart of the Haitian capital.
They were members of one of the many neighborhood patrol groups that sprang up briefly last week in Port-au-Prince and other


Two Artists Tempered in the Crucible of War
LEAD: OTTO DIX AND HANNELORE Baron would not exactly seem to have a great deal in common.


Hostage Was More Afraid of Happenings Outside
LEAD: Throughout his eight-day ordeal as a hostage, Scott Sutterfield was more afraid of what was happening outside the Federal detention center in Oakdale, La., than he was of what was happening inside.


Release of 4 in Atlanta Viewed as Good-Faith Move
LEAD: In what negotiators interpreted as a good-faith gesture, Cuban inmates controlling the Federal penitentiary here released four hostages early today.
The action surprised Federal officials and led them to hope for a break in negotiations.


St. John's Holds On To Take Lapchick
LEAD: St.
John's University survived a scare today to win the 13th annual Joe Lapchick Memorial tournament at Alumni Hall in Jamaica, Queens.
The Redmen, who have never lost a game in the history of the tournament, held off a late rally by Loyola Marymount University to win, 88-85.


Seoul Candidate Faces Violence at Kwangju Rally
LEAD: In the worst outbreak of violence yet in this country's presidential campaign, the ruling party candidate, Roh Tae Woo, dodged rocks, sticks and tear gas canisters today as he faced crowds aflame with bitter memories of the harsh Government suppression of a 1980 uprising here.


Recycling Helps Avoid Wasteful Incineration; It's Energy-Efficient
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mark D. Lazarus Married To Deborah L. Kozupsky
LEAD: Deborah L. Kozupsky, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Kozupsky of Spring Valley, N.Y., was married yesterday to Mark D. Lazarus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles S. Lazarus of Rye Brook, N.Y.
Cantor David Rosenswieg officiated at Le Chateau in South Salem, N.Y.


Rebels in Mozambique Said to Kill 42 Civilians
LEAD: Right-wing rebels have killed at least 42 civilians in an ambush on the main road north of the capital, Maputo Radio reported today.


The Editorial Notebook; 'Sidney Is Trying'
LEAD: Sidney Flax was wounded in a dive bombing attack while serving with the U.S.
Army in Naples in World War II.
He recovered, returned home, married, raised a family and worked in a bank until he suffered a stroke two years ago.
His right arm and side are paralyzed; his right leg had to be amputated.


David G. Cherna Wed To Shari R. Schonfeld
LEAD: At the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I., Shari Rita Schonfeld, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Schonfeld of Brooklyn, and David Gary Cherna, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Cherna of Livingston, N.J., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Dr.
Manfred Fulda officiated.


Choo San Goh, a Choreographer Hailed for Inventive Dance Forms
LEAD: Choo San Goh, the ballet choreographer and associate artistic director of the Washington Ballet, died Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 39 years old.


Faster Revamping Expected at Amfac
LEAD: Henry A. Walker Jr. was chief executive officer of Amfac Inc. from 1967 to 1982, a tenure he now calls long enough.
But last week, following the abrupt dismissal of Ronald R. Sloan as president and chief executive officer, Mr.
Walker resumed those titles and duties in addition to his role as chairman.


Greenwich Village Battles PATH Plan
LEAD: The smaller scheme is generating the larger debate as the New York City Planning Commission reviews proposals for a 36-story tower on the East River and a pair of 46-foot-high shafts on the Hudson.


Music: Chamber Group In 'Alexander's Feast'
LEAD: THE revival of ''Alexander's Feast'' at the 92d Street Y Saturday evening afforded a welcome opportunity to hear one of Handel's freshest and most inventive works, and so was a welcome event even if the performance did not quite take wing in the way one had hoped.


2 Connecticut Men Die in Fire
LEAD: Two Connecticut men, a groom and his best man, were killed early today along with the bride and eight other people when a fire erupted toward the end of their wedding party in a luxury hotel on the resort island of Margarita.


Gift to Neediest Cases Honors a Bar Mitzvah
LEAD: One of the first gifts to the 76th appeal of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, which formally opened yesterday, came from Lisa Sheiman of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


Account
LEAD: * Long Island Rail Road to Christopher Thomas Associates, Garden City, L.I.


Books: Legacies
LEAD: FATHERS AND CHILDREN. By C. L. Sulzberger. 304 pages. Arbor House. $19.95.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Chicago Milwaukee Corp., Chicago, said it had extended its self-tender offer and withdrawal rights for any and all of its outstanding $5 prior preferred stock at $55 a share until midnight Tuesday.


How New York City Balances Pension Demands
LEAD: To the Editor:


Music: Christmas Songs
LEAD: STEPHEN PAULUS, the young American composer, wrote ''So Hallow'd Is the Time'' for the Greenwich Choral Society eight years ago.
The Connecticut singers - by the look and sound of them, a group of about 100 amateurs - brought this music to the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine on Saturday night.
It is described as a Christmas cantata.


Trade Surplus Rises in Mexico
LEAD: Mexico had a trade surplus in the first 10 months of this year of $6.81 billion, well more than double the $2.83 billion surplus over the corresponding period in 1986, the Planning and Budget Ministry said Friday.


Explosive Growth Crowds Schools and Leads to Conflict in a Jersey Town
LEAD: Robert Hunter School is ''bursting at the seams,'' said James Gamble, its principal.
In six years, enrollment has grown to 631 from 485, and when more children come next year there will be no room to add classes.
Some teachers will have as many as 30 pupils.


Washington Talk: Foreign Affairs; A 6-Pointed Star and Mozambique
LEAD: It has been a hard several years for Mozambique, the southern African nation beset by drought, famine, a tattered economy and a persistent insurgent movement.


100 Haitians, Trying To Vote, Encounter 'Utter Blood Bath'
LEAD: About 100 Haitians lined up to vote at a small school near the downtown area of the capital this morning, and, according to witnesses, were set upon by a mob of 50 to 100 men believed to be remnants of the Tontons Macoute, the old bodyguard of the deposed dictator, Jean-Claude Duvalier.


Advertising; Big Plans In Sales Promotion
LEAD: PETER H. ENGEL's American Consulting Corporation announced a small acquisition last week.
It's only the beginning.
The former Procter &amp; Gamble, Philip Morris and Colgate-Palmolive marketing executive has had big growth plans for his eight-year-old company, especially since it went public last August.


If He's in the Swing of It, Rope-Jumper Can Have Serious Sort of Workout
LEAD: THE rope slaps the pavement rhythmically and sets the cadence as the little girls chant:  Cinderella  Dressed in yella  Went upstairs  To kiss a fella


Proof of Blood Cholesterol Theory May Be Near
LEAD: To the Editor:


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Last Call


Metro Matters; In High School, A Chance to Test Wall St. Waters
LEAD: When the stock market collapsed last month, Vadim Krys's portfolio declined by about 30 percent from a high of $14,000.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Moynihan Weighs Favorite-Son Bid
LEAD: Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said yesterday that he had been asked to consider running as a favorite-son candidate in the New York Democratic primary in April.
If he decides to do run, he said, it would be to help keep the 1988 Democratic Presidential race open until the convention in July.


Cuomo Guard Defends Actions in Assault Inquiry
LEAD: A New York City police detective who is a security officer for Governor Cuomo has defended actions he took in the first hours of an investigation of the robbery and assault of the Governor's father-in-law, Charles Raffa, three years ago.


TV Review; 'The Secret Garden,' A New CBS Adaptation
LEAD: AMONG the hardiest of perennials, ''The Secret Garden'' is back - tonight at 9 on Channel 2 - with its story of a bratty little orphan girl who undergoes magical transformation in a gloomy Yorkshire manor called Misselthwaite.
Published in 1911, the story was written by Frances Hodgson Burnett, an amateur gardener who specialized in minor literary classics, including ''Little Lord Fauntleroy.


In East Berlin, Dissenters Resist a Crackdown
LEAD: Candles were burning Saturday evening in Zion Evangelical Church, and bunches of flowers were tied to a metal fence outside.
Young men and women were holding a protest vigil, while uniformed policemen patrolled outside and secret policemen mingled with the onlookers.


Text of Oakdale Agreement
LEAD: Here is the text of the agreement signed today, ending the eight-day uprising at the Federal Detention Center here.
The agreement was typed on the stationery of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d.
Upon the release of all remaining officers being held on the compound at F.D.C.
Oakdale, the following agreement will immediately be enforced.


U.S. SUSPENDS AID
LEAD: The United States announced tonight that it had suspended virtually all military assistance and some economic aid to Haiti after violence there caused the cancellation of elections.


Federated Names Chief For Foley's Store Chain
LEAD: Federated Department Stores Inc. has named John B. Utsey chairman and chief executive of one of its major department store chains, the Houston-based Foley's.


Recycling Helps Avoid Wasteful Incineration
LEAD: To the Editor:


DEATH ON RAILROAD PROMPTS A STRIKE
LEAD: When a veteran railroad worker was hit by a locomotive while trying to stop a runaway car, his death prompted not only a Federal investigation but also a strike over safety issues.


Chestnut Prepares Ads For New Diet Product
LEAD: On Dec. 30 CCA Industries of East Rutherford, N.J. - already the national marketer of such brands as Nutra Nail, Pro Perm and Hair Off -will go onto two of the three commercial television networks to advertise Eat 'n Lose, another contribution to a diet-conscious nation.


Belgians Puzzle Over a Future When Missile Sites Vanish Like Sand Castles
LEAD: The first snow of winter was falling, fat wet flakes in the headlamps of the construction trucks.
The distant cruise missile base, floodlit and overhung with cranes, glowed in the dusk.


Mr. Reagan's Treaty
LEAD: All Democratic Presidential candidates, in varying degree, are supporting the arms control treaty Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev are about to sign.
All Republican candidates except Vice President Bush are opposing the treaty, or reserving judgment.


Economic Outlook Stable, Poll Shows
LEAD: Americans, reassured by the financial markets' steadier performance during November, have not changed their minds about the economy, according to a recent New York Times/CBS News Poll.


For Haitians In New York, Trying Times
LEAD: In one Brooklyn neighborhood, what might have been a day of joy for its Haitians yesterday was instead a time of sadness, somber reflection and desperate but largely futile attempts to reach relatives back in Haiti by telephone.


BATTERED DREXEL SWEATS IT OUT
LEAD: Senior executives of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., like those at other major Wall Street firms, often engage in spirited debates about strategy.
Recently, Drexel's officials have been arguing about an issue generally not considered to be controversial: its image advertising.


Wagner Urges Legislation to Alter School System
LEAD: The president of the New York City Board of Education, Robert F. Wagner Jr., called yesterday on the Governor and the State Legislature to enact legislation that would ''provide a context for sweeping reform of the city's school system.''


Union, Seeking To End Strife, Readies Accord
LEAD: The Rev.
Martin Luther King Jr. called Local 1199 of the hospital workers' union ''the conscience of the labor movement.''


Lack of British Interest Seen in Eurotunnel Sale
LEAD: Despite a multimillion-dollar advertising campaign appealing both to national pride and to private gain, British private investors have apparently shown only limited interest in the shares of Eurotunnel, the British-French consortium that plans to build a tunnel beneath the English Channel.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Phones at State
LEAD: State Department officials who are facing a possible cutback of $60 million and the possible loss of some 1,200 jobs in a budget-cutting effort were annoyed to discover a slow but sizable leak of money over the years in a corner of the room used by correspondents who cover the department.


THAT WOLFISH GRIN IN 'WOODS'
LEAD: Among the arresting sights in ''Into the Woods,'' the fairy-tale musical by Stephen Sondheim and James Lapine, is the wolf's eerie grin as he pursues Little Red Ridinghood.


Electronics Sales Rise
LEAD: United States factory sales of electronic equipment, components and related products during the first nine months of the year increased 6.7 percent over the corresponding period last year, an industry association said Friday.
Sales for the 1987 period totaled $165.5 billion, compared with last year's nine-month record sales of $155.2 billion, according to figures released this week by the Electronic Industries Association here.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Skiing  Tomba Wins Again: Alberto Tomba of Italy won his second consecutive World Cup ski race in three days yesterday with a victory in the giant slalom at Sestriere, Italy.
Tomba, 20 years old, won the special slalom Friday.


Honda's U.S. Imports
LEAD: The Honda Motor Company said it would import and sell American-built motorcycles in Japan.
Next spring, Honda said, it would start importing 500 units a year of its Goldwing GL1500 model, which is produced by Honda of America Manufacturing Inc. in Marysville, Ohio.


Their Crimes Vary, but Most Cubans Are Serving Sentences of Frustration
LEAD: Many of the Cuban inmates in the Federal penitentiary here are unsophisticated rural people who have been hardened by years in prisons for infractions as minor as disagreeing with the Government of Fidel Castro while in Cuba or failing to pay traffic tickets in the United States, according to those who know them.


HOLE-IN-ONE EARNS $175,000 FOR TREVINO
LEAD: There was a moment of silence.
Stunned silence. ''I think that's the first time in my life I've heard him shut up,'' Jack Nicklaus said. ''He was speechless.
For once, he was at a loss for words.'' But the silence didn't last.
Lee Trevino - who watched in something like disbelief today as his 6-iron shot trickled into the cup for a hole-in-one - began bounding about the 17th tee, hopping into the air, waving his cap.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 1987
LEAD:  The Economy


A MighMy 'Wallflower' at NBC
LEAD: Were it not for his red ties, Henry S. Kanegsberg could easily disappear in a crowd.
Even his employer, the National Broadcasting Company, describes him as ''a wallflower.''


READER'S DIGEST MAN JOINS ANTI-DRUG EFFORT
LEAD: The Media-Advertising Partnership for a Drug-Free America, advertising's biggest voluntary effort since the bond drives of World War II, has announced thet Lynn C. Mapes, recently retired Reader's Digest executive, has joined the organization as a volunteer to serve in the important job of media director.


How Much Authority for Indian Tribes?
LEAD: Donald Hodel, the Secretary of the Interior, and Ross Swimmer, the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, touch a responsive chord when they call for a new relationship between the Government and Native Americans that is based on Indian ''self-determination.'' Such a relationship is a desirable goal, but also a distant one.


Martha Kurshan, Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Martha C. Kurshan, an associate at the New York law firm of Shea &amp; Gould, and Carl Stine, a second-year student at the Fordham University School of Law, were married yesterday at the bride's home in Manhattan.
Rabbi Jacob Reiner officiated.


Blacks Entering New Era in Chicago
LEAD: The death of Harold Washington has ushered in the next chapter in the evolution of urban black political power, what the late Mayor called simply, ''The Movement.''


Metro Datelines; 2 IRT Work Trains Collide During Test
LEAD:  BRONX: Two subway work trains collided yesterday in the Bronx during a test of their propulsion systems.


CUBAN INMATES IN LOUISIANA FREE ALL 26 HOSTAGES
LEAD: Cuban inmates today released 26 hostages they had held for eight days in the Federal detention center here.


If Group of 7 Meets: Industrial Nations Favor Cooperation On Dollar but Disagree on Formality
LEAD: Most European officials want Washington to stablize the dollar and Bonn to keep stimulating its economy whether or not those things happen within the framework of a formal meeting of the world's industrial leaders.
Japan, for the moment, seems to be off the hook.


Recycling Helps Avoid Wasteful Incineration; It Cuts Toxic Residues
LEAD: To the Editor:


Barbara Anne Perry Wed To Dr. Jean-Marie Bind
LEAD: The marriage of Barbara Anne Perry to Dr.
Jean-Marie Bind took place yesterday at Waveny House in New Canaan, Conn.
Cantor Mark Lipson officiated.


West Berlin Journal; The Proletarian T-Shirt (Making Kitsch of Lenin)
LEAD: As if it wasn't enough that Mikhail S. Gorbachev has elbowed past Ronald Reagan in popularity polls, his glasnost is now crowding America off the T-shirts.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 1987
LEAD:  International A3-15


Premier's Party Leads Turkish Vote
LEAD: For the first time in seven years, Turks voted today in national elections free of military supervision, a poll depicted as reinforcing the revival of democracy.


2 Returning Salvador Rebels Make Quick Political Impact
LEAD: They will not win an election anytime soon.
But in their first week home from exile, El Salvador's two top civilian rebel leaders appear to have already had an impact on political thinking here that outweighs their potential showing at the polls.


Giants Lose Their Honor, Too
LEAD: FOR the Giants, it was an opportunity to defend their honor as Super Bowl champions.
In this strike-snarled National Football League season, the Giants were all but out of the playoffs.
But if they could win, they would remind the Redskins and themselves of what might have been had there been no strike.


People
LEAD: *
John Kelleter has joined Caravetta Allen Kimbrough, Miami, part of the Omnicom Group, as senior vice president, director of marketing.


U.S. Rates Non-Atom NATO Arms
LEAD: While outnumbered by Soviet forces, NATO has sufficent conventional strength to make a Soviet attack highly unlikely, according to a classified ''net assessment'' of opposing strengths and weaknesses prepared by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.


AUSTERITY LIKELY AFTER POLISH VOTE
LEAD: Poland's Communist Government appeared ready today to announce that the public had approved a program of severe economic belt-tightening, after the nation's first referendum in more than 40 years.


Metro Datelines; Man Held in Slaying Of Gypsy Cab Driver
LEAD:  TREMONT: The driver of a gypsy cab was shot and killed in the Bronx Saturday night in an apparent robbery attempt, the police said.


MACHINE TOOL ORDERS JUMPED 46.2% IN OCTOBER By STEPHEN LABATON
LEAD: Orders for American-made machine tools surged 46.2 percent in October from the previous month, to $267.3 million, according to a report scheduled to be released today by the industry's trade association.


Lease Cost Affecting Hutton Sale
LEAD: The competition to buy E. F. Hutton &amp; Company, which continued through the weekend, is being complicated by the amount of capital the brokerage house has tied up in its new Manhattan headquarters building, according to several Wall Street professionals close to the bidding.


Spain: A Land of Problems and Progress
LEAD: Before last month's stock market plunge, Spain's economy was zipping along in Europe's fast lane.


Retailers Pleased by Weekend
LEAD: Helped by weather conducive to shopping in New York, California and other places, sales rose considerably from a year earlier during the weekend that traditionally begins the holiday shopping season, some major retail chains reported.


Dance: Moscow Ballet Performs in Trenton
LEAD: The Moscow Ballet closed its two-month American debut tour tonight with a first-rate performance at the War Memorial Auditorium here.
Founded in 1979 as a local touring ensemble by Irina Tikhomirnova, a former Bolshoi ballerina, the Soviet company is now directed by Vyacheslav Gordeyev, a leading dancer with the Bolshoi.


Lincoln Journal; Artist's Brush Is a Plow, His Canvas Is the Soil
LEAD: The sun, small and red as a copper penny on a hot stove lid, rose this morning over a gently sloping hillside where a giant American farm breakfast was spread.


THE HAITIAN TRAGEDY: 30 YEARS OF MISRULE
LEAD:


49ers Defeat Browns, 38-24
LEAD: Joe Montana threw four touchdown passes, three to Jerry Rice and one to Dwight Clark, as the San Francisco 49ers cruised to a 38-24 victory over the Cleveland Browns tonight.


Light Slate of New Issues This Week
LEAD: This week's calendar of new debt issues is relatively light and headed by today's regular weekly Treasury auctions of new three- and six-month bills.
While the slate of new corporate and tax-exempt issues appears light, underwriters said that if market conditions improve and interest rates decline, issuers might bring existing shelf-registered issues to market.


Windows at A-Weapons Lab Hit by Debris in Bomb Blast
LEAD: A bomb exploded Saturday outside a laboratory where nuclear weapons are designed, blowing out dozens of windows, and a man saying he belonged to a group called the Nuclear Liberation Front today claimed responsibility for the blast.


Lee Rich's Stubborn Optimism
LEAD: Lee Rich believes in MGM/UA, even if many of his own employees are skeptical.


Miracle for Saints: A Winning Season
LEAD: The New Orlean Saints assured themselves of the first winning season in their 21-year-history today, beating the Pittsburgh Steelers, 20-16.


Rekindled Dodgers
LEAD: It's been three decades since the Dodgers decamped for Los Angeles, and since then, it seems, Brooklyn's beloved Bums have become more beloved than they ever could have been when they were breaking the borough's heart with depressing regularity.


Bowl List Has Its Share of Inconsistency
LEAD: Texas and Tulane are included and Colorado and Wake Forest are excluded.
With the last options for college football's bowl games closed over the weekend, the 18-match lineup has the usual mix of deserving and undeserving teams.


DOZENS ARE SLAIN
LEAD: Haiti's first attempt in 30 years at a presidential election was abruptly called off by election officials today after a frenzy of attacks on voting stations, churches and radio stations in which more than two dozen people were killed.


Lendl Wins Stakes And $583,200 Prize
LEAD: From their grim expressions and animated, sometimes caustic, reactions to critical lapses and controversial line calls, one might have thought Ivan Lendl and Pat Cash were playing in the past.


Bishop Who Speaks for Downtrodden
LEAD: Auxiliary Bishop Agustin A. Roman, who was flown to Oakdale, La., this weekend to make a videotaped appeal to Cuban inmates holding 26 hostages at a Federal detention center, is a man who has never forgotten his humble roots, according to those who know him well.


Whitehead Is Married In Ceremony in Jersey
LEAD: Mary Beth Whitehead, the surrogate mother in the landmark Baby M custody case, has married the father of a child she expects to give birth to in the spring.


Transit Police Union Calls for 'Impartial Investigation'
LEAD:  William McKechnie, right, the head of the Transit Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, speaking at the union's office at 299 Broadway.
With him was Barry W. Agulnick, counsel to the union.
Mr.
McKechnie called on Charles J. Hynes, the special prosecutor, to investigate charges that some transit police officers made false or improper arrests.


Down the Stretch, Giants Fizzle and Jets Sizzle; REDSKINS WIN, 23-19
LEAD: For the first 30 minutes, the Giants played what Coach Bill Parcells said was probably their best half of the season.
Then the momentum swung, and in the last 17 minutes of the game the Redskins charged back with three touchdown passes by Jay Schroeder and took the lead.
In the last minute of the game, the Giants charged back, only to have Tony Galbreath stopped on the


Pop: Judy Collins at Carnegie Hall
LEAD: FROM the moment Judy Collins stepped onto the stage of Carnegie Hall Friday evening and opened with an a cappella rendition of ''Amazing Grace,'' it was apparent that the singer's 25th anniversary concert in New York would be markedly different in tone from her annual post-Thanksgiving concerts.


Metro Datelines; 2 Workers Injured In Store Explosion
LEAD:  SOUTH JAMAICA: Two men working in a Queens grocery store were injured Saturday night when an incendiary device exploded in the shop, the police said.


Korean Plane, 115 Aboard, Crashes in Southeast Asia
LEAD: A South Korean airliner with 115 people on board disappeared as it flew near Burma from the Middle East Sunday.


Devils Salvage Tie
LEAD: Jim Carson's power-play goal just 40 seconds into the third period earned the Los Angeles Kings a 2-2 tie with the Devils tonight.


Business and the Law; Slower Growth Seen at Firms
LEAD: THE steady trend of law firms growing larger appears to have stalled, as partnerships have recently experienced a series of dissolutions and collapsed deals.


Jews' Summit Message to Gorbachev
LEAD: One of my first Gulag cell mates was a professional swindler.
After a career of enterprising scams, Leonid had exhausted his opportunities for ''work'' in the Soviet Union.
As he served his sentence, he was studying English with the hope of living in the United States.


At a Harlem Rink, Skaters Resist the Success of Wollman
LEAD: At the northern end of Central Park, where the landscape is rocky and wild, Charles Heuer and his daughter glided freely across the Lasker Memorial Skating Rink yesterday afternoon, sharing the ice with a dozen neighborhood cognoscente.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Aaron Rents Inc., Atlanta, a renter and seller of furniture, named M. Lee Hulsebus president and chief operating officer, succeeding R. Charles Loudermilk Sr., who has been elected a director and continues as chairman and chief executive.


South Shore Needs 2 Injured Players
LEAD: As the South Shore football coach, Marty Senall, prepares his team for Saturday's Public Schools Athletic League Division A championship game against John Adams, a couple of big questions remain.
How's Arthur Davis?
And how's Marc Senall?


Market Place; Mixed Views On Aerospace
LEAD: IN a market grown increasingly hostile toward the stocks of giant aerospace companies, the General Dynamics Corporation and the Boeing Company are selling at their lowest prices in three years.


A Lonely Death on Halloween Haunts a Pennsylvania Town
LEAD: While goblins and ghouls roamed this tiny borough over the Halloween weekend, 19-year-old Christopher Fabiani and three friends left a beer-drinking party, piled into a pickup truck and started to cruise the twisting back roads.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: After his first five years in the major leagues, how does Darryl Strawberry compare with Mickey Mantle and Willie Mays regarding home runs and runs batted in?


Heifetz Is Hospitalized For Undisclosed Illness
LEAD: Jascha Heifetz, the violinist, has been at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center here for several weeks with an undisclosed illness, a hospital spokesman said.


LATIN CHIEFS URGE OVERHAUL OF DEBT AND OF O.A.S. TOO
LEAD: The presidents of eight Latin American countries ended a four-day conference today by calling for a sweeping overhaul of the Organization of American States and demanding a ceiling on repayment of their foreign debt.


Informal Capitalism Grows in Cameroon
LEAD: When Samuel Nansi needed $35,000 to open his Joie de Vivre Bar here, he did not bother with banks.
Instead he turned to the tontines, an informal credit system rooted in African tradition.
Without signing a paper or filling out a form, Mr.
Nansi emerged from his monthly tontine meeting with $35,000 in cash.


Relief Plane in Ethiopia
LEAD: A Belgian Air Force Hercules transport plane arrived in Ethiopia today to airlift emergency food to drought victims in the northern province of Tigre, where rebel ambushes are hindering transport by road.
Jean-Jacques Fresard, the delegate of the International Committee of the Red Cross in Ethiopia, said the plane would start work Monday, ferrying more than 70 tons of food each day from Asmara, the capital of Eritrea province, to Mekele, the capital of Tigre.


Infant Survives on Chips When Family Dies
LEAD: A 17-month-old girl survived for two to three weeks apparently by eating potato chips and drinking water from a toilet while her parents and infant sister lay dead nearby, the authorities say.


Shultz Sees No Snags For Signing Arms Pact
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that work on the final language of the treaty on medium- and shorter-range nuclear missiles has been ''going on in a good way, and there isn't any particular problem about that I know of.''


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  Farm Prices...
Oct.
Tuesday  Construction Spending...
Oct.
Leading Indicators...
Oct.
Wednesday  New-Home Sales...
Oct.
Thursday  Factory Orders...


Purchasers Report Gains in Activity
LEAD: The stock market may still be down in the dumps, but those who expected a downturn in business activity so far have been proved wrong.
According to the National Association of Purchasing Management, the economy continued to grow in November, but at a slightly slower pace than was reported the previous month.


In Defense of Defaults On U.S. Student Loans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Recital: Carol Vaness
LEAD: THE thoughtfulness of Carol Vaness's recital at Alice Tully Hall yesterday afternoon began with her choice of music.
There were such tender little Rossini masterpieces as ''La Promessa'' and ''L'Invito''; then four Strauss lieder of solid substance followed by three elegant desserts by Tosti.
Nowhere in French song is despair so eloquent or nostalgia so touching as in Chausson's ''Temps des Lilas'' and ''Colibri.


European Plan To Tax Fats
LEAD: A controversial proposal to tax vegetable oils and fats, which is opposed by Europe's trading partners, will be submitted to the European Community summit meeting this week.


A Treacherous Paradox: AIDS Tests
LEAD: Present tests for the AIDS virus antibody are highly accurate.
Yet if applied to the population at large, they could falsely brand nine people infected for every true case identified.
The President's AIDS commission had better be sure it understands this treacherous paradox if it intends to recommend the widespread testing favored by some


Marla Frances Wald Weds Dr. Oren Cohen
LEAD: At Congregation Kehilath Jeshuran in New York, Marla Frances Wald, the daughter of Eve Wald of New York and the late Dr.
Philip M. Wald, was married yesterday to Dr.
Oren J. Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Cohen of Washington.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein officiated.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Haig Joke Irks Marines
LEAD: Floyd Smith, a railroad clerk with the New York Transit Authority and a sergeant in the Marine Corps Reserve, did not take kindly to a joke that Alexander M. Haig Jr. made about on the campaign trail recently at the Marines' expense.


A Conservative Call for Compassion
LEAD: An influential conservative group is issuing a major new manifesto this week that chastises some in the movement as lacking compassion toward the needy.


Becker Finds a Few Potholes Along the Yellow Brick Road
LEAD: IT was good to be in Leimen, West Germany, Boris Becker said, where he could sample his mother's cooking and spend time with friends he rarely sees.
The past three years have been like a trip to Oz, as Becker was swept off his feet in a whirlwind of events that were often beyond his control.
Clicking his heels, returning home on occasion, gives him a chance to catch his breath and reflect on a relatively brief but tumultuous tennis career.


For Crime Detection, 'Genetic Fingerprinting'
LEAD: The conviction of Robert Melias on a rape charge in a Bristol court two weeks ago appeared routine, except that vital evidence came from a technique called ''genetic fingerprinting,'' which is acclaimed as the biggest advance in the science of crime detection in a century.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''There is a consensus on two things.
One is that the debt has to be paid, and the other is that the debt cannot be paid.''


Air Force's Titan Is a Success In Lofting a Military Satellite
LEAD: An Air Force Titan 34D, the nation's most powerful unmanned rocket, roared into space Saturday night with a secret military satellite that a civilian expert said would provide instant warning of an enemy missile attack on the United States.


Historic Goal Sparks Rangers
LEAD: From Bob Froese's vantage point, all that could be seen were raised sticks, sticks pointing his way, usually a menacing sign at Madison Square Garden but in this case an indication that he had just made hockey history.


Babe Herman, 84, Former Outfielder With the Dodgers
LEAD: Babe Herman, the popular Brooklyn Dodger star of the 1920's and early 1930's, died Friday at the age of 84.
Mr.
Herman died of complications from pneumonia and a series of strokes, his son, Charles Robert Herman of Miami, Fla., said.


60 Are Missing as Avalanche Hits Valley in Chilean Andes
LEAD: An avalanche roared into an Andean valley near Santiago today, burying a workers' camp and a picnic area.
The Government television said up to 60 people were missing and feared dead.


Co-op City Sets New Goal: Attract More Whites
LEAD: Co-op City, the huge, integrated apartment complex in the northeast Bronx, is about to begin a marketing campaign - even though it has a waiting list of several months for an apartment.
The objective is to persuade more white people to live there.


Grocery Store Owner Killed
LEAD: A man was killed yesterday morning in an apparent robbery attempt at his grocery store in the Bronx, the police said.
The man, who was identified as Hector Borrayo, 38 years old, of 5360 Broadway in Manhattan, was shot once in the head around 8:30 A.M. at the Metro-One-Superette at 2070 Clinton Avenue in the Tremont section of the Bronx, said Sgt.


Pressure on Bonds Expected
LEAD: The bond market is expected to come under renewed downward pressure this week, largely because of the weakening dollar and soaring prices of basic commodities and precious metals.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Nov. 29, 1987:  MONDAY  Albertson's Inc  Watkins-Johnson  United Industrial  TUESDAY  Alaska Air Group  MCA Inc  First Mississippi Corp  Premier Industrial  WEDNESDAY Corning Glass Works  Peoples Energy  Federal Co  Starrett (LS) Co  Heilig-Meyers  Tektronix Inc  Louisville Gas &amp; Elec  Times-Mirror  Milton Roy  USF&amp;G CorM  Pacific Scientific  U.S.


Working a Gift List Into Shape
LEAD: THERE is more to the physical-fitness craze than muscle tone and target heart rate.
At no other time of year is this more apparent than during the holiday season, a period when life as we know it turns into a frenzied shopping spree.
No longer will a necktie do when it could have been a pair of running shoes.


Clarence E. Unterberg, An Investment Banker
LEAD: Clarence E. Unterberg, an investment banker, died Saturday at his home in Tinton Falls, N.J.
He was 86 years old.


Bridge: Player From Bombay Leads In Fall National Title Event
LEAD: Until this year no foreign player had ever won a major American team title, but that barrier was broken four months ago at the American Contract Bridge League's summer nationals in Baltimore.
And the successful player, Jaggy Shivdasani of Bombay, India, was on track to repeat the success when the final day's play began at the fall nationals here today.


Rehabilitate Bukharin, Widow Asks Moscow
LEAD: Nikolai I. Bukharin's widow has asked Mikhail S. Gorbachev for the political rehabilitation of her husband, who was executed in 1938 after he was ousted from the Kremlin hierarchy by Stalin, a journal appearing today reported.


A Rite Is Going Wrong Way
LEAD: A few years ago, Harold Ballard, owner of the Toronto Maple Leafs, outraged many Canadians when he passed the word that a female reporter would be welcome in the team's locker room if she joined the hockey players in removing her clothes.
Nobody could be sure that the 84-year-old Ballard, who has made a career of cantankerousness, was joking.


Dresser's Energy Focus Emphasized by New Bid
LEAD: John J. Murphy, president, chief executive and chairman of Dresser Industries, has underscored his company's focus on the energy industry with the announcement that Dresser plans to acquire the N. W. Kellogg Company.


Irene Handl Dies at 85; Comedienne in Britain
LEAD: Irene Handl, one of Britain's best-loved actresses and comediennes, who perfected the role of a slightly eccentric cockney old lady, died today at her home here, according to her agent, Peter Graham.
She was 85 years old.


Why the Watergate Break-In?
LEAD: H. R. Haldeman shrugged. ''To this day I still don't know why that was done,'' Richard M. Nixon's former chief of staff told a questioner at Hofstra University the other day. ''And I don't know anybody who does.
Why they would hit the National Headquarters is beyond me, because nobody in that place knows anything anyway.


Concert: Youth Symphony
LEAD: THE New York Youth Symphony began its Carnegie Hall concert Sunday afternoon with ''American Slick,'' a work by the young composer William Doerrfeld, who said in a program note that he ''set out with one thing in mind . . . to make the orchestra boogie.'' That he does, in loud-louder-loudest terms that leave this observer inclined to wait and hear what other arrows Mr.


OUTDOORS: NO DEER BAGGED, JUST LEFTOVER GROCERIES
LEAD: HAD there been snow for tracking, had the deer that walked past my son, Steve, been a buck instead of a doe, had the season on black bear not been closed, had moose been legal game, the six of us who recently journeyed to the northeastern tip of New Hampshire for two and one-half days of hunting could have come back with more than a box of leftover groceries.


Dollar Hits New Low; Stocks Drop in Tokyo
LEAD: The dollar fell to a record low today on the Tokyo foreign exchange market.
Stock prices also declined.


Bronx Grand Jury Critical of No-Bid Towing Pacts
LEAD: A system of no-bid contracts for emergency towing on limited-access allowed to continue despite a 1981 City Comptroller's audit that showed it had engendered widespread fraud, a Bronx grand jury has asserted.


BLOCKED KICK TOPS BENGALS
LEAD: Well, why not?


Blazers Hand Nets 5th Straight Loss
LEAD: Clyde Drexler and Steve Johnson scored 28 points each tonight, leading the Portland Trail Blazers to their fifth consecutive victory, a 125-104 decision over the Nets.
It was the fifth straight loss for New Jersey.


France Lets Bombing Suspect Go In Step to Restore Ties With Iran
LEAD: France allowed an Iranian sought for questioning in terrorist bombings to leave the country today, a step in restoring relations between Paris and Teheran after their bassies and diplomats have been under police siege for nearly six months.


Social-Service Breakup Is Suggested by Perales
LEAD: The New York City Human Resources Administration has become mired in bureaucracy and should be broken into smaller, localized units with more accountability, the State Commissioner of Social Services said in a television program aired yesterday.


Author Turns 80 With Roman Timelessness
LEAD: ''I always live in the present, and so it seems that my life is always the same and that my age is always the same.''


Corporate Profitability Rising, Reversing 15-Year Downturn
LEAD: After 15 years of decline, the profitability of American business - measured as a return on investments - is rising again, and the future health of the economy is riding on whether the turnaround can be sustained.


Esposito Timetable Moving Too Slowly
LEAD: PHIL ESPOSITO, a man who admits he is in a hurry but contends he does not feel rushed, has found himself under the burden of a skewed timetable ever since he assumed control of the Rangers last year in midsummer.


INSIDE
LEAD:  South Korean Jet Vanishes


FIVE BODIES FOUND AFTER JET CRASH
LEAD: Search teams pulled five bodies from the Indian Ocean today in the area where a South African Airways jet crashed with 159 people aboard.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: IT'S easy enough to pick out as a gift a book you simply read, for gosh sakes!
The trick is to give a book the recipient can use, can keep going back to and consulting until the pages fall out and another gift is required to replace it.
The following books, arranged by cost from cheap to expensive, are useful for everything from collecting classic baseball cards to identifying James Bond movie villains to practicing


Clemson Defeats Pesky Rutgers, 3-2
LEAD: Bruce Murray of Clemson, proving he possesses the characteristics of an efficient striker, found the right time to get free inside the opposing penalty area as the Tigers scored a 3-2 victory today that eliminated Rutgers from the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament.


Running Strong
LEAD: Six months have passed and Sean Nelson can still hear the gunfire.
The 17-year old football player was walking home from his girlfriend's house on a Friday night in May when six shots rang out.
One of the bullets hit him in the back.
By the time he was taken to a hospital, Nelson realized he was lucky to be alive, but he had another dread - that he would never play football again.


Columbia Contenders
LEAD: The last time Columbia won an Ivy League basketball championship was in the 1967-68 season.
Since then, Penn and Princeton have dominated the league, while Columbia's fortunes have sagged.


Lois Perelson Wed to Stewart K. Gross
LEAD: Lois Marion Perelson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel S. Perelson of New York, and Stewart Koerner Gross, a son of Merle Gross-Ginsburg of New York and New Milford, Conn., and Bernard Gross of Plainfield, N.J., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Sheldon Zimmerman, assisted by Cantor Richard Botton, officiated at the Central Synagogue in


Dance: The City Ballet in a Pair Set to Gounod
LEAD: THE New York City Ballet presented audiences with a generous sampling of varied works from its repertory at weekend performances at the New York State Theater.


Top Afghan Offers New Charter; Insurgents Answer With Rockets
LEAD: Invoking Islam, but interrupted by Islamic guerrilla rockets, Afghanistan's Communist leader, Najibullah, introduced a new constitution today in an effort to legitimize his shaky Soviet-backed regime.


Talks Seek to Avert Milk and Trash Hauler Strikes
LEAD: Labor negotiations in two industries - milk distribution and private refuse carting - were scheduled today in an effort to avert strikes tonight that would halt the delivery of milk and the collection of all commercial garbage in New York City and many suburban areas.


Detentions in Malaysia Harm Its Stability
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bills Clobber Dolphins
LEAD: Buffalo limited Miami to 229 yards - just 23 on the ground - and stopped Dan Marino's streak of 30 straight games with at least one touchdown pass as the Bills beat the Dolphins today, 27-0.


Taiwan Studies Joining GATT
LEAD: Taiwan is considering applying to rejoin the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 37 years after withdrawing from GATT membership, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said Friday.


Washington Talk: Court Politics; Nursing the Wounds From the Bork Fight
LEAD: A month after the Senate's defeat of Judge Robert H. Bork, life has yet to return to normal for many of the conservative Southern Democrats who voted against President Reagan's Supreme Court nominee.


The U.N. Today: Nov. 30, 1987
LEAD:  GENERAL ASSEMBLY


Bombing in Manila
LEAD: A bomb went off tonight behind the Philippine International Convention Center, where leaders of Southeast Asian nations are to meet from Dec. 14 to 16, the police said.
There were no reports of casualties.
The police said the blast damaged a fire hydrant and broke the building's windows.
Three weeks ago, the police found more than 80 sticks of dynamite inside the building.


A Poor Parish Strains To Help the Homeless
LEAD: Most of the people who worship at St.
Luke's Church in the South Bronx have very little money to spare.
But yesterday, as they filed out after the service, they were asked to give to a group that is even poorer than they are - the homeless.


Trial of Crime Boss to Open
LEAD: Jury selection begins Monday for the trial of Nicodemo Scarfo, the reputed head of organized crime in Philadelphia and southern New Jersey, on charges of masterminding a multimillion-dollar drug ring.
Selection of the 12 jurors and four alternates is expected to take most of this week.
They will be sequestered in a hotel until the trial is over, which the authorities hope will come before Christmas.


