Onset Tender Offer
LEAD: The Onset Corporation, an acquisition company formed by the New York investment firms J. H. Whitney &amp; Company and Welsh, Carson, Anderson &amp; Stone, raised its tender offer by 50 cents a share for the Decision Industries Corporation, to $11 a share.
Under its new bid, which was accepted by Decision, Onset said it would defer the merger until April 29; the deal had been scheduled to take place immediately after its tender offer succeeded.


Orders Rise A Weak 0.1% At Factories
LEAD: Orders to the nation's factories edged up just one-tenth of 1 percent in November, the weakest showing in three months, the Commerce Department said today.


Canada Bans Most Seal Kills After Big Protests in Europe
LEAD: Canada has banned all offshore commercial hunting of white-coated baby harp seals and blueback hooded seals after European threats of trade reprisals and reduced demand for seal pelts.


McPherson Tired After Busy Month
LEAD: His performance this season, much like his taste in clothes, has been virtually impeccable.
Recently, however, Don McPherson has shown signs of wear: a loose thread here and there against Boston College, a wrinkled crease against West Virginia, a generally rumpled look since early December, when the Syracuse quarterback became one of the more publicized runners-up in the history of the balloting for the Heisman


Rainier Sells Unit
LEAD: Rainier National Bank, whose $1.2 billion acquisition by the Security Pacific Corporation became final three months ago, said it had agreed to sell its leasing operation to a unit of the First City Trust Company of Vancouver, British Columbia.
Terms were not disclosed.
The operation has assets of $160 million and in the first nine months of 1987 earned $2.2 million.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Benefit Loss as '88 Issue
Elderly Iowans who say they are victims of a quirk in the Social Security law are a new political force.
Page 36.
Pride of the Palestinians
The clashes in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip have entered the folklore of the Palestinians.
Page 3.
Action Against Murdoch


Shareholders Fight Shoe-Town Plan
LEAD: Shoe-Town Inc., a specialty retail store chain, said certain shareholders had asked Delaware's Court of Chancery to stop its $103 million tender offer to take the company private.
An investment group including Shoe-Town managers began the formal offer to buy shares at $9.75 each on Dec. 21.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is going to be a very exciting New Year for you.''
- William A. Brown,
Ambassador to Thailand,
to 65 Vietnamese-Americans
resettling under a new accord.  [ 1:1. ]


Two Ways to Reduce Underage Drinking
LEAD: To the Editor:


300,000 Celebrators Jam Times Square
LEAD: Despite threats of snow and sleet, more than 300,000 New Years revelers jammed Times Square last night to watch the traditional lowering of the ball on 1987.


Court Rules On Monet Ownership
LEAD: A 19th-century French impressionist painting by Monet that vanished from a German castle during World War II belongs to the Manhattan woman who bought it 30 years ago -not the original owner, a Federal appeals court ruled yesterday.


How Goes Ozone War?
LEAD: Friends of the Earth, a Washington-based environmental group, is at it again in its role as guardian of the earth's ozone shield.


A Neikrug Premiere
LEAD: The violinist Shlomo Mintz will be guest soloist with the Cleveland Orchestra in the New York premiere of a violin concerto by Marc Neikrug, Jan. 26 at 8 P.M. in Carnegie Hall.
The piece was commissioned for Mr.
Mintz by the Houston Symphony, with which he first played it in 1984.
The Cleveland Orchestra will be conducted by Christoph von Dohnanyi.


Stymied Conrail Officer Resigns
LEAD: Stuart M. Reed, Conrail's president and chief operating officer since 1979, resigned yesterday after being passed over as designated successor to the chief executive.
The top job is expected to become vacant at the end of 1988 when L. Stanley Crane retires.


Drug Manufacturer Recalls Cold Syrups, Citing Health Risks
LEAD: Several brands of an over-the-counter cold medicine are being recalled because they may be mislabeled and might contain a potent tranquilizer, the Food and Drug Administration said today.


A Tranquil New Year's Eve in the Capital
LEAD: On a cold, but not-too-cold day (mid 40's) in the nation's capital, seagulls perched on a frozen section of the Tidal Basin, within view of the Jefferson Memorial.
Like this scene, Washingon, too, was quiet. (NYT/Paul Hosefros)


CRAFTMATIC-CONTOUR INDUSRIES reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRAFTMATIC-CONTOUR INDUSRIES (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
51,021,000
45,795,000
Net loss
3,168,000
b2,742,000
Share earns
-
.77
b-Net income


Soviet Attack Is Seen as Move in Afghan Peace Bid
LEAD: A Soviet-backed military drive to lift the guerrilla siege of an Afghan garrison town is intended to strengthen Afghanistan's Communist Government in peace talks, Reagan Administration officials and other analysts say.


A NEW YEAR'S STROLL AMONG THE SIGHTS AND DELIGHTS AT MANHATTAN'S TIP
LEAD: IT was a cold, brisk New Year's morning, and the sun, which had started to warm lower Manhattan on the East River, had not yet surmounted the skyscraper barricade that still shadowed the West Side, where City Stroller gingerly sat on a waterside bench in Battery Park City feeling his teeth chattering like jackhammers tearing up Broadway.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD: Watson-Lundy Quintet The Bobby Watson-Curtis Lundy Quintet featuring Slide Hampton, at the Village Vanguard, Seventh Avenue South at 11th Street (255-4037).
This exemplary little band sparked a gleam in Max Gordon's eye the last time it played the Vanguard, and Mr.
Gordon, the club's patriarch, clearly wasted no time in proposing a return engagement.


Vietnam Children of Americans Reach Thailand on Way to U.S.
LEAD: Sixty-five children and young adults fathered by Americans during the Vietnam War arrived here today with 91 relatives on their way to the United States under a resettlement program stalled for nearly two years.


COMPUMED INC reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUMED INC (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,381,000
8,816,000
Net loss
b540,000
c538,000
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
28,754,074
27,451,642
b-After an extraordinary gain of $246,000 on settlement of disputed claims.


USX Expects Charge Tied to Oil Price Drop
LEAD: The USX Corporation said today that it expects to take a charge against fourth-quarter earnings to reflect the decline in value of oil inventories at its Marathon Oil Company subsidiary.


Court Won't Bar Return of Boy In Abuse Case to Zimbabwe
LEAD: A New York State appeals panel ruled yesterday that state courts may not block the forcible return to Zimbabwe of a 9-year-old boy whose father, a Zimbabwean official with diplomatic immunity, is accused of brutally beating him at their Queens home.


Truck Carrying Nuclear Wastes Overturns
LEAD: A technician checking containers of low-level nuclear wastes for radiation leaks after a truck carrying them overturned yesterday near the Hanford Nuclear Reservation in Washington State.
Officials said the driver, two police officers who responded to the accident and motorists who stopped at the scene were being checked for radiation.


Buckeyes Meet Cooper
LEAD: The official hiring of John Cooper as head football coach at Ohio State yesterday ended six weeks of uncertainty for the Buckeye players.
Cooper was introduced to them by officials of the school as the replacement for Earle Bruce only a day after he coached Arizona State to a 33-28 victory over Air Force in the Freedom


Sheriff Reconstructs the Murders of 16
LEAD: The man suspected of one of America's worst mass murders probably began slaughtering 16 people by stealthily strangling his sleeping children on Christmas Eve, according to the sheriff investigating the slayings.


Subsidy to Industry
LEAD: To the Editor:


Seagram Bid Is Set Back
LEAD: An offer by Seagram &amp; Company of Canada to acquire a 40.1 percent stake in the French cognac producer Martell &amp; Compagnie from the Martell family failed to follow normal procedures for takeover bids, the Paris Stock Exchange regulatory body said today.


Stock Markups Seen in London
LEAD: The London Stock Exchange said that it was investigating allegations that some market makers marked up share prices on Christmas Eve to win personal bets on the closing level of a stock index.


Hollings Says He Originated Murdoch Curb
LEAD: Senator Ernest F. Hollings, an outspoken critic of consolidation within the communications industry, said yesterday that he originated legislation ''aimed directly'' at barring Rupert Murdoch's continued ownership of The New York Post and The Boston Herald while he owns television stations in those cities.


The Dance: Nikolais's 'Imago'
LEAD: ''IMAGO'' was hailed, on its premiere in 1963, as the last word in the kind of multimedia theater-dance practiced by Alwin Nikolais.
The dance started life as a full-evening work that explored ways movement, light and sound affect each other.
Subtitled ''The City Curious,'' the piece also seemed to allude to the busy and mysterious pace of urban life.


Letter: On Finance; Public Power Is a State Concern
LEAD: To the Editor:


Benefits Disparity Made Issue in Iowa
LEAD: With single-minded persistence, elderly Iowans who describe themselves as victims of a quirk in the Social Security law have emerged as a significant force in the state's Presidential politics.


Raeburn Van Buren; Drew Daily Comic Strip
LEAD: Raeburn Van Buren, a cartoonist and illustrator, died Tuesday at North Shore Community Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., after suffering an injury in a fall.
He was 96 years old and lived in Great Neck, L.I.


Vito Acconci's Art of Opposition and Provocation
LEAD: VITO ACCONCI may be avant-garde in a rather old-fashioned sense.
He has always made art that is an affront to conventional behavior (esthetic or otherwise), that is not too viable in the commercial sense and that is often all the more off-putting for the way it implicates the viewer in its machinations.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday


Rangers' Burst Fells Nordiques
LEAD: It is a night generally remembered for the significant seconds leading up to midnight.
For the Rangers, no matter how extravagant their individual New Year's Eve celebrations, it was going to be hard to top the memorable couple of minutes they enjoyed last night slightly after 9 P.M.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD: Kindred on Saxophone Bob Kindred Quartet, at Red Blazer Too, 349 West 46th Street (262-3112).
The spirit of the great tenor-saxophonist Ben Webster is kept alive in the playing of Bob Kindred, who frequently shows his deep admiration for Webster not by copying him but by building on the emotion and intelligence that Webster brought to his performances.


The 'Uprising' Fires Palestinian Pride
LEAD: ''It's miserable,'' said Asmaa Khroob, summing up life in the Balata refugee district, a grim warren of dirt streets, open sewers and low concrete-block houses.


Harry Green, Lawyer, 94
LEAD: Harry Green, a retired New Jersey lawyer, died of heart failure Monday at the University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center.
He was 94 years old and lived in Los Angeles, where he moved in 1986.


30 Reported Killed by Tamils in Sri Lanka
LEAD: Ethnic Tamil militants killed at least 30 Moslems in eastern Sri Lanka on Wednesday in revenge for the deaths of six comrades killed by Moslem fundamentalists, two communities said today.


Free Trade by Phone
LEAD: For the signing of their historic free trade agreement tomorrow, President Reagan and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada are planning a little telephone conversation around 4 P.M. and separate ''photo opportunities.''


Football Hero Keeps Warm and Shuns Memories
LEAD: Sunshine pours in a large picture window of the house.
Outside, in a chill breeze that ruffles their gray feathers, two sandhill cranes, visitors from nearby Lake Weohyakapka, stand like frozen sentinels on the lawn.
Their beady eyes beneath a tufted crown of bright red feathers dart back and forth, betraying no secrets.


'Pinafore' Performances
LEAD: The New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players will present ''H.M.S.
Pinafore'' tonight at 8, tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M. at Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street.
Tickets are $15 to $25, with a $5 discount for children and the elderly.
Information: 864-5400.


Blasius in Fight For Atlas Control
LEAD: Blasius Industries said that it intends to wage a proxy fight for control of the Atlas Corporation.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Blasius said it was beginning the process because Atlas, a gold exploration concern based in Princeton, N.J., ''has yet to make any substantive response'' to a restructuring proposal made by


Economic Scene; Seeking a Course For the New Year
LEAD: THE year 1987 ended on a downbeat.
The dollar, on the last day of the year, fell to record lows of about 121 yen and 156 West German marks.
In the stock market, by no coincidence, the Dow Jones industrial average dropped 11.27 points.
Worries about recession were rife, intensified by the sharpest fall in the leading economic indicators since 1981.


COMMUNICATIONS TRANSMISION reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMUNICATIONS TRANSMISION (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,917,000
14,373,000
Net inc
1,972,000
655,000
Share earns
.11
-
6mo rev
39,624,000
28,647,000
Net inc
3,105,000
1,566,000
Share earns
.16
.01


Variations in the Sport
LEAD: Differences between the lacrosse played indoors and the lacrosse played outdoors include the following:


DOUG WILSON STUDIOS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOUG WILSON STUDIOS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
393,913
1,373,130
Net loss
184,806
b107,423
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
2,643,167
2,013,167
9mo rev
1,965,235
3,265,374
Net loss
159,026
b6,880
Shares outst
2,223,167
2,007,055


Indoor Lacrosse Starting Up
LEAD: They are being paid $150 a game, but they say that, for the pleasure of competition, they would play for nothing.
There are 25 of them, mostly Long Islanders who learned to love the game at Sewanhaka High or Levittown or Manhasset.


'Junk Dances' Originators Reminisce
LEAD: It was 23 years ago that two youngsters performed together in a new work called ''Junk Dances.'' It was a popular and critical success.
The stars of the piece - Murray Louis and Phyllis Lamhut - soon went on their separate ways to become even more deft comedians and dancers, as well as modern dance choreographers with distinctive gifts.


Haig Leaves Hospital
LEAD: Former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. was released from a hospital early today after an overnight stay for treatment of an allergic reaction to drugs he had taken for a tooth problem. ''They gave him a clean bill of health,'' said a spokesman for Fairfax Hospital, Lon Walls.
Mr.
Haig, a candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination, had been treated Wednesday at Walter Reed Army Medical Center for an abscessed tooth.


By John Gross
LEAD:  TALES OF LOVE, SEX, &amp; DANGER.
By Sudhir Kakar and John Munder Ross. 249 pages.
Basil Blackwell. $16.95.


2d Youth Is Arrested In Assault on Blacks
LEAD: A 17-year-old youth was arrested yesterday in connection with what the authorities say was a racially biased incident in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn on Christmas Day in which two black men were beaten by a group of whites.


Political Maneuvering Intensifies In Search for Schools Chancellor
LEAD: The political maneuvering surrounding the search for a New York City schools chancellor intensified yesterday, with both City Hall and the president of the Board of Education believing they had switched one pivotal vote in favor of their candidate.


Prices of Precious Metals Show a Moderate Increase
LEAD: Precious metals futures posted moderate advances yesterday, but analysts said the gains were more subdued than they would have otherwise expected in view of new declines in the slumping dollar.


SOUTHWESTERN PUBLIC SERVCE CO reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWESTERN PUBLIC SERVCE CO (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
775,518,000
789,436,000
Net inc
104,101,000
97,462,000
Share earns
2.36
2.17


Retired Ad Executive Died of Strangulation
LEAD: A 77-year-old retired advertising executive who was found slain in his Park Avenue apartment Tuesday died of strangulation and ''blunt-force trauma'' to his head, face, chest and abdomen, according to autopsy results released yesterday.


3 New Chamber Works At Symphony Space
LEAD: Three new chamber pieces are to have their world premieres at the fourth American Music Festival on Jan. 21 at 8 P.M. at Symphony Space, Broadway and 95th Street.


French and Swiss Fight About Tainted Cheese
LEAD: Two of the world's proudest makers of cheese, the French and the Swiss, are locked in battle over allegations of contaminated cheese.


Image Problems Dog Top Teams
LEAD: The nation's two highest-ranked college football teams will complete a trilogy of decisive bowl games involving Penn State, Oklahoma and Miami Friday night.
This time, Oklahoma and Miami will meet in the 54th Orange Bowl in an attempt to provide a clear answer to an issue that has been known to involve Presidents of the United


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: TRACK  O'Sullivan Captures Fiesta Mile: Marcus O'Sullivan of Ireland, runner-up each of the last two years, outsprinted the 1985 winner, Steve Scott of the United States, and the defending champion, Ray Flynn of Ireland, in the final 400 yards to win the third annual Fiesta Bowl Mile yesterday in Phoenix.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption in Sports Pages yesterday with the New Year's Day bowl preview misidentified the Miami player.
He was Melvin Bratton.


Pat Robertson Asks For Federal Money But May Return It
LEAD: Pat Robertson's well-heeled Presidential campaign adjusted its financial course again today by agreeing to accept $4.5 million in Federal matching funds.
But it pledged to put the money in escrow while Mr.
Robertson decides whether to keep it or try to give it back.


No Decision By Robins
LEAD: The board of the A. H. Robins Company will meet today to continue its review of three takeover offers, and a company spokesman said a decision to accept one of them was expected early in the day.


The End Is Near
LEAD: It seems only yesterday that America celebrated its Bicentennial.
Yet it was 12 whole years ago, and by the same measure the 21st century is tomorrow - just 12 years hence.
Foresighted earthlings will start now to get ready.


Holiday Shopping at a New York Culinary Landmark
LEAD: At Zabar's on Broadway and 80th Street, customers found little standing room as New Yorkers stocked up on specialty food before a long and peaceful day of eating and watching television on New Year's Day. (NYT/Keith Meyers)


Huskies Battling For Respectability After Hard Times
LEAD: For the last five seasons, Connecticut has been a sore spot for the image-conscious Big East.
The Huskies were like a blighted part of the city tourists never see or an offbeat relative visitors never meet.


A Pair of Comedies
LEAD: Two comedy shows - featuring individual comics and the First Amendment Comedy and Improvisation Company - will be offered this weekend at 2 Bond Street, between Broadway and Lafayette Street.
Tonight at 10:30, there will be appearances by four comedians - Bill Torres, Mike King, Judy Gold and Liz Wolynski.


Prices Paid to Farmers Fell by 3% in December
LEAD: The prices that farmers received for raw products declined 3 percent in December, from the November average, the Agriculture Department said today.


Alexis Smith
LEAD:  The Brooklyn Museum 200 Eastern Parkway Through Jan. 11 Alexis Smith is a California artist who emerged in the mid-1970's as part of the narrative or story-art phenomenon, a more talkative, less hermetic branch of Conceptual art.
Ms.
Smith's metier is a collage-like installation that, using film stills, bits of printed matter, small found objects and quotations from fiction, tells tales in visual terms.


The Law on 'Excludable Aliens': Stay Tuned
LEAD: While the President's signature on a bill usually certifies the end of the legislative process, that was not the case last week when President Reagan signed a bill removing ideology as a ground for excluding foreigners from entry into the United States.


Correction
LEAD: An article yesterday about a dispute between the developer Sam LeFrak and Jersey City officials misidentified his development in Jersey City.
The development is Newport; its shopping mall is Newport Center.


Closings Today
LEAD: Stock and commodity markets will be closed today in observance of New Year's Day.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JANUARY 1, 1988
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL  The dollar ended a bleak year on a bleak note, falling to new lows against the yen and the mark.
Trading was very light.
The drop came despite what dealers said was a fourth straight day of buying dollars by the central banks of Japan, West Germany and Switzerland.
For the second consecutive year, the dollar recorded the dubious distinction of falling to its lowest levels of the year on the year's last day.


Rescue the Future, at Birth
LEAD: ''Social dynamite'' is one way to define poor children who lack education and sound parental supervision. ''Overwhelmed'' is a way to define poor mothers who lack education and self-esteem.
How to help the children and the mothers is a question that can overwhelm, too - so much that it may induce paralysis even among the most well meaning.


A NEW OPERATION FOR BETTY FORD
LEAD: Betty Ford was reported doing well today after unexpected surgery to repair sutures from a heart operation last month, and she was expected to remain hospitalized for about two more days.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.90
6.77
n.a.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.71
n.a.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.16
6.15
n.a.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.65
8.56
n.a.
30-YR.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc., an insurance brokerage, completed sales of its two major underwriting units, Sphere Drake Insurance Group P.L.C. and Shand Morahan &amp; Co., to separate investor groups.
Terms were not disclosed.


Mugabe Now President of a One-Party Zimbabwe
LEAD: Robert Mugabe was inaugurated today as Zimbabwe's first Executive President, marking the country's movement away from a parliamentary democracy toward a one-party state.


New Year In New Delhi
LEAD: Why India?
Why does this distant, stiflingly crowded, quarrelsome country, still ridden with wrenching poverty for hundreds of millions and still unable to free itself of murder and hatred among castes and religions, mean so much to the United States - or why should it?


Smoking Ban on Jet Stirs Unruly Protest And Police Response
LEAD: Passengers enraged by an airline's smoking ban on a cross-country flight earlier this week lit up anyway and shoved attendants who asked them to stop, and the pilot radioed for the police, the authorities said today.


Parker Hannifin Renews Gull Bid
LEAD: The Parker Hannifin Corporation, which last week dropped its bid for Gull Inc., an aviation equipment maker, said that Gull had agreed to a lower price and the offer would again proceed.
The Cleveland-based Parker Hannifin, which makes fluid power systems, said that under the new agreement each Gull shareholder would receive 0.55 of a Parker Hannifin share.


AGING COWBOYS ON CBS
LEAD: NO sooner is Willie Nelson released from jail after serving 20 years for trying to rob a train, than he gets together that old gang of his and goes off to try to rob a train again.
He knows that an ex-Texas Ranger, Richard Widmark, who stopped him the first time, will be out to get him again, with that old gang of his.


Tighter AIDS Precautions Urged in Labs
LEAD: Scientists and technicians who work with the AIDS virus have been warned in a new report to take more precautions when working with the virus to avoid the chance of infection.


Fines for 70 Players
LEAD: Danny White and Daryle Smith of the Dallas Cowboys and Dexter Manley and Neal Olkewicz of the Washington Redskins were among 70 players from the two teams fined a total of about $30,000 by the National Football League for their part in a brawl late in their game Dec. 13.
The melee started with the four players, but 30 to 35 players from each team ran onto the field and each was fined at least $400 for joining the fight.


No. 1 Just a Dream For Florida State
LEAD: Florida State can pinpoint exactly when and why it failed to reach the Orange Bowl and a New Year's Day showdown against Oklahoma for the final No. 1 national ranking.
It came nearly two months ago, when the Seminoles' 2-point conversion pass attempt was batted down by Miami defenders with 42 seconds to go in a game Miami won, 26-25, Nov.


The Chancellor Search Goes Haywire
LEAD: New York City's Board of Education appears on the verge of a mistake.
Acting under pressure from borough presidents and the teachers' union, it has decided to consider Dr.
Bernard Gifford, a candidate rejected by the board's own search committee.
Such political intervention inevitably would handicap any chancellor it produces.


SHARP OZONE DROP FOUND WORLDWIDE IN 8-YEAR PERIOD
LEAD: The atmosphere's protective shield of ozone ebbed rapidly from 1979 through 1986, not just over Antarctica, where the depletion has been sharpest, but over nearly the whole globe, researchers said yesterday.


Dow Off 11.27 to End Year at 1,938.83
LEAD: The stock market ended a frustrating but record-filled year with the Dow Jones industrial average giving up 11.27 points yesterday to close at 1,938.83.
That left the Dow down 60.84 points for the week and only 42.88 points, or 2.26 percent, above its 1986 close of 1,895.95.


Coffey Still Out
LEAD: Paul Coffey, the speedy defenseman for the Pittsburgh Penguins, will miss at least two more games with a knee injury he suffered two days before Christmas when he collided with Don Koharski, the referee, during a Penguins-Devils game in Pittsburgh.


Trio at Knitting Factory
LEAD: The trio of Robert Dick on flute, Mark Dresser on bass, and Gerry Hemingway on percussion is to perform Sunday at 8 P.M. at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street (219-3055).
At 10 P.M., the trio of Wilber Morris on bass, Claude Lawrence on saxophone, and Dennis Charles on drums is to perform.


Islanders Demote 2
LEAD: The Islanders have sent two rookies, Brad Dalgrano and Derek King, both first-round picks in the 1985 draft, to their minor-league team, the Springfield Indians.
Dalgarno, a right wing, had 2 goals and 7 assists in 33 games; King, a left wing, had 2 goals and 8 assists in 20 games.
King missed the team's last nine games because of a wrist fracture suffered Dec.


College Basketball; Kentucky Rallies To Top Vanderbilt
LEAD: Rex Chapman scored 13 of Kentucky's final 16 points tonight as the Wildcats rallied to beat Vanderbilt, 81-74, in the Southeastern Conference opener for both teams.


Taiwan Trade Surplus
LEAD: Taiwan will record a 1987 trade surplus of at least $18.7 billion (American), the Board of Foreign Trade said today.
The board's director, Vincent Siew, said that Taiwan's exports were expected to total $53.5 billion and imports $34.8 billion in 1987 compared with exports of $39.8 billion and imports of $24.2 billion in 1986.


Blakey at Sweet Basil
LEAD: The drummer Art Blakey is leading the Jazz Messengers tonight through Sunday at Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street (242-1785).
Sets are at 10 and 11:45 P.M. and 1:30 A.M; there is a $12 cover and a $6 minimum.


Dance World In Dispute On Drug Use
LEAD: The confirmation that Patrick Bissell, the 30-year old star of American Ballet Theater who was found dead Tuesday of unexplained causes, had had problems with drug abuse and alcoholism has led to a sharp exchange of views on the use of drugs by dancers, and on a therapy program established by Ballet


AT THE BAR
LEAD: There's no way of knowing whether more clients will be fleeced by unscrupulous lawyers in 1988 than in previous years.
One thing, however, seems clear: A growing percentage of them will be reimbursed for at least some of what they lost.


Four Guilty in Plot to Free Puerto Rican Terrorist
LEAD: Four members of the Puerto Rican independence group FALN, including its leader, were convicted of conspiracy today in a failed attempt in 1986 to free the leader from prison.


On Stage
LEAD:  Projects in the Making


48 Wild Horses Die in a Test
LEAD: Forty-eight wild mustangs died of dehydration in the high Nevada desert last September during a University of Minnesota experiment with horse contraceptives.


AMERICAN RECREATION CENERS reports earnings for 13wks Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN RECREATION CENERS (OTC)
13wks Nov 25
1987
1986
Revenue
6,244,000
6,214,000
Net inc
49,000
363,000
Share earns
.01
.08
26wk rev
10,700,000
10,615,000
Net inc
377,000
179,000
Share earns
.09
.04


Over Somebody's Head
LEAD: THEY were assistant coaches together a long time ago, taking vacations at the Galveston coast, talking football, relaxing and playing with the children.
Mostly talking football.


Jets for Northwest
LEAD: Northwest Airlines Inc. has agreed to buy three more B-757 aircraft from the Boeing Company for an undisclosed amount.
Northwest, a subsidiary of NWA Inc., also said it had accelerated deliveries of two B-757's ordered previously.
The aircraft are to be delivered in the second half of 1988.
The aircraft will seat 184 passengers each and will expand Northwest's B-757 fleet to 33.


Art People
LEAD: Bamboo, Pebbles, Ice


Patricia E. Roberts, Landscape Designer, 77
LEAD: Patricia Easterbrook Roberts, a landscape designer and author, died of cancer Sunday at Danbury (Conn.) Hospital.
She was 77 years old and lived in Southbury, Conn.


Harcourt Brace Units Are Sold
LEAD: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. completed the sale of its business periodicals, trade-show and school-supply distribution companies to a group of investors for $334.1 million.
The sale was part of Harcourt Brace's restructuring, undertaken to fight a takeover by the British publisher Robert Maxwell.


More Selfless Resolutions
LEAD: Making resolutions for other people last New Year's had mixed results.
I didn't have to worry about keeping my own, which was a relief, but not many of them lived up to the obligation.
Maybe I can do better this time.
Here are some suggestions:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Circle K Corp., Phoenix, an operator of convenience stores, appointed Larry J. Zine executive vice president of finance and chief financial officer.
He replaces Bill J. Farmer, who resigned to pursue other interests.


Holly Sugar Bid Increased
LEAD: The Holly Sugar Company, which agreed to be acquired by the Imperial Sugar Company on Christmas Eve, said today that Imperial had increased the cash portion of its offer from $105 a share to $108.


Title to Santos
LEAD: When Jose Santos won his third race of the day aboard Jane's Dilemma yesterday in the $90,150 Display Handicap, Aqueduct's year-end feature, he earned a spot in the national money winner's circle for 1987.


Manila Fights Rebels With Roundups
LEAD: Jump-off, as the major called it, was at 5 A.M., and the heavily armed policemen in their fatigue uniforms clattered from a dozen jeeps and fanned out through the narrow alleyways of the sleeping slum.


Pittance for Researchers
LEAD: To the Editor:


INTEGRATED GENERICS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTEGRATED GENERICS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
178,501
647,839
Net loss
5,104,978
b132,387
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
7,987,207
7,305,000
Yr sales
4,450,191
11,002,452
Net loss
5,184,008
b330,948
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
7,879,370
7,155,000


DAVIS AND L.S.U. HALT SOUTH CAROLINA
LEAD: Tom Hodson threw three touchdown passes to Wendell Davis, and David Browndyke added three field goals today as seventh-ranked Louisiana State beat South Carolina, 30-13, in the Gator Bowl.


CALNY INC reports earnings for 12wks to Nov 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALNY INC (OTC)
12wks to Nov 3
1987
1986
Sales
19,181,105
18,617,248
Net inc
635,771
b457,968
Share earns
.13
.10
Shares outst
4,856,443
4,746,274
36wk sales
58,490,796
54,002,457
Net inc
1,974,823
b1,192,463
Share earns
.41
.25
Shares outst
4,841,601
4,758,500


Tales of 1987: Strikers, Dogs And U.F.O.'s
LEAD: The Our Towns reporter pauses to glance back at a few tales from the old year:


Motel Burns; 50 Guests Forced to Leave
LEAD: Firefighters examining the burned remains of a section of the Towne and Campus Motor Lodge in Union, N.J.
Fire started in an adjacent lumberyard.
No injuries were reported among firefighters or the 50 guests. (NYT/John Sotomayor)


Federal Programs Assisting New York City's Housing Needs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Music From A Crossroads Of Cultures
LEAD: A FEW centuries ago, Bukhara was a Central Asian hot spot.
An ancient city on the silk route between China and the West, just north of present-day Iran and Afghanistan, Bukhara developed a cosmopolitan culture of the Near and Far East.
Its traditions drew from Persia, from nomadic Turkic tribes that wandered the steppes, from the bustle of trading cities and the calm of mountain villages; its music was shaped by classical Sufi poets and generations of Jewish court musicians.


DOLLAR SETS LOWS IN SPITE OF BUYING BY CENTRAL BANKS
LEAD: The dollar ended a bleak year on a bleak note yesterday, falling to new lows against the Japanese yen and the West German mark.
Trading was very light.


Federal Workers Get Raises
LEAD: President Reagan, secluded at a private estate for a New Year's celebration, signed an executive order today that grants a 2 percent pay increase to 4.3 million military and civilian Federal workers.


JOHNSTOWN AMERICAN COS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSTOWN AMERICAN COS (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
24,096,000
30,235,000
Net loss
890,000
b527,000
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
14,410,373
11,049,535
b-Net income


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JANUARY 1, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/2-4


When the Campus Is the Corporation's Servant
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Free Insider Tip
LEAD: After all the hysteria generated by stock market fluctuations during the last three months, my Super Bowl stock theory has triumphed for the 21st consecutive year, indicating that some order still exists in the financial universe.


Colombia Frees Drug Figure, Provoking American Anger
LEAD: A Colombian reputed to be one of the world's leading cocaine smugglers has been freed from a Colombian prison, prompting angry criticism today by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d and the State Department.


Leo Steiner, 48, Owner of a Deli; Known for Wit
LEAD: Leo Steiner, co-owner of the Carnegie Deli, who was renowned for his celebrated corned beef as well as his cornball kosher humor, died of complications from a brain tumor yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 48 years old and lived in Manhattan.


A Brokerage Sues Drexel
LEAD: A lawyer for a Santa Monica, Calif., brokerage firm said today that his client had filed suit against Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and its ''junk bond'' expert, Michael Milken, seeking $200 million in damages and contending that 10,000 transactions had been mishandled since 1980.


N.C.A.A. Mark For Long Game
LEAD: When Clarkson defeated Colgate, 7-6, Wednesday night on a goal 9 minutes 28 seconds into the game's fourth overtime, the teams set a National Collegiate Athletic Association record for the longest hockey game.


Auctions
LEAD: Art and antiques collectors will long remember 1987 as a banner year for auctions.
It saw world records toppled with the sales of two van Gogh paintings, a Bugatti automobile, a Mozart manuscript, a Stradivarius, a Gutenberg Old Testament, Charlie Chaplin's hat and cane and Babe Ruth's locker tag.


The Supreme Court and the National Will
LEAD: To the Editor:


A.T.&amp; T. in Rate Cut Today; 3.5% Drop Exceeds Estimate
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said today that it would lower its rates for interstate long-distance calls by an average of 3.5 percent on New Year's Day, a larger reduction than expected.


A First For Irish, Aggies
LEAD: Notre Dame will make its fifth appearance today in the Cotton Bowl (Channel 2, 1:30 P.M.), hoping to salvage a promising season that was all but ruined by Miami.


Tokyo Starts Dollar's Drop
LEAD: In Tokyo, where trading ends as Europe's business day begins, the dollar fell to a record low yesterday for the 11th time in 17 trading days, closing down 1.50 yen at 122.00 yen.
Later, in London, the dollar was quoted still lower at 121.25 yen.


Judge, Backing Blacks' Case, Orders Vote in Georgia Town
LEAD: A Federal district judge today ordered officials to conduct Monday's scheduled election in the predominantly black town of Keysville, rejecting a state judge's ruling that the town's boundaries were too indistinct to hold a legal election.


Two in Track Honored
LEAD: The New York Track Writers Association yesterday voted Ben Johnson of Canada and Heike Drechsler of East Germany as the outstanding athletes of the 1987 indoor season.


North Beach Journal; The Nightclub Where It All Began Imposes an End on a Topless Era
LEAD: Most of the topless clubs that lined Broadway Street in the North Beach section are gone, maybe because of competition from X-rated home videos, maybe just because times change and it became no big deal to watch people dance with approximately no clothes on.


Cordero Recovering
LEAD: Angel Cordero Jr., the jockey who is thoroughbred racing's second-leading career money winner with more than $121 million, was transferred from the intensive-care unit to a private room at Arcadia Methodist Hospital in California yesterday.


Rio Journal; As '88 Dawns, Brazil Is Spellbound
LEAD: As evening fell tonight, even amid tropical showers, Copacabana beach came alive with lighted candles as tens of thousands of Brazilians bedecked in white prepared to ask Iemanja, an African goddess of the sea, to guide them safely through the New Year.


Politics of Education; Chancellor Selection Process Reveals Rift on Board and Groups' Influence
LEAD: The decision by the Board of Education to go beyond the recommendations of its own screening panel and consider additional candidates for chancellor of the New York City school system exposes a number of the political undercurrents that have been operating during the selection process.


Restaurants
LEAD: ZARELA MARTINEZ'S stewardship of nearly three years at the whimsical Mexican restaurant Cafe Marimba ended abruptly in September when the owner, David Keh, converted all his restaurants back to Chinese.
The feisty Ms.
Martinez wasted no time gathering her pots, pans and jalapenos and opening her own place, called Zarela, in the former Tastings on Two on Second Avenue.


Philip Weinberg, Ex-G.O.P. Aide
LEAD: Philip H. Weinberg, a lawyer who served as appointments secretary to two governors of New York, died of leukemia Wednesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 58 years old and lived in Manhattan.


ALTEX INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALTEX INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,083,000
1,159,000
Net loss
b1,343,000
b2,905,000
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $455,000 (includes writedown of $192,000) for the latest year and $482,000 for the year-ago period.


No Tilt as Yet From New California High Court
LEAD: When a conservative tide forced out Chief Justice Elizabeth Rose Bird and her liberal majority on the California Supreme Court in 1986, liberals feared the new court would mount an assault on defendants' rights and privacy.
Conservatives expected a pronounced rightward tilt.


MacGregor Unit Bid Is Canceled
LEAD: MacGregor Sporting Goods Inc. said it had been notified that Oppenheimer-Palmieri Fund L.P. would not complete the acquisiiton of the assets of MacGregor's Riddell Inc. football equipment unit and the capital stock of its Equilink Licensing Corporation, a licensor of the MacGregor trademark.
The fund said it had been unable to obtain satisfactory financing for the transaction, which was to have been completed by Jan.


At the Movies
LEAD: 'Aria' Coming to U.S.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: TIME AND AGAIN, the American restaurant at 116 East 39th Street, is catering to the early-bird business client with its new breakfast club.
Along with the a la carte breakfast (eggs, cereals, smoked salmon, homemade breads, from $5.50 to $15), diners get complimentary copies of The New York Times or The Wall Street Journal and the use of pads and pens, calculators and, if you ask, cassette tape recorders and cordless telephones.


Bruins' Lemelin Shuts Out Sabres
LEAD: Reggie Lemelin recorded his second shutout of the season over Buffalo as the Boston Bruins beat the Sabres, 2-0, tonight.


Elaborate Creches From Italy
LEAD: The history of European art is filled with odd but intriguing footnotes -including an 18th-century Neapolitan craze for creating and collecting extraordinarily elaborate creches.
One of these sculpted tableaux, known as presepios and rarely exhibited in the United States - can be seen through Jan.


An Investment Bank's Big Shift
LEAD: For years, the financial world considered Stephens Inc. something of an anomaly.
The privately held brokerage firm in Little Rock, Ark., had $500 million in capital - as much as many of the big Wall Street houses - but it was neither a broker that controlled giant pools of money nor an investment banker for scores of major corporations.


Hanover Unit Sale
LEAD: The Manufacturers Hanover Corporation has sold 500,000 shares, or 20 percent, of its Banco Manufacturers Hanover (Portugal) S.A. unit at a public auction for $43.4 million.
The sale will result in a pretax gain of about $35.7 million in Manufacturers Hanover's fourth-quarter earnings.
Based on the return on equity, Banco Manufacturers Hanover is the most profitable foreign financial institution in Portugal, the bank said.


Monty Alexander
LEAD: Monty Alexander, a pianist, is to lead his Ivory and Steel Jamboree, featuring Othello Molineau on steel drums, tonight through Sunday at Carlos 1, 432 Avenue of the Americas, at Ninth Street (982-3260).
Sets begin at 9 and 11 P.M., plus a 12:30 A.M. set tonight and tomorrow; there is a $10 cover with a $7 minimum at tables and a one-drink minimum at the bar.


Real Estate; Central Park Vista From New Tower
LEAD: WHILE debate continues over the future of the New York Coliseum building at the west side of Columbus Circle, another tower has been rising just south of the Coliseum.
It is a 55-story square residential condominium called Central Park Place, and it is replacing the cluster of low-rise buildings that represented the


Ramones at the Ritz
LEAD: The Ramones are to perform tomorrow night at the Ritz, 119 East 11th Street (254-2800).
Manitoba's Wild Kingdom is to open at 11 P.M., with the Ramones at 12:30 A.M.
Tickets are $13.50 in advance, $14.50 tomorrow.


Sheldon Andelson, Political Fund-Raiser, 56
LEAD: Sheldon Andelson, a leader in the gay community and a fund-raiser for such politicians as Senator Edward M. Kennedy and Walter F. Mondale, died Tuesday of complications from AIDS.
He was 56 years old.
A member of the University of California Board of Regents and the founder of the Bank of Los Angeles, Mr.


Ferry Service From Bay Ridge Coming to End
LEAD: Ferry service between Brooklyn Heights and Wall Street, just seven months old, is scheduled to die next Friday - a victim of sharply lower ridership as temperatures have plunged.


Bonds End Year on Familiar Note
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices fell as much as a point yesterday, as the dollar's decline to new lows cast a pall over the credit markets.


Missing Woman Is Found Dead In Field on L.I.
LEAD: The body of a 22-year-old woman who disappeared the night of Dec. 24 after leaving her home to take a walk was found last night in a bleak, weed-strewn field here.


More Bar Questions Are the Same But Scores Still Vary State by State
LEAD: For decades, lawyers have been talking about the desirability of a national bar examination, but progress in that direction has been painfully slow.


Texaco Financing Plan Filed
LEAD: Texaco Inc. intends to borrow $3.4 billion and use $2.2 billion of its cash on hand to settle its dispute with the Pennzoil Company, pay off its creditors and emerge from bankruptcy, the company said yesterday in a document it filed with the Federal Bankruptcy Court in White Plains.


Transactions
LEAD: BASEBALL  MINNESOTA (AL) - Agreed to terms with Juan Berenguer, pitcher, on a two-year contract for $1.125 million.
BASKETBALL  GOLDEN STATE (NBA) - Named Don Nelson general manager.
INDIANA (NBA) - Placed Scott Skiles, guard, on injured reserve.
HOCKEY  DEVILS - Assigned Gordie Mark, defenseman, to Utica of the American Hockey League.


Harold Rousselot, 80, Ex-Investment Banker
LEAD: Harold A. Rousselot, a retired investment banker and commodity trader, died of cancer Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old.


Wine Makers Divided on How to Fight Curbs
LEAD: As efforts to curb wine consumption gain momentum, American vintners are widely divided about how to combat the movement.


Bridge; Senior Player Is Honored By New York Association
LEAD: The American Contract Bridge League recently began to recognize that a slight majority of its membership is over the age of 55.
It has therefore sanctioned events and even tournaments for these players, many of whom prefer the peace and quiet of their own age group to the hurly-burly engendered by the rising stars of the younger generation.


RAGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAGEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
5,022,000
5,429,000
Net loss
b3,735,000
c142,000
Yr sales
23,035,000
22,326,000
Net loss
b4,619,000
c840,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $1,572,000 for the quarter and $2,493,000 for the year, and losses from disposal of discontinued operations of $1,588,000 and $1,666,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Gifts and Good Wishes Offered for the Neediest
LEAD: With the steadily increasing flow of gifts and good wishes, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund looks forward to a bright new year.


Dining Out Guide: Casseroles
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.


Horse Racing Notebook; The New Year Brings Instant Birthdays
LEAD: Happy birthday to every race horse in the Northern Hemisphere - technically, that is.
Each Jan. 1, all runners age a year for official purposes, regardless of whether they were born in January or June.


11 REPORTED SLAIN IN THREE INCIDENTS
LEAD: A man with a history of drug charges went on a shooting rampage in two New Hampshire cities, killing three men and critically wounding two before the police shot him to death, the authorities said yesterday.


Child Abuse Cases Draw New Attention
LEAD: The swollen eyes of a 3-year-old boy, bruised and battered repeatedly by his father despite intervention from state social workers, stare out from a snapshot that continues to haunt people in the Pacific Northwest.


On the Island of Cyprus There Are No Borders
LEAD: To the Editor:


Korean Trade Surplus Soars
LEAD: South Korea's trade surplus more than doubled in 1987 to a record $6.55 billion, the Trade and Industry Ministry reported today.


Brooklyn Series to Study Black Images in Film
LEAD: Although few black directors worked in Hollywood until the last 30 years, and histories of American movies rarely even mention such pioneering black filmmakers as Oscar Micheaux and Richard Maurice, black American cinema has a rich -albeit largely unknown - history, according to Pearl Bowser, who has organized a series of works by black directors that begins on Sunday at the Brooklyn Museum.


Wilbur Schramm; Wrote Many Works On Communications
LEAD: Wilbur Schramm, an authority on mass communications who was the author of 30 books, died Sunday at his home in Honolulu.
He was 80 years old.


BARRETT RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARRETT RESOURCES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,007,000
1,046,000
Net loss
b545,000
c433,000
Share earns
-
.12
Yr rev
4,087,000
4,516,000
Net loss
b656,000
d2,622,000
b-After a writedown of $580,000 of oil and gas properties.


Company Abandons Proposal on Burning Toxic Wastes at Sea
LEAD: The nation's biggest waste disposal company said today that it had abandoned plans to burn toxic wastes on ships off the United States coast, effectively ending the prospect of such waste disposal for the foreseeable future.


INVESTITECH reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INVESTITECH
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,753,036
4,036,303
Net loss
92,090
b306,803
b-Net income  The company said the loss for the latest year reflects research and development expenses of $276,000.


Harlem Priest Voices Strong Convictions
LEAD: The Harlem priest embroiled in a public dispute with Mayor Koch over remarks about racism has compiled a record of provocative commentary on a range of political and social issues since his ordination almost 30 years ago.


Mexico in Shift on Imports
LEAD: Mexico has agreed to relax its restrictions on imports of steel, beer and wine, Clayton K. Yeutter, the United States trade representative, said in a statement this week.


The Bowls: Orange, Rose, Sugar, Fiesta, Cotton, and Florida Citrus
LEAD: Warren Williams of Miami picking up yardage past Oklahoma's Darrell Reed last night at the Orange Bowl.
Miami won the game, and the national championship, 20-14.
Articles are on pages 39 and 42.


Why All Those People Feel They Never Have Any Time
LEAD: Because she wanted more free time, Sue Alstedt quit her job as a manager at A.T.&amp;T.
Then, to save even more time, she bought equipment to do her banking at home.
But she soon became impatient with the computer because it was not as fast as the one she had used at work. ''I couldn't stand to wait for it, even though it was coming out at the rate of speech,'' she said.


14 Reported Killed by Sikhs
LEAD: Fourteen people were killed in violence attributed to Sikh separatists over the New Year's holiday, the police said today.
Sikh militants reportedly shot dead three people in Beas village today.
In Amritsar the police found the bodies of two suspected extremists possibly killed by rival hardliners.


Japanese Becoming a Force On Exchanges in Chicago
LEAD: Chicago's futures exchanges have long had their eyes on the large financial markets of Japan.
And now the Japanese are returning that interest.


For a Hudson Greenway
LEAD: The extraordinary cultural, historical and environmental values of the Hudson River Valley are under siege.


Syracuse Sidesteps Criticism of Dye
LEAD: Tim Vesling kicked the 38-yard field goal that put Syracuse ahead before Win Lyle's 30-yard field goal with 1 second remaining salvaged a 16-16 tie for Auburn in the Sugar Bowl today.
But now Vesling and five of his Syracuse teammates were being asked in the Superdome's interview area for their reaction to Coach Pat Dye's decision to go for the tie instead of trying for a victory with a last-play pass from the 13-yard line.


Rainier Sells Unit
LEAD: Rainier National Bank, whose $1.2 billion acquisition by the Security Pacific Corporation became final three months ago, said it had agreed to sell its leasing operation to a unit of the First City Trust Company of Vancouver, British Columbia.
Terms were not disclosed.
The operation has assets of $160 million and in the first nine months of 1987 earned $2.2 million.


Erie Lackawanna Files Suit on Taxes
LEAD: The president of Erie Lackawanna Inc. said that he hoped that the filing of a suit in Federal Claims Court this week would speed up a $42.5 million refund the company hopes to obtain from the Internal Revenue Service.
Harry A. Zilli Jr., who is in charge of what is left of the former railroad concern, said company lawyers had been frustrated by a lack of progress through the I.R.S.


13 KILLED IN BLAZE AT BANGKOK HOTEL
LEAD: At least 13 people died and 36 were injured when a fire destroyed a tourist hotel early today.
Some guests received injuries trying to jump from windows or rooftops, according to police and fire officials.


Jazz Fellowship Awarded
LEAD: The National Endowment for the Arts has announced awards to three jazz musicians for contributions to ''jazz in the African-American tradition.''


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 14.


Reagan's Greetings, In Soviet Exchange, Have a Barbed Edge
LEAD: President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev exchanged televised New Year's greetings to the Soviet and American peoples today.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A headline yesterday with an article about ferry service in New York City incorrectly described the status of two lines.
Service between Brooklyn Heights and Wall Street is to end next week.
Service between the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn and Wall Street is to begin in late January or early February.


Eagles Set to Fly in Face of Expectations
LEAD: When someone suggested recently that Boston College's basketball program was stuck in a downward spiral, Jim O'Brien, the school's second-year coach, insisted that the Eagles' fortunes could change sooner than people thought.


Family Fortunes
LEAD: SECOND SIGHT. By Mary Tannen. 259 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.


Grown-Ups' Video Game Is a Mazelike Journey
LEAD: In a darkened room on the third floor of the Kitchen, the experimental arts space on West 19th Street, sits a machine that resembles a futuristic piece of gymnasium equipment but is actually a video game for grown-ups.
Two attached video monitors offer printed instructions to the player and an observer who stands to his left.


Soviet Halts Jamming of Broadcasts to Poland
LEAD: For the first time in six years, the Soviet Union today stopped jamming broadcasts to Poland by the Voice of America and Radio Free Europe, the director of the Voice of America said.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article in the Metropolitan Report on Wednesday about the slaying of a public relations executive incorrectly referred to a merger between the Xerox Corporation and the C.I.T.


Comparing Apple Juice And Orange Juice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Railroad Tank Car Explodes
LEAD: A railroad tank car exploded Wednesday night, setting off a fireball seen more than 25 miles away, derailing adjacent rail cars and shattering windows of buildings up to six miles away, the authorities said.
At least two people suffered minor injuries. ''The only thing left of the tank car was the wheels it was standing on,'' a police spokesman, Mike Healy, said.


Rehnquist Says Shortage of Judges Threatens to Clog Federal Courts
LEAD: A shortage of trial and appellate judges poses a ''serious dilemma'' for the Federal courts that is not likely to be resolved soon because of budget pressures, Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist says.


Warriors of Hate Find No Homeland in Idaho
LEAD: The Rev.
Richard Girnt Butler, head of the neo-Nazi sect based here in northern Idaho, believes white people in the Northwest will rally round him when he is tried on Federal sedition charges.


To Keep Horses Alive and Wild
LEAD: Early in this century two million wild horses roamed the American West.
Human and wild predators reduced them to a mere 17,000 by 1971.
Then the Federal Government stepped in with a law to protect wild horses and burros as vestiges of an older America.
But like crop supports and rent control, this well-intended initiative produced unanticipated side effects.


Court Gives Leader's Money to Black Muslims
LEAD: A $5.7 million bank account of Elijah Muhammad, the Black Muslim leader who died in 1975, belongs to the religious organization he founded and not to his heirs, an Illinois appeals court has decided.


Children's Radio Show Is Canceled
LEAD: ''Kids America,'' an award-winning nationally syndicated children's radio program, went off the air yesterday after nearly four years of live broadcasts that combined ''Sesame Street''-style teaching with the format of talk radio.


The Audience as Obstacle
LEAD: During a recent performance of ''Tamara'' at the Seventh Regiment Armory, on Park Avenue at 66th Street, a woman in the audience could not contain her feelings.
When the character Emilia, a hot-tempered housemaid, kept silent after a proposal from Dante, the good-natured valet, the spectator cried: ''Marry him!


After 2 Years of Struggle, Ann Jillian's Story Is Told
LEAD: Ann Jillian is not the first actress to play herself in a television dramatization of her life.
But in preparing ''The Ann Jillian Story,'' an NBC-TV movie to be broadcast at 9 P.M.
Monday, Ms.
Jillian found herself embroiled in conflicts with her producers - disagreements that grew from her unusual double role as actress and as consultant on the authenticity of the script.


Four Arrests In Taiwan
LEAD: Four officials of a leading stock brokerage house have been arrested in connection with illegal margin loans that led to a default on payment of $750 million (Taiwan), or $26.3 million (United States) by a stock investor, police said.


Overstaying By Patients Cuts Beds
LEAD: Despite a critical shortage of beds in New York City's public and private hospitals, an average of 2,000 beds a day are occupied by patients who are medically ready for discharge and do not belong there, government and health-care officials acknowledge.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 2, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


COPING: WITH NEGLIGENCE CASES
LEAD: If you slip and sprain your ankle on an icy public sidewalk or a wet floor in a department store, how do you go about getting compensation for your injury and suffering?
What if your car is dented by a parking-lot attendant who won't admit fault?
Or an expensive garment is damaged by a dry cleaner who accepts no liability?


NEW YORK REACHES PACT ON COLISEUM
LEAD: The Koch administration, working to keep viable its disputed plan for developing Columbus Circle, has agreed to a new proposal that includes no reference to the height of the project, reduces its purchase price and bulk, and places a new financial constraint on the developer.


Regulators Oppose Bid By Seagram for Martell
LEAD: The attempt by the Seagram Company of Montreal to acquire a controlling interest in the French cognac producer Martell &amp; Compagnie has run into an obstacle from French regulators, raising the hopes of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. of London, which has made a competing bid.


Stamford Comes Alive After Dark, Finally
LEAD: A funny thing happened as the clock at the old Town Hall here struck midnight and ushered in the New Year.
There were people on hand, more than 4,000 of them, to watch.


KNICKS TAKE RISKS AND ROUT CLIPPERS
LEAD: With Bill Cartwright and Patrick Ewing in foul trouble and the Knicks clinging to a 68-65 advantage with 4 minutes 40 seconds remaining in the third quarter last night, Coach Rick Pitino took a calculated risk.
He played the 6-foot-9 1/2-inch Pat Cummings at center for the rest of the period.


Cold Brings California Gas Cutoff
LEAD: The nation's largest natural gas utility will temporarily cut off shipments, starting Monday, to 800 corporate users in Southern California, hoping to avert a shortage for residential customers.


Texas Star Sidelined
LEAD: When Clarissa Davis, top-ranked Texas' all-America basketball player, came crashing down onto the court Tuesday night, badly injuring her left knee in the Orange Bowl Classic in Miami, her mother was listening to the game at a park about an hour south of San Antonio, where she and her husband had driven because that's where the reception was best.


October's Specter Lurks Over '88
LEAD: The stock market opens the New Year under a shadow.
The trauma of October has reintroduced the fear of losing money.


Anti-Israeli Protests in Cairo Broken Up by Egypt's Police
LEAD: Egyptian police with riot sticks charged and beat hundreds of anti-Israeli protesters chanting Islamic fundamentalist slogans today and besieged others at one of Cairo's most eminent mosques, witnesses said.


Kabul Reports Besieged City Receives 3d Supply Convoy
LEAD: A third convoy carrying supplies arrived today in Khost, the southeastern Afghanistan city where Government troops are besieged by Moslem guerrillas, the Kabul radio said.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''Happy New Year. Thank you, and God bless you.''


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 16.


Tumultuous Markets
LEAD: The Dow Jones industrial average ended a year of turmoil 2.3 percent higher, at 1,938.83.
Sharp increases had carried the Dow to a record high of 2,722.42 on Aug. 25 - 43.6 percent above its close last Dec. 31.
When the market collapsed on


Iraq Says Its Warplanes Hit 2 Tankers Off Iran
LEAD: Iraq said today its warplanes raided two tankers off the Iranian coast, opening 1988 the way it closed out the most damaging year for shipping in the 7-year-old Persian Gulf war.


Group May Pursue Apex Counterclaim
LEAD: The New York Mercantile Exchange, which trades energy futures contracts, said it might continue to pursue some $15 million in legal counterclaims against the Apex Oil Company, a privately owned company that is one of the nation's largest oil trading concerns.
Apex filed for Chapter 11 protection under the United States Bankruptcy Code on Dec.


Spartans Stop and Smell Roses on Way to Victory
LEAD: The theory was that Big 10 teams had lost six consecutive Rose Bowls, and 12 of the last 13, because the Midwestern kids were dazzled and distracted by Disneyland, Hollywood and the Southern California climate when they came to play the Pac-10 champion.


Johnson Is Now 'The Guy' After Beating Switzer a 3d Time
LEAD: Jimmy Johnson stopped being ''the other guy'' tonight as his University of Miami team swarmed over Barry Switzer's Oklahoma team, 20-14, to lay claim to the unofficial national championship.


ARCO Increases Its Stake in Britoil
LEAD: ARCO, the United States oil group seeking to acquire a 49.9 percent stake in Britoil P.L.C., said it had raised its share in the concern to 21.2 percent.
Britoil, based in Glasgow, has received a takeover bid of $:2.27 billion, or about $4.26 billion, from the British Petroleum Company and sees AR


2 Men Killed and 2 Wounded in Brooklyn
LEAD: A store clerk and a bystander were killed and two other people were wounded yesterday when at least two armed robbers opened fire at a bodega in Brooklyn, the police said.


Syracuse Deprived Of Perfect Ending
LEAD: From one cluster of reporters to another, Dick MacPherson, the Syracuse coach, moved about the basement corridors of the Superdome late this afternoon, closely guarding the Sugar Bowl championship trophy and his emotions as well.
His team had left the field at the end of today's game unbeaten but unhappy, an eventuality that was simply not considered by Ma


Money Fund Assets Fall
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 413 money market mutual funds decreased $3.16 billion, to $258.22 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said Thursday.
Assets of the 112 institutional funds were down $2.11 billion, to $70.99 billion.
Assets of the 206 general purpose funds increased $159.8 million, to $79.36 billion.


China's G.N.P. Up 9%
LEAD: China's gross national product will exceed $270 billion this year, up 9 percent from 1986, the official New China News Agency said.
Zheng Jiaheng, deputy director of the State Statistical Bureau, said in an interview earlier this week that industrial output increased 14.5 percent while agricultural output was up 4 percent.


SOUTH CAROLINA G.O.P. IS ACCUSED OF RACISM
LEAD: A Roman Catholic clergyman says that the South Carolina Republican Party is helping perpetuate a segregated society and that racism should be stamped out on the 125th anniversary of Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation.


2 Steel, 2 Gold Stocks Top List of Best Gainers
LEAD: In a wildly turbulent year, the largest gains on the New York Stock Exchange were registered by two steel producers and two gold-mining companies.


Czechoslovak President Praises Soviet Goals
LEAD: President Gustav Husak, who was replaced last month as Communist Party chief, praised innovation in Kremlin policies today but indicated that economic change in his country has not even begun.


Sanofi's Bid For Robins Is Accepted
LEAD: The board of the A. H. Robins Company last night accepted a sweetened merger bid from Sanofi, a large French drug maker, over competing offers from two American suitors.


From Poles' Ferment, a Socialist Party
LEAD: The party's founding unfolded, amid police harassment, in three acts: the first in a garden house, the second in a cafe, the third in an apartment.


Florida State Rallies
LEAD: Danny McManus of Florida State capped a record passing performance in the Sunkist Fiesta Bowl today with a fourth-and-goal, game-winning touchdown pass from the Nebraska 15 to Ronnie Lewis with 3 minutes 7 seconds to play.


4 Die in Burning Apartment
LEAD: Firefighters heard faint scratching at a locked door today while they struggled to enter a burning apartment, but they were unable to save a pregnant woman and three children inside, an official said.
After the firefighters sawed through the door, secured by deadbolts, they discovered a child just inside who had apparently died from heavy smoke in the apartment, a fire department spokesman said.


Independent Service Contracts: Are They Worth the Money?
LEAD: More and more consumers are being faced with a new situation when they purchase extended warranties for appliances and electronic products.
Many stores sell such protection themselves, but others have decided to offer it through separate companies.


Airbus Suffers As Dollar Falls
LEAD: The steep fall of the dollar has created a catastrophic situation for Airbus Industrie, the European commercial aircraft consortium, the Foreign Trade Minister of France, Michel Noir, said in an interview published this week.
Mr.
Noir told the newspaper


Teachers Union, in Shift, Calls 3 Acceptable for Chancellor's Post
LEAD: The president of the New York City Board of Education and the head of the teachers union moved closer yesterday in the political battle over who should be the next schools chancellor.


Soviet Urged To Rethink Pasternak
LEAD: Yevgeny Yevtushenko has suggested that the 1958 Nobel Prize in Literature awarded to Boris Pasternak but rejected by him under intense pressure by the Soviet Government be posthumously restored.


Decline on Amex Paced By Battered Oil Stocks
LEAD: Although the October stock market collapse took its toll on virtually every stock on the American Stock Exchange, those that held onto most of their gains had very little in common.
The winners for the year ranged from a bedcovering importer to a cable television system, while losers ran the gamut from a poultry processor to a jewelry maker.


Specialists Saved Day
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jackson Treated at Hospital
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson was treated at a hospital today for back pain and released after a few hours, hospital officials said.
A candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination, Mr.
Jackson went to the Franklin Medical Center here at about noon, according to a nursing supervisor at the hospital who refused to give her name.


Gains by Philadelphia Police Are Seen
LEAD: A citizens' group overseeing attempts to improve the Philadelphia Police Department, long considered one of the worst in the country, says the department is making progress but ''has not yet fully escaped the powerful pressures of the past that permit misconduct and result in lower standards of policing.


TV Ministry to Seek Return Of $9.3 Million From Bakkers
LEAD: The trustee for the PTL television ministry will take action to recover what the Internal Revenue Service says is $9.36 million in excessive compensation paid to Jim and Tammy Bakker, an attorney for the trustee said today.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Horse Racing  Long Shot Travels by Rail: Key to the Bridge, an 11-to-1 shot, hugged the rail from start to finish and held off Avanti Sassa by a head to win the $113,480 Hialeah Breeders' Cup Handicap yesterday at Hialeah Park in Hialeah, Fla.
Natania finished third, 1 1/4 lengths behind the top pair, and Way It Should Be was fourth.


Royalties Bill Leads To Art Black Market
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Improving Law Enforcement


RIGHTS ADVOCATES AND U.S. CONDEMN SALVADOR AMNESTY
LEAD: The United States Embassy and human rights advocates are strongly criticizing a blanket amnesty law here that has pardoned several gunmen accused of killing Americans and Salvadorans civilians in recent years.


'88 Yield Predictions Vary Widely
LEAD: After a year of falling bond prices and volatile interest rates, the sports fans' ''wait till next year'' refrain is echoing through the credit markets.


Keycorp Buys A Utah Bank
LEAD: Keycorp of Albany has acquired the Commercial Security Bancorpation of Salt Lake City, according to officials of both companies.


Owens-Illinois Extends Offer
LEAD: Owens-Illinois Inc. has extended its $774 million offer for a rival glass container maker, Brockway Inc., by three days, to next Thursday.


Crystal Balls Are Murky, at Best
LEAD: So, is the bull market over?
Was that the message of last October's stock market collapse?
Did the long bull market in stocks finally exhaust itself, after more than five years?


Markets Closed
LEAD: Stock and commodity markets, as well as banks, government offices and most businesses, were closed yesterday in observance of New Year's Day.
Most foreign stock markets, including those in Tokyo and London, were also closed.


NASDAQ NATIONAL MARKET SYSTEM
LEAD:  O-T-C VOLUME  Total Nasdaq share volume for the year.  1987 ........................... 35,597,292,000  1986 ..................... 26,658,897,000  1985 ............... 19,281,412,800  1984 ........... 15,158,819,587  1983 ............ 15,908,547,400  MOST ACTIVE NASDAQ ISSUES IN 1987  Only common stocks are listed; adjusted for stock splits (s).


Guidepost; LUGGAGE ON BOARD
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration has ruled that air carriers must enforce limits on carry-on luggage on domestic and international flights beginning Jan. 1.


Return of Boy Stayed by Judge In Abuse Case
LEAD: A Federal judge last night stayed the return of a 9-year-old Zimbabwean foreign service officer's son to his home country, leaving him in foster care on Long Island until at least this morning.


2 HART CREDITORS LOSE COURT RULING
LEAD: A Federal magistrate in Denver has rejected an effort by two major creditors of Gary Hart's 1984 Presidential campaign to lay claim to money held by his 1988 campaign.


The Rally That Was: Gone, Almost Forgotten
LEAD: Only a year ago, the stock market was cheering the longest string of day-to-day gains on record.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 13 consecutive days before falling back on Jan. 21.
Indeed, from the year's opening session on Jan. 2 through the early spring the Dow stocks were bid higher and higher.


U.S. Youths Play London
LEAD: It rained on their parade, but five American high school bands and a drill team dazzled their audience during a New Year's Day march through one of London's main shopping districts.


Dorothy Bliss, Ex-Curator of Museum, Dies
LEAD: Dorothy Elizabeth Bliss, a retired curator of the American Museum of Natural History, died of cancer last Saturday at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence.
She was 71 years old and lived in Wakefield, R.I.


Coming Soon to This Theater
LEAD: Here is a list of the columns I shall write in the coming year unless public pleas for mercy soften my heart.


2 Airlines Reject Smoking Ban On California Law's First Day
LEAD: A law banning smoking on commercial plane, train and bus trips in California took effect today, but at least two airlines ignored the law, saying superseding Federal regulations allowed smoking sections.


Moscow 1987: A Tattering of Myths
LEAD: Daily life is much the same in the Soviet Union.
The old economic machinery creaks along.
There still is no recourse against the power of the state.
Yet Mikhail Gorbachev's new thinking, while short on establishing genuine reforms in economic and political machinery, has exposed some of the myths of


Youth Killed by Burning Tree
LEAD: A Christmas tree caught fire in the elevator of a Bronx apartment building yesterday, killing one teen-ager and critically injuring two others, fire officials said.
They said the youths may have been playing with matches.


Wrestler Fails to Keep Hold on an Honorable Past
LEAD: In the highly structured, rigidly disciplined, virtually feudal world of Japanese sumo wrestling, there had never been anything like it.


New Year's Day in Philadelphia
LEAD: Members of the Southwest Strutters dancing their way up Broad Street yesterday in the annual Mummers Parade.
Some 20,000 marchers, including clowns, comics and string bands took part. (AP)


Cambodia Foreign Ministry Shift May Affect Talks
LEAD: In a move that may affect the tentative peace process in Cambodia, Prime Minister Hun Sen has also reassumed the position of Foreign Minister.


NEWS SUMMARY SATURDAY, JANUARY 2, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 3-8, 24  A Salvadoran amnesty law has led to the release of several gunmen accused of killing American and Salvadoran civilians, the United States embassy and human rights activists in that country say.
Page 1  Israeli soldiers were on alert in Gaza, Jerusalem and the West Bank to combat Palestinian attempts to commemorate the 23d anniversary of Yasir Arafat's first military operation against Israel.


O-T-C Stocks Still Trail Exchange-Listed Issues
LEAD: Like some earthquakes, the stock market debacle caused aftershocks that hit the over-the-counter market harder than the initial tremor.


Florida Cleans House
LEAD: Heads continue to roll at Florida after consecutive disappointing seasons, of 6-5 and 6-6 records.
On the heels of the Gators' 20-16 loss to U.C.L.A.
Christmas Day in the Aloha Bowl, Galen Hall, the head coch, dismissed Mike Heimerdinger, the wide receivers' coach, and three other coaches announced their resignations: Zaven Yaralian, defensive coordinator; Dan Coughlin and Ty Smith, defensive assistant coaches.


ISRAEL PUTS ARMY ON STREET PATROL TO PREVENT RIOTS
LEAD: The Israeli Army put hundreds of heavily armed troops onto the streets of Gaza, Jerusalem and the West Bank today, blocking Palestinian efforts to commemorate the 23d anniversary of Yasir Arafat's first military operation against Israel.


Ship File Proves Legal Status Of a 1912 Immigrant to U.S.
LEAD: A Federal immigration official says a 95-year-old woman facing the cutoff of state medical benefits because she could not prove legal residence status has been in the United States since 1912.


Depleted Auburn
LEAD: It hasn't been the best of weeks for the front line of the Auburn (7-2) basketball team.
On Monday Mike Jones, the leading scorer and rebounder averaging 21.9 points and 10.0 rebounds, was ruled academically ineligible.
On Wednesday Jeff Moore, the senior center, suffered a broken hand in an 83-72 defeat to Georgia Tech in the final of the Cotton States Classic.


AULD LANG SYNE
LEAD: WHILE hearing the last, fading refrain of that New Year's classic, Old Long Since (as some readers might have corrected the bonny Bobby Burns), we begin the annual look back on what has been written in this space.


Florida Citrus Bowl; Penn State Routed
LEAD: Rodney Williams passed for 214 yards and Tracy Johnson scored three touchdowns today to lead Clemson to a 35-10 victory over Penn State in the Florida Citrus Bowl.


Washington Police Arrest 11 In Protest at Israeli Embassy
LEAD: Eleven women were arrested today at a pro-Palestinian demonstration outside the Israeli Embassy, according to the District of Columbia police.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc., an insurance brokerage, completed sales of its two major underwriting units, Sphere Drake Insurance Group P.L.C. and Shand Morahan &amp; Co., to separate investor groups.
Terms were not disclosed.


Newsprint Cost Rises Sharply
LEAD: Newspapers around the country are facing a sharp increase in the price of newsprint with the start of the new year, and analysts say another increase is likely some time in 1988.


Santa Fe Files Plan For Rail Unit's Sale
LEAD: The Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation filed papers with the Interstate Commerce Commission outlining its proposed sale of the Southern Pacific railroad to Rio Grande Industries, the I.C.C. said.
The sale is subject to approval by the commission.


Betty Rhodes; Singer, 52
LEAD: Betty Rhodes, a cabaret singer who played in the original production of ''Jacques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris,'' died of cancer Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 52 years old and lived in Manhattan.


No Aid to American Vision of South Asia
LEAD: To the Editor:


Three Are Held In Hong Kong
LEAD: The former chairman of Hong Kong's stock exchange and two top aides were arrested today in connection with a investigation into suspected corruption.
Ronald Li, the chairman, Jeffrey Sun, the former chief executive of the stock exchange, and Donald Tsang, the former head of the stock listing department, were arrested at their homes by the Independent Commission Against


Whether Swings Will Continue Is Uncertain
LEAD: Although the stock market ended the year at about where it began, the last 12 months will go down as the most chaotic since World War II.


Chase to Close Offices in Peru
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Bank will close its offices in Peru, the Government said today.


In Night Court: Plea Bargains and Coffee
LEAD: Late Thursday night, while many New Yorkers in fancy dress were celebrating the new year at bright spots around the city, Judge Joel M. Goldberg took his black polyester robe and drove to Manhattan Criminal Court, where he had a job to do.


Iran Seeking OPEC Talks
LEAD: Iran wants OPEC's president, Rilwanu Lukman of Nigeria, to call an urgent meeting of the organization's monitoring committee because oil prices are falling.
But a Nigerian official said Thursday that such a meeting would be premature.


New System For Trade
LEAD: About 50 countries - but not the United States - began to use a new system today to track the thousands of items involved in world trade.


Shackles on City Prisoners, and Budgets
LEAD: Justice Kenneth Shorter of the New York State Supreme Court rules properly that New York City's jailers don't have to shackle ailing prisoners in general population wards of city hospitals.
The litigation makes clearer than ever the need to expand special hospital facilities for prisoners.


Britain Suppressed Details of '57 Atomic Disaster
LEAD: A detailed account of the causes of one of the world's worst nuclear accidents - a fire at a British nuclear plant in 1957 - was suppressed by Prime Minister Harold Macmillan mainly because he feared it would threaten nuclear and defense cooperation with the United States, according to classified documents released today.


Bore the 'Arc'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sexual Harassment Arrest on Jet
LEAD: An Eastern Airlines jet made an unscheduled stop here Thursday so that officials could arrest a New Jersey passenger accused of making sexual advances to two airline attendants.


CORRECTION
LEAD: The Page 1 chart yesterday tracing the dollar's fall against the yen incorrectly indicated a recent climb by the dollar.
The dollar fell on Dec. 31 to 121.05 yen, its lowest point of the year.


Time Runs Out for Peter Pan's Hospital
LEAD: Time has caught up with Peter Pan, even in his native England.


Cotton Bowl; Aggies Top Irish By 35-10
LEAD: Tim Brown ended his Heisman Trophy season today looking for a towel.
A crying towel would have done nicely for his Notre Dame teammates and Coach Lou Holtz.


Transcripts of New Year's Greetings From Reagan and Gorbachev on TV
LEAD: Following are transcripts of New Year's greetings, televised today, by President Reagan to the Soviet people and by Mikhail S. Gorbachev to the American people.
The transcripts were supplied by the White House, with the translation from the Russian provided by an official interpreter.
MR.
REAG


Top Executives in Demand
LEAD: Demand for senior-level executives rose 11 percent in 1987 despite the October stock market collapse, according to a report by Korn/Ferry International, a Los Angeles management recruiting company.


AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE ISSUES
LEAD:  AMEX VOLUME  Total share volume on the American Stock Exchange for 1987.  1987 ........................ 3,505,950,000  1986 .................. 2,978,540,000  1985 ............. 2,100,860,000  1984 ....... 1,545,010,000  1983 ........... 2,081,270,000  MOST-ACTIVE AMEX ISSUES IN 1987  Only common stocks are listed; adjusted for stock splits (s).


NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE ISSUES
LEAD:  BIG BOARD VOLUME  Total share volume on the New York Stock Exchange for the year.  1987 ............. 47,801,308,660  1986 ............ 35,680,016,341  1985 ......... 27,510,706,353  1984 ..... 23,071,031,447  1983 ... 21,589,576,997  MOST ACTIVE BIG BOARD ISSUES IN 1987  Only common stocks are listed; adjusted for stock splits (s).


Humidifiers Aid Comfort, Not Health
LEAD: The Consumer Product Safety Commission is looking into the health risks of humidifiers.


Waldheim Assails Racial Hatred
LEAD: President Kurt Waldheim, who has been accused of involvement in wartime atrocities, today denounced the period of Nazi rule in Austria and urged his countrymen to avoid racial hatred and intolerance.


2 Officers Find Guns and Drugs In Queens Home
LEAD: Two police officers patrolling a Queens street Thursday evening spotted a teen-ager with a gun in his hand, followed him inside a house and found a cache of automatic weapons, drugs and $5,000 that officials said appeared to belong to a major street narcotics ring.


Vincent Scores 33 To Lead Nuggets
LEAD: Jay Vincent scored 33 points in his first game against his former Washington teammates, matching his season high and helping the Denver Nuggets to a 124-109 victory over the Bullets tonight.


Dawn of '88 Brings Hope And Unease
LEAD: In a shadowy section of Pennsylvania Station, Maurice Warner rocked slowly back and forth, muttering softly as he surveyed about 30 homeless people, most of them asleep on wooden benches or the bare floors.


Boy, 13, Is Dead of Rabies
LEAD: Rabies caused the death of a 13-year-old boy, the first human in San Francisco to die of the rare disease in nearly half a century, health officials have reported.
The victim, Michael Ancheta, died Dec. 15 but was not diagnosed as having the rare disease until several days later, according to the city's Bureau of Communicable Disease Control.


Autonomy in Industry To Challenge Worker
LEAD: The Soviet Union today entered a critical phase in Mikhail S. Gorbachev's attempt to resuscitate the economy, in which workers will be asked to change their notion of work radically without yet having enjoyed any great rewards from two years of economic experiments and promises.


New Suffolk Executive Breaks With Tradition
LEAD: Patrick G. Halpin, describing Suffolk County as an area ''on the edge of greatness,'' was inaugurated today as the county's first Democratic chief executive in 16 years.


'Elephant Repellent'
LEAD: ''Thank heaven for nuclear weapons,'' Prime Minister


Your Money; The Strategy Of Overwriting
LEAD: DR.
CHARLES ALLEN, a physician in Palm Springs, Calif., has been using an options strategy called overwriting for about two years.
Even following the enormous market meltdown in October, he has continued to participate in the investment program.


Quick-Buck Crowd Gives Wall St. a Black Eye
LEAD: To the Editor:


Orange Bowl; Hurricanes Overwhelm the Sooners to Claim No. 1
LEAD: The University of Miami, with an offensive line that had to be reconstructed because of injuries and a suspension after a positive drug test, limited the most powerful offense in the nation tonight to defeat Oklahoma, 20-14, in the 54th Orange Bowl.


Forgoing Gifts to Give to the Neediest
LEAD: It would be wrong to let the holiday season close without acknowledging some of the many people who gave to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund instead of exchanging gifts.


I.R.S. Action to Allow Spinoff of IC Rail Unit
LEAD: IC Industries plans to spin off the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad into a separate company after it receives a favorable tax ruling from the Internal Revenue Service, a company vice president, Bruce S. Chelberg, said this week.


Bridge; Contest west down a wire For New York Player of Year
LEAD: Rather unexpectedly, the New York Player of the Year title remained in doubt until the last day of the tournament season.


New York Should Raise Supplemental Security
LEAD: To the Editor:


ENGINE DESIGN HELD A BREAKTHROUGH
LEAD: Scientists at the Argonne National Laboratory have developed what they said today was the first electric motor based on the properties of a material that conducts electricity with minimal resistance.


Bluebonnet Bowl; Longhorns Riddle Pitt's Highly-Respected Defense
LEAD: It took Pittsburgh's defense one play, its first of the game, to know it was in for a rough evening against the Texas Longhorns in the Bluebonnet Bowl Thursday night.


Concert: Kathleen Battle
LEAD: Kathleen Battle has done more than any guest conductor in recent memory about teaching the New York Philharmonic to play softly -an appreciable achievement, even if her means were somewhat extreme at the New Year's Eve concert in Avery Fisher Hall.
One assumes that the microphones improved matters for the telecast, but in the hall it was often hard to hear Miss


Ringing Out the Cans And Ringing in the Bags
LEAD: The start of the new year means goodbye to battered curbside trash cans here, and many Dallasites are reluctant to see them go.


A Breakthrough on Latin Debt
LEAD: Mexico and the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company have exploded the fiction that Latin America's $400 billion foreign debt can ever be fully paid off.
After five dreary years of adding new debt just to pay interest on old debt, they present an alternative: partial debt forgiveness in exchange for a guarantee on the remainder.


About New York; A Composer, At 75, Gets His Big Break
LEAD: It was cold, as all but the Sherpas know, and Ted Harris wouldn't come out of his apartment in the Sheepshead Bay section of Brooklyn, on account of the angina and the stern doctor's orders, and then he thought he would take it one step further: no guests.
He could visit by telephone, though, and it was important because he had a load to get off his chest.


Rising Debate Over a Schools Chief Hinges on Picking Insider or Outsider
LEAD: As was perhaps inevitable, the selection of a New York City schools chancellor has become mired in politics -personal, jurisdictional and racial.


Coaching Job Swap?
LEAD: The former Ohio State football coach, Earle Bruce, said yesterday that he would like to be considered for the coaching position at Arizona State - a job that became vacant when John Cooper accepted Bruce's old job.
In an interview broadcast by NBC during halftime of the Fiesta Bowl, Bruce said: ''I'm unemployed.


Candidate for Chancellor Is Seen as Teacher Ally
LEAD: As Dr.
Bernard R. Gifford presents his case to the Board of Education today on why the board members should appoint him schools chancellor, he will be strongly perceived as a candidate allied with the teachers union.
It is a perception he questions.


GARDEN-VARIETY PREDICTIONS FOR 1988 ARE JUST AS MIXED
LEAD:  Daniel Justman  Manhattan  ''I'll take a shot: 2,500.
By the second half of the year things will settle out - the dollar, the taxes, Germany's plans, Japan's plans.''  Ronni C. Denes  Manhattan  ''If I had a clue, I would be a rich woman by this time next year.
But I don't have any idea.


Bond Won't Seek Cup
LEAD: In light of the recent decision by the defending San Diego Yacht Club not to accept any America's Cup challenges in 90-foot boats except for the one already received from Michael Fay of New Zealand, Alan Bond, the millionaire behind Australia's 1983 victory, has decided not to challenge for the trophy this year.


Campo Colt Wins Flamingo
LEAD: Johnny Campo and Jorge Velasquez, who teamed with Pleasant Colony to win the Kentucky Derby and Preakness Stakes seven years ago, won the $250,000 Flamingo Stakes today at Hialeah Park with a son of Pleasant Colony named Cherokee Colony.
The style of the colt's victory had the trainer and jockey thinking about the


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  TRADING CARD MANIA


The Moment of Truth for Big Blue
LEAD: THE roof caved in on Jackie and Larry Kilcoin two years ago when the county sheriff knocked on the door of their Iowa farmhouse to foreclose on the property they had dreamed of passing on to their grandchildren.


End Paper; Minesweeping? Try Mindsweeping
LEAD: ENGLISH COMP is the minesweeper of the educational fleet.
There's absolutely no status in running such a class, or ship.
Yet somehow the whole fleet looks very silly without it.
The minesweeper clears away problems everybody else pretends are not there.
It's time-consuming, hazardous duty.
And if, when I'm done, there are only half as many mines - comma splices, sentence fragments and the like - have I succeeded?


MOVIES
LEAD:  Losin' It  With Tom Cruise, Shelley Long and Jackie Earle Haley.
Directed by Curtis Hanson. 1982.
Embassy/Nelson Entertainment. 100 minutes. $24.95.


1988: PREVIEWS FROM 36 ARTISTS
LEAD: WHEN WE CONTEMPLATE A WORK OF art, the experience most of us share is of seeing or hearing something with a beginning, a middle and an end.
Or, in the case of paintings and sculpture, it's the discovery of a point of view.
We also conveniently like to think of artistic careers as orderly sequences of completed works.


Where History's Been the Last 50 Years
LEAD: To the Editor:


Phone Services Cut Back in Parts of New York
LEAD: New technology has made the telephone more versatile.
Calls can be dialed by simply pressing one button.
People at three or more locations can speak at once.
During a conversation, a beep signals that another call is waiting.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Visiting Cyprus


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It is hard to imagine a more positive or more hopeful beginning to 1988.''
- Alexander B. Trowbridge,
president, National Association
of Manufacturers, on
U.S.-Canada trade agreement.  [ 12:3. ]


A Trout Fisherman's New Zealand Haven
LEAD: I RELEASED trout bigger than I had ever caught before.
Then I hooked and lost trout bigger than that.
And then I spooked trout still bigger.


THE NATION: The Economy; Indicators Fall, but U.S. Industry Appears Poised to Rebound
LEAD: GOING by the numbers, things didn't look so good.


Question Of the Week; Who Will Win the Pro Football Playoffs?
LEAD: Thank you George Young and Bill Parcells for assembling a scab team that effectively turned the lights out on the Giants' season before the end of the baseball season.
With their toughest adversary out of the picture, watch Washington take the whole shootin' match.
PETER BLECHMAN  Fishkill, N.Y.


Yale Law Students Aid the Homeless By Preserving Low-Income Housing
LEAD: A new corporation, just a few months old, is poised to play a big role in the New Haven housing boom.
Its legal team includes some of the nation's finest tax, finance and real-estate lawyers - a pool of talent that the largest companies in the world would covet.
On paper, this is a corporation to watch.


A Tempered Skyline Strengthens a City of Steel
LEAD: THIS IS THE ONLY CITY IN America with an entrance.
You slide and slither into most downtowns, passing through gradual layers of ever-more-intensely built-up sprawl, and you do not so much enter the center as realize after you are there that it is all around you.
Not Pittsburgh.
Pittsburgh is entered with glory and drama.


TESTING GLASNOST
LEAD: I was impressed by Alexander Goldfarb's article ''Testing Glasnost: An Exile Visits His Homeland'' (Dec. 6), and congratulate The New York Times Magazine on having selected him to give us a picture of what is happening now in the U.S.S.R.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: Trips and Tours To Catch the Solar Eclipse


Fairness of Case Reviews for Cubans Is Challenged
LEAD: Cuban detainees who rioted at two Federal penitentiaries in November may not be properly represented as a new round of individual case reviews opens Monday, an attorney for the detainees says.


COCKNEY CHARISMA
LEAD: I encourage William Boyd to refamiliarize himself with Evelyn Waugh's masterpiece ''Brideshead Revisited,'' Chapter 6, in which Cordelia, one of the Flyte family members, says to Charles, the narrator: ''Charles . . . modern art is all great bosh, isn't it?''


Marimekko Changes Its Spots
LEAD: THERE was never any doubt about what the inside label would say.
The clothes and fabrics, with their striking design and splashes of bold color, were clearly Marimekko.
But for people of a certain generation - those who came of age in the 1960's - they represented more than just a brand name: They conjured up an image and an era.


THE APPROACH
LEAD: ONE OF THE very important attractions of the game of golf,'' wrote Bobby Jones, one of the sport's immortals, ''is that it provides a varied assortment of topics for conversation.'' Not least, it seems, the golfer's zany wardrobe, which over the years has encompassed such classical oddities as screaming argyle hose and peaked tartan caps.


La Guardia Statue: A Study in Action
LEAD: THE question was which of two proposed statues best portrayed Fiorello H. La Guardia, New York's dynamic Mayor from 1934 to 1945:


A Nominee by Spring? Hart Makes It Tougher
LEAD: Gary Hart's sudden decision to re-enter the 1988 Presidential campaign has provoked, at least in public, more wringing of hands than careful calculation, more denunciation than analysis of its impact on the Democratic race.


Embattled Teamsters Fight Government on Several Fronts
LEAD: FEW labor leaders were surprised last month by a spate of reports that Jackie Presser, the president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, had resigned.
The rumors weren't true, but the fact that they were so widely believed showed how troubled is Mr.
Presser's reign over the 1.7 million-member union, the nation's largest.


Special Today: Education Life/Section 12
LEAD: Special reports in this issue include:


Commercial Property: The Teleport; Moving Ahead Off the Beaten Path in Staten Island
LEAD: Within the Teleport, a 100-acre telecommunications and office project on Staten Island that has faced many skeptics and many setbacks, workers are preparing sites for three office buildings expected to open this year.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  OWL MOON  By Jane Yolen.
Illustrated by John Schoenherr.
Unpaged.
New York: Philomel Books. $13.95. (Ages 5 to 9) THE very best books for not-quite-reading children must be written to charm and astonish the adults who will read them aloud: thrill that reader, who will communicate those prickles at the nape of the neck, and you'll have created a desire in the young listener to learn how to read books alone.


CHARITABLE DONATIONS STEADY
LEAD: ALTHOUGH charitable organizations had expected deficits in holiday fund-raising this year because of the uncertain economy, most major charities in New Jersey seem to have raised at least as much as they did last year.


OLD AND NOVEL
LEAD: Gary Jennings's article ''Old and Novel'' (On Language, Nov. 29) is devoted to an impassioned plea for the compilation of a dictionary of ''What People Used to Call Things.'' Such a dictionary is, in fact, being edited at the University of Glasgow - it will be called the Historical Thesaurus of English.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. We have a brick patio with a northern exposure, and there is a problem with mold and mildew forming on these bricks.
We have to scrub them several times a year with bleach to remove the growth.
Do you have any suggestions for preventing this growth?


Question Of the Week; Who Will Win the Pro Football Playoffs?
LEAD: Who will win the playoffs? Who cares?  BRIAN B. BOEHM  Sea Cliff, N.Y.


Between Palestinians and Israelis, a U.S. Role; Healing in Jerusalem
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE CONTINUATION OF POLITICS BY OTHER MEANS
LEAD:  OUT OF CONTROL  The Story of the Reagan Administration's Secret War in Nicaragua, the Illegal Arms Pipeline, and the Contra Drug Connection.
By Leslie Cockburn. 287 pp.
New York: A Morgan Entrekin Book/ Atlantic Monthly Press. $18.95.


Syria Tries to Dissuade Iran From New Attack
LEAD: Syria is seeking to persuade Iran not to launch a new ground offensive against Iraq so as to avoid expanding the Persian Gulf war into an all-out Arab-Persian confrontation.


Yanks Change Mortgage Policy
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


DATA UPDATE
LEAD:  MEDIAN HOUSE PRICES
$
Sept. 87
Aug.
Sept. 86
Nation $86,100
$86,200
$82,000
Northeast
134,800
143,200
107,500
Midwest
66,200
66,900
63,700
South
79,700
78,400
79,700
West
104,700
106,700
102,900
Source: Census Bureau, U.S.


HUNGERING FOR A CREDIBLE GODDESS
LEAD:  REINVENTING EVE  Modern Woman in Search of Herself.
By Kim Chernin. 191 pp.
New York: Times Books. $16.95.
ONCE I had a fantasy about the Virgin Mary.
When the angel Gabriel announced that Mary would bear a son - a very special boy - she thought it over and said, ''No.'' Gabriel couldn't believe his ears, so Mary repeated, ''No.


Captain Vinegar's Ancestors
LEAD: To the Editor:


ITALIAN, WITH ACCENT ON FRESHNESS
LEAD: FRANCESCO'S is such an improvement over the restaurant that preceded it in its downtown Norwalk location, that one wishes it were doing better.
On the nights of our visits, one of which was on a weekend, only a handful of tables were occupied.


F. GEORGE DAVITT, LAWYER, MARRIES LYNDA CEREMSAK
LEAD: St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Lynda A. Ceremsak, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Ceremsak of Hamilton, Mass., to F. George Davitt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Alan Davitt of Delmar, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Costello performed the ceremony.


In Defense Of Brad Gilbert
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Young Fenians In Love and History
LEAD:  THE TENANTS OF TIME  By Thomas Flanagan. 824 pp.
New York: A William Abrahams Book/E.
P.
Dutton. $21.95.


JANE MARIE FLYNN TO MARRY IN JULY
LEAD: The engagement of Jane Marie Flynn, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William F. X. Flynn of Scarsdale, N.Y., to Stanley Randall Silver, a son of Dr.
Randall H. Silver of Auburn, Me., and Helen M. Silver of Medford, Mass., has been announced by the future bride's parents.
The couple plan to marry in July.


Correction
LEAD: The Week in Business column last week misidentified the company from which Steve S. Chen recently resigned.
It was Cray Research Inc.


Iran-Contra Aside, Webster Asks for Trust
LEAD: WHEN William H. Webster, the Director of Central Intelligence, announced his long-awaited response to the Iran-contra affair, most of the public attention focused on the disciplinary action he took against several agency officials.
But Mr.
Webster's carefully crafted statement went well beyond personnel issues: It outlined his agenda for the upcoming year, and it proposed answers to several of the major criticisms leveled at the Central Intelligence


IRA J. SCHACTER IS WED TO JANICE LYNN LANDIS
LEAD: At Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I., Janice Lynn Landis, the daughter of Harriet Landis of Bellmore, L.I., was married last evening to Ira Jason Schacter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert E. Schacter of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Saul Teplitz performed the ceremony.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the new state law governing marine fishing licenses misstated the kind of fishermen to whom it would apply.
The $100 annual license fee is required only for commercial fishermen who are state residents.
Under the law, commercial fishermen are defined as those who sell one or more fish a year.


Olympic Challenge 'Distracts' Thompson
LEAD: A HALF-HOUR before a recent game between Georgetown and Florida International in Miami, some fans in back of the Hoyas' bench unfurled a banner exhorting, of all things, the Syracuse University basketball team.


TENACIOUS EDUCATOR AND ROLE MODEL: Richard Reginald Green
LEAD: Dr.
Richard R. Green was walking downtown not long ago with the head of the city school board when he suddenly veered off to confront a young man loitering near a street corner.


LATE-BREAKING NEWS ON THE WORDS WE USE
LEAD:  THE RANDOM HOUSE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE  Second Edition, Unabridged.
Edited by Stuart Berg Flexner with Leonore Crary Hauck.
Illustrated. 2,478 pp.
New York: Random House. $79.95.
THIS outsize unabridged dictionary, the first in English in 20-odd years, weighs in at 12-plus pounds.
It involved nine years' labor by 340 lexicographers and consultants, and its 2,500 pages contain 50,000 new words; 75,000 fresh definitions; Italian, French, Spanish and German dictionaries; prodigious, encyclopedic information; spankingly updated entries on high-tech jargon, trade names,


SHERRI LONDON ENGAGED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Carl London of Bulls Head, S.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sherri Sue London, to Michael Edward Pastolove, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Pastolove of Brookville, L.I.
Ms.
London, an account representative for the Arts and Entertainment Cable Network in New York, graduated from the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University.


Possessions of Dead Stolen, Ex-Coroner's Employee Says
LEAD: A former coroner's investigator has accused some of his former colleagues of stealing money, jewelry and other property from the dead, and a grand jury is investigating the allegations, a newspaper reported Friday.


Slides vs. Prints
LEAD: ONE of the reasons that color-print films outsell color-slide films is their reproducibility.
Take a picture on slide film of the family gathered together round the Yule log and you get back a slide, period.
Take the same picture on print film and you get back a print and a negative.
With the negative, you can order as many duplicates of the picture as there are family members.


HILLARY SHARON ALPERT MARRIES RICHARD WOLF
LEAD: The marriage of Hillary Sharon Alpert, the daughter of Susan Nacey and Lewis Alpert, both of New York, to Richard Hilary Wolf, the son of Margret Hirschberg of Paramus, N.J., and Dr.
Robert Wolf of New York, took place last evening at the East River Yacht Club in New York.
Cantor David Benedict officiated.


WHEN A PARENT NEEDS A NURSING HOME
LEAD: ''WE take care of our own'' was one of the family mottos I grew up with.
And take care they did.
My father supported his mother, my mother's parents and her two unmarried sisters. ''I married the whole damn family,'' he once said in a rare expression of feeling.
Mother's sister, Bessie, submerged her life in order to care for her parents at home, through Grandma's broken hip and Grandpa's strokes.


Anthony V. Barber, Educator, Is Dead; Led 2 Prep Schools
LEAD: Anthony V. Barber, a former headmaster of preparatory schools in the New York metropolitan region, died of bronchial pneumonia Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
Mr.
Barber, who had been ill with cancer, was 83 years old and also lived in Tuxedo Park, N.Y.


MISS WARE WED TO JAMES RATHLESBERGER
LEAD: Mary Elizabeth Ware, an administrator at the New School for Social Research, and James Howard Rathlesberger, the assistant executive vice president of the National Health Council in New York, were married yesterday at the Congregational-Presbyterian Church in Lewiston, Idaho.
The Rev.
John Williams performed the ceremony.


LEARNING THE RULES OF THE ROLES
LEAD: IN these times of working marital partners and changing family roles, I find myself alienated by the machines and procedures involved in the labors that once were the responsibility of my wife.


Question Of the Week; Who Will Win the Pro Football Playoffs?
LEAD: The 49ers appear to be headed for a Super Bowl berth.
The most important factor is their defensive unit.


PAMELA MARGARET DAVIS, ARTIST, MARRIES PHYSICIST
LEAD: Pamela Margaret Davis, an artist, and Steven A. Kivelson, an associate professor and a theoretical physicist at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., were married in San Francisco yesterday.
Rabbi Robert Kirschner performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's grandmother, Mrs.
S.
Marshall


A Year of Shame
LEAD: As one scandal after another unfolds, it is clear that President Reagan presides over one of the most corrupt administrations ever.
Whether measured by the rank or the sheer numbers of officials who have come under ethical suspicion and criminal investigation, the amount of sleaze is awesome.
Precise comparisons to the Grant, Harding and Nixon Administrations aren't possible or necessary.


12 Acres of Garbage Bits Are an Artistic Attraction in India
LEAD: After years of collecting bits of discarded junk like old toilet bowls, broken bangles and shards of rock, Nek Chand has finally found success and renown - not as a scrap merchant, but as a sculptor.


MASTERING THE ART OF BABYLONIAN COOKING
LEAD: TUCKED away in a dark room of a Gothic-style library at Yale University, what may be the world's oldest known cookbooks are shedding light on an ancient cuisine.


Question Of the Week; Who Will Win the Pro Football Playoffs?
LEAD: Pro football is no longer a sport but a business; the game has been structurally altered.
Society's values are reflected in this uniquely American game.
This game is violence, greed and absolutely dull.


Next Week; Should The Knicks Trade for Mullin?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


What's Doing in Cleveland
LEAD: An old-world open-air grocery marketplace within blocks of an upscale nightclub; a restaurant with a la carte menus priced to match New York establishments around the corner from a family-owned diner serving more than you can eat for less than half as much and, braving the cold winds off Lake Erie, 80,000 Browns fans regularly packing Cleveland's Municipal


SUSAN ANN CROTTY IS WED
LEAD: At St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in Darien, Conn., Susan Ann Crotty, a vice president of Hamilton &amp; Company, financial consultants in New York, was married yesterday to David William Lohuis, a vice president of Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
The Rev.
William Donovan officiated.
Their parents are Mr.


ALLAIRE AIRPORT: BUMPY FLIGHT TO SUCCESS
LEAD: A HALF-CENTURY ago, Edward I. Brown bought a 40-acre tract here in Monmouth County, a onetime gravel pit along the northern fringe of the Pine Barrens.


PREVENTING PIPES FROM FREEZING
LEAD: FROZEN plumbing is easily one of winter's worst household disasters.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE NEW SEASON: A Spectator's Guide to the 1988 Election.
By George F. Will. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $17.95.) In this eclectic and engaging smorgasbord of bons mots, statistics, anecdotes and epigrams, one source crashes George F. Will's buffet line twice. ''This ain't a football game.
We do this every day,'' Earl Weaver, former manager of the Baltimore Orioles, says about baseball.


The Shape of a Rodin Tour
LEAD: THE obvious Rodinophile's rendezvous in Paris is the Musee Rodin, one of the most popular museums in France.
For decades - at least until Picasso got his museum in the Marais - it had no rival among one-man galleries anywhere in the world.
A young Parisian friend and I used the museum, on Rue de Varenne, as the starting point for a Rodin tour of Paris, a tour on foot, Metro and train that led to churches, tenement and mansion, to both banks of the


New Jersey Guide
LEAD:  'BILOXI BLUES' IN MILLBURN  Neil Simon's ''Biloxi Blues,'' which won a Tony award for best play in 1985, opens Wednesday at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn.
It is the middle work in Mr.
Simon's semi-autobiographical trilogy, which begins with ''Brighton Beach Memoirs'' and ends with ''Broadway Bound.


AMANDA C. ALLEN IS WED TO JAMES BOARDMAN BLAIR
LEAD: Amanda Clark Allen and James Boardman Blair were married yesterday at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Old Lyme, Conn., by the Rev.
Kirk Steven Smith.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.86
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.92
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.82
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
9.82
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


Special Today: Education Life/Section 12
LEAD:  Special reports in this issue include:


CELEBRATING 80 YEARS OF LITHOGRAPHY
LEAD: WHEN a major exhibition of the work of Georgia O'Keeffe, marking the centennial of the artist's birth, opened at Washington's National Gallery of Art two months ago, a big, lavish book entitled ''Georgia O'Keeffe Arts and Letters,'' containing 120 color plates of all the exhibited work, accompanied the exhibition.


Only Memories For Giants Fan
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


HONG KONG DETAINS 3 AT ITS EXCHANGE
LEAD: The former chairman of Hong Kong's stock exchange and two former aides were detained and released on bail today by this British colony's anti-graft agency in connection with an investigation of suspected corruption.


CLAY AND GLASS: 2d CYCLE OF ARTS ANNUALS
LEAD: ''CLAY AND GLASS,'' an exhibition now on view at the Montclair Art Museum, marks the beginning of the second cycle of ''New Jersey Arts Annuals.''


The New Wave of Body Sculptors
LEAD: DICK ROBERTSON, a senior executive with Lorimar Telepictures in Los Angeles, is the quintessential bicoastal fitness fanatic.
Whether at home in Malibu or on his frequent trips to New York, the 6-foot-3, 186-pound executive works out six days a week with trainers.
In 1987, Mr.
Robertson estimates he spent upwards of $20,000 on instructors, equipment and club memberships.


ABOUT BOOKS
LEAD: JUST when help is needed to understand the Tax Reform Act of 1986, here comes the ''1988 New Jersey Tax Handbook'' (Prentice Hall, New York, $17.50), a guide tailored specifically to the state's needs.


Miami Coach Prevails
LEAD: Of all the labels that could have been attached to Jimmy Johnson as the football coach at the University of Miami for the past four seasons, the notions of champion and educator have never seemed to stick.


What Would Hippocrates Have Said About AIDS?
LEAD: ALMOST as difficult as the scientific riddle of AIDS is the ethical question of whether doctors are obliged to care for patients infected with the deadly virus.


How Education Came to Be a Campaign Issue
LEAD: CONGRESS created the national Office of Education in 1867 and then, not quite sure of what it was supposed to do, ordered its Commissioner to keep an eye on the Federal reindeer herds in Alaska.
Commissioners have since been relieved of their reindeer-watching duties, but the tradition of turning to education to deal with everything from driver safety to drug abuse lives on.


Israeli Aircraft Attack South Lebanon Towns
LEAD: Israeli helicopter gunships fired rockets today into two southern Lebanese villages held by guerrillas of the pro-Iranian Party of God, destroying houses, the state-run Beirut radio reported.


U.S. Applauds (Softly) at Changes in Eastern Europe
LEAD: As Eastern Europe enters a period of political and economic fluidity, the United States faces a quandary.
If it does nothing, it forfeits an opportunity.
If it does too much, it risks fostering an instability that could deliver a severe setback to Soviet-American relations.


Clean Air Deadline Is History
LEAD: AFTER a series of extensions, the deadline set by Congress for cleaning up the air was to have been New Year's Eve.
But more than a decade and a half after passage of the Clean Air Act, the effort is still best described by the words that were used at the beginning: long term.
Just before Christmas, Congress approved legislation to extend the deadline to Aug.


Harvard's Midlife Crisis Center
LEAD: IT WAS the typical student scramble: Robert E. Vanasek pulled an all-nighter to finish his midterm in Political Management, went to class, and just half an hour before it was due, packed his knapsack and sneaked out to pick up the paper from the typist, barely making it back to class by the deadline.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  College Basketball  Rutgers 77, Arizona 54: Sue Wicks scored 17 points and grabbed 11 rebounds and Rutgers reeled off 14 straight first-half points last night on the way to a victory over Arizona in Piscataway, N.J.
The victory was the 35th straight at home for the Lady Knights and raised their record to 6-2.


Helping Customer Relations
LEAD: I'LL bet they still exist, somewhere under the gray paint.
They are my New Year's resolutions, circa 1953.


Sunday Observer; Coming Home To Roost
LEAD: IT WAS FUN BEING a yuppie until the stock market ran out of gas.
Since then, it's been pain and suffering.
I have it firsthand from my friend Duffy.
In Wall Street they used to call him ''Duffy the Yuppie.'' That was to distinguish him from Duffy the pushcart pretzel vendor of the arbitrage district, who was known as ''Duffy the Scruffy.


5 YEARS OFF THE JOB BUT ON THE PAYROLL
LEAD: LIEUT.
FREDERIC SARGEANT of the Stamford Police Department fired one shot at a station wagon being driven by a burglary suspect as it bore down on him in the middle of a road.
The bullet struck the door on the driver's side of the stationwagon, which contined on until the suspect was arrested a short while later.


An Imaginary Office Learns to Cope
LEAD: IT'S a brand new year here at the American Widget Works in Ludd, Tex., a ficticious company that we founded a few minutes ago (even though our motto is ''Serving Luddites Since 1982'').
Widget Works is a small but growing company that designs, manufactures and distributes high-quality widgets to fine stores and airport souvenir stands.


How Art Springs Forth From Broken Windows
LEAD: In the 1970's, when windows started popping out of the tall, sleek but architecturally flawed John Hancock Tower, many Bostonians laughed at the developers' dilemma.


Giving New Life to Old Fabrics
LEAD: JENNY BELL WHYTE TRANSFORMS tattered textiles into pedigreed finery.
Not just any old tatters, but worn antique textiles of museum quality.
The finery is contemporary clothing fashioned from the restored pieces, which are available at her homey brownstone ''shop'' on the Upper East Side, indistinguishable from the living quarters Mrs.


Intellectual Seduction
LEAD: LISTENING TO MIKHAIL S. Gorbachev's impassioned address in the rococo white-and-gold ballroom of the Soviet Embassy on 16th Street in Washington, on the late afternoon of Dec. 8, in a heterogeneous gathering of some 50 fellow American ''intellectuals'' and ''artists,'' I recalled these cryptic words of Nietzsche's; but wondered if my habitual skepticism, particularly regarding politics in its most public, theatrical mode, might be irrelevant here, unjustified.


Death at 80 Parts Twins Who Never Grew Old
LEAD: Until Buell Fuller died last week at the age of 80, he and his identical twin, John, were separated only twice in their lives: once when John preceded Buell at birth by two minutes, and a second time two decades later when Buell joined the Air Force for two years.


Bronx Man, Thrown From Window, Dies; Teen-Agers Charged
LEAD: A South Bronx man died after he was stabbed, beaten, handcuffed and then thrown out of an apartment window early yesterday, the police said.


WHAT'S NEW IN THE FITNESS BUSINESS
LEAD: MILLIONS of Americans are mired this New Year's weekend in a slough of despond over the abuses to which they subjected their bodies during the holiday season.
Fearing the worst, most will simply avoid bathroom scales for a week or two.
But some will decide the time has finally come to get serious about physical fitness.


102 Flee British Hotel Fire
LEAD: Fire swept through the cabaret of the seafront Balmoral Hotel in Blackpool this morning, forcing 102 people from the Balmoral and a neighboring hotel, the Craigy Don, to flee.
The police in this resort town on England's northwest coast said two people ill from smoke inhalation were treated at the scene.


RELIEF, CAUTION AND DISAPPOINTMENT GREET CHOICE FOR SCHOOLS CHANCELLOR
LEAD: The choice of a new schools chancellor for New York City yesterday brought statements of support from politicians and educators who said they hoped Dr.
Richard R. Green could soon begin to revive an ailing schools system.


THE NEW GREED TAKES CENTER STAGE
LEAD: SUDDENLY EVERYBODY IS TALKING about greed.
It may not be a brand-new topic, but after the chastening experience of the stock market fall in October it seems an all too appropriate one.
We virtuously distance ourselves from yesterday's excesses (without necessarily discarding today's); and three works in particular have shown up at just the right time to highlight our concerns - Oliver Stone's movie ''Wall Street,'' Caryl Churchill's play ''Serious Money'' and Tom Wolfe's novel ''The Bonfire of the Vanities.


U.S. Judges Extend Deadline On Louisiana Desegregation
LEAD: A Federal court order to improve Louisiana's mostly black universities has been extended to allow more time to decide whether the state has fulfilled its terms.


EDUCATION BOARD WILL NAME GREEN AS SCHOOLS HEAD
LEAD: The New York City Board of Education yesterday agreed, 4 to 3, to name Dr.
Richard R. Green as the next schools chancellor.
Dr.
Green is the Superintendent of Schools in Minneapolis.


New State Laws Will Affect Life on a Broad Scale
LEAD: New laws that took effect in some states on New Year's Day change the rules regarding drunken driving, obtaining marriage licenses, doing the laundry and taking time off to be with a new baby.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  ANNA DELANEY'S CHILD, by John Thorndike. (Plume/New American Library, $7.95.) Anna Delaney is grief-stricken by the loss of her son in a car crash; her father, Alex, is depressed over the death of his wife.
This ''lyrically powerful'' first novel ''deftly explores the ethics of memory, dramatizing how Anna and Alex learn to forge bonds with the living without betraying their loving memories of the dead,'' Sherie Posesorski said in The Book Review in 1986.


LAURA JEANNE DUTZEK MARRIED TO JONATHAN LICHTER
LEAD: The marriage of Laura Jeanne Dutzek, the daughter of Henry Dutzek of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., and the late Barbara Mae Dutzek, to Jonathan Simons Lichter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Lichter of Larchmont, N.Y., and New York, took place yesterday at Singer's Caterers in Spring Valley, N.Y.
Kenneth Rones, a town justice in Clarkstown, N


Move Cardinals To Baltimore
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 3, 1988
LEAD:
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week$ YList
Fiction
1
1
6
THE TOMMYKNOCKERS, by Stephen King.
(Putnam, $19.95.) Two writers' zealous attempt to
unearth mysterious artifacts creates havoc.
2
2
11
KALEIDOSCOPE, by Danielle Steel.


MERYL STONE ENGAGED TO MICHAEL H. COHEN
LEAD: Meryl Illene Stone and Michael Howard Cohen, executives at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York, plan to marry next summer.


Dad's Bad Mood
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Vatican, Gorbachev's 'Openness' Is A Solid Wall
LEAD: ''THE church fights the enemies of yesterday and the friends of tomorrow.'' That enigmatic slogan, a senior Vatican diplomat said, explains how the Roman Catholic Church dealt with the Huns and the French Revolution - and how it now deals with the Soviet Union.


MISS FRENZE WED TO J. P. DONAHUE
LEAD: Jenifer Frenze, a lawyer in Philadelphia, and J. Philip Donahue, a candidate for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University, were married yesterday at Old St.
Mary's Church in Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Edwin Sanders performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.


AID GROUPS RATED ON PUERTO RICANS
LEAD: Puerto Rican organizations receive negligible philanthropic support from some leading foundations, according to a study conducted for the National Puerto Rican Coalition, a seven-year-old association based in Washington.


He Can Do More Than Just Pitch
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Streetscapes: The West Side Improvement; On the Lower West Side, Fate Of Old Rail Line Is Undecided
LEAD: IT was hailed in its time, but now the West Side Improvement is to some an awful blight and to others a magnificent opportunity.
The elevated railroad, completed in 1934, snakes around and even through industrial buildings on the Lower West Side of Manhattan.
It will either be demolished or returned to service, depending on the outcome of litigation that began in 1985.


THE LOVER HAD A BROTHER
LEAD:  LIVES OF THE TWINS  By Rosamond Smith. 236 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $16.95.


Machaut and Chaucer
LEAD: To the Editor:


IT'S TIME AGAIN TO REMOVE ALL THE TRAPPINGS OF CHRISTMAS
LEAD: THE sixth of January.
Call it what you will - The Feast of the Three Kings or Epiphany - but at our house it is the day to take down all the holiday trappings.


MISS MURPHY IS AFFIANCED
LEAD: The engagement of Sheila Ann Murphy to Michael Maurice Azarian, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Azarian of Andover, Mass., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Murphy of Oldwick, N.J., and Groton Long Point, Conn.
An April wedding is planned.


By SHAWN G. KENNEDY
LEAD:  Rent Subsidies


JOE THE DEAD SEEKS IMMORTALITY
LEAD:  THE WESTERN LANDS  By William S. Burroughs. 258 pp. New York: Viking. $18.95.


UNION CITY ANGERED BY CUBA PACT
LEAD: LEADERS of the Cuban community here say they have been sold out by the Federal Government in its deportation agreement with Fidel Castro.


OLD AND NOVEL
LEAD: I believe I can aid Gary Jennings with the ancient word for getting ''bucked'' off a horse.
I give him instead: equiabiciate.
I recalled that reference from my high-school Latin toils with ''Caesar's Gallic Wars,'' wherein that Roman military genius sent a Gallic horseman with a message to Cicero, his general in the field.


PREVENTING PIPES FROM FREEZING
LEAD: FROZEN plumbing is easily one of winter's worst household disasters.


Mauritius Seeks to Regain Island With U.S. Base
LEAD: This island state still wishes it could regain sovereignty over the faraway island of Diego Garcia, which the United States has turned into a military base in the Indian Ocean.


Between Palestinians and Israelis, a U.S. Role; Nonviolence Is the Way
LEAD: To the Editor:


With Agnes Smedley in China
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dye's Tie Still Ugly In Syracuse's View
LEAD: It was apparent that there had not been any overnight revelations for Dick MacPherson.
The Syracuse coach came to a team breakfast this morning, lacking sleep and a satisfactory explanation for why Auburn chose to play for a tie in the Sugar Bowl game the day before.
He tried to mask his feelings, engaging in long goodbyes with players heading home for the remainder of the semester break, hugging and kissing members of their families.


COCKNEY CHARISMA
LEAD: I say ''bosh'' to William Boyd, and recommend that he keep his ears open while wandering around London (''Cockney Charisma,'' Dec. 6). ''Bosh'' is a Turkish colloquial interjection that has been around for years, at least since 1894, when George Bernard Shaw wrote ''Arms and the Man.'' Please see Act II, in which Maj.


What Microwave Mania Missed
LEAD: WHEN Barbara Boynton and John Odom cook a holiday dinner, it is no slapdash affair.
There is a huge goose, sausage- and-chestnut dressing, carrots, brussels sprouts, all kinds of traditional accoutrements.
Cookware of every type comes into play - except one.
There is not a piece of microwave cookware in sight.


HOT STUFF
LEAD: DAVID CAMERON: AT THE END of his spring showing, the models led 26-year-old David Cameron across the stage.
He had a big smile on his handsome face and for good reason: the audience was clapping, stamping and hollering approval of his highly shaded, sharply styled designs.
After two years in business, Cameron is on his way to becoming a major American talent.


Confessed Bandit From Harvard
LEAD: ''By the way, I've done some armed robberies.''


Missile Fire Inquiry
LEAD: Investigators looking into an MX missile fire that killed five workers at a Morton Thiokol plant here are examining the possibility that static electricity may have ignited the blaze, a company official said.
A 23-foot MX segment containing 100,000 pounds of solid propellant burst into flames Tuesday after the fuel had been poured into the rocket segment, Thiokol said.


Ethics Commission Pressed for Results
LEAD: THE State Commission on Integrity in Government, barely a year old, is beginning a critical period that will very likely determine whether the New York City corruption scandals will prompt genuine reform in the business of politics or just another study to be filed and forgotten.


Question Of the Week; Who Will Win the Pro Football Playoffs?
LEAD: San Francisco will get it done.
The 49ers are the team on a roll.
But the playoff structure would be different without the three replacement games.
Also, since the draft is determined by final record, the replacement games will change the draft order, in turn affecting future team quality.
These unfortunate facts cloud the Niners' run at the title.


DATA BANK: January 3, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,835.9
$3,795.3
$3,683.3
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.3
2.5
2.9
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$141.9
$134.5
$130.2


Death Toll Climbs to 5 In a Shooting Rampage
LEAD: A man wounded in a shooting rampage has died, bringing the death toll to five in the apparent drug-related episode that covered two cities.


For Botha, What Price 'Peace' in South Africa?
LEAD: PREDICTING the course of events in South Africa has always been a dismal science.
Will it end in a bloody cataclysm, or will the country's leaders, black and white, renounce violence and reach an as yet improbable accommodation?


Question Of the Week; Who Will Win the Pro Football Playoffs?
LEAD: A great summation to this crazy football season would be a Colts and Saints matchup in the Super Bowl.
GARY M. LEON  East Brunswick, N.J.


Teachers Lose at Boston University
LEAD: Members of the faculty of Boston University have lost another round in their fight to prove they have less power than faculties at other schools.


When Actors Beat the Odds They Face
LEAD: I DO LIKE TO SEE A PERFORMER beat the system.


TESTING GLASNOST
LEAD: Though not an emigre, I, like Alex Goldfarb, am a biologist who has recently returned from a visit to a U.S.S.R.
Academy of Sciences Institute in Moscow, where I lectured and pursued a collaborative research project (financed by the United States National Science Foundation).
I, too, went there to measure firsthand the consequences of glasnost.


To the Victors
LEAD: THERE'S NOT MUCH GOLD IN them, actually.
According to International Olympic Committee regulations, the Olympic bronze medals shall be bronze, the silver medals silver, but each gold medal, weighing 193 grams in all, must contain just six grams of the stuff.
Mostly, the golds are made of sterling silver, too.


A City of the Future Grapples With A Troubled Present
LEAD: IN WHAT SEEMED LIKE A timely tribute to the main architect of this modernistic capital, just a week before Oscar Niemeyer's 80th birthday on Dec. 15, Brasilia was added to Unesco's list of sites that form part of the cultural patrimony of mankind.


Between Palestinians and Israelis, a U.S. Role
LEAD: To the Editor:


AIDS Patients Speak Through Art
LEAD: AIDS patients cannot always articulate what they are going through.


What's Behind Cheap-Fare Ads
LEAD: THE questions asked most insistently of this column concern the small ads in newspapers, including this one, that simply list cities in Europe and Asia and then prices.
At the bottom of the ad is the name of an organization, a phone number and sometimes an address.


MICHIGAN RALLIES TO TOP ALABAMA
LEAD: John Kolesar caught a 20-yard touchdown pass from Demetrius Brown with 50 seconds to play today, and Jamie Morris carried for a career-high 234 yards and three touchdowns, leading Michigan over Alabama, 28-24, in the Hall of Fame Bowl.


Price Ends Maine Effort To Buy a Pristine Lake
LEAD: The state of Maine has abandoned its effort to buy the land around Donnell Pond, one of 30 pristine north woods lakes that conservationists have been fighting to save from development, because it could not meet the developer's price.


KEYNESIAN CRUSADER: Robert Eisner; Why Not a Bigger Budget Deficit?
LEAD: AMONG economists, Robert Eisner stands out as the man who loves the Federal budget deficit.


THE DISTURBING ALLURE OF A GIACOMETTI 'WOMAN'
LEAD: WHAT MAKES A WORK OF art ''great''?
What makes a painting or sculpture more than the sum of its parts, more than a document of a person, period, position or style?
What is it about a work that makes people from other periods and places keep returning to it?


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending Dec. 19  MANHATTAN
Greenwich Village #1.1 million
17 Grove/100 Bedford Streets
4-bedroom, 3-bath, single family, 3-story, 1822, Federal frame house and 2-bedroom, 2-bath, single family, 2-story, 1833, frame house on adjoining lots, sold to same buyer; large kitchen, dining room, central chimney and 6 fireplaces on Grove Street; dining room large kitchen, on Bedford; landmark district; taxes $7,275 combined (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)


Vermont Town to Keep Cross Despite Adverse Court Ruling
LEAD: Town officials here say that an adverse court ruling will not keep them from leaving a cross atop a Christmas tree on the courthouse lawn until holiday decorations are dismantled next week.


Mandlikova Mix-Up
LEAD: ALTHOUGH she became an Australian citizen on Friday, Hana Mandlikova will still play for the Czechoslovak tennis team at the Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea, her father said yesterday.
But Mandlikova, ranked fifth in the world, told journalists in Brisbane, Australia, Friday that she ''will not play for Czechoslovakia again.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Come Back, Africa  Written, directed and produced by Lionel Rogosin.
Mystic Fire Video. 83 minutes. $60.


On the High Price of Awards for Innovation
LEAD: CHOREOGRAPHERS NEED more than ideas.
They need time, dancers, rehearsal space - and money.
Therefore, any attempt to help choreographers is welcome.
Yet, with help may come unwelcome complications.


CHICAGO'S GRUMPY GURU
LEAD: GAZING OUT AT Chicago from the back of a cab on a rainy December night, I was stunned by the city's awesome sprawl.


Boston Area Is Scarred By Arson and Sacrilege
LEAD: A fire ignited by a time bomb that exploded in a Nativity scene in Cambridge is the latest in a series of arson cases at churches and religious settings in eastern Massachusetts.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, JANUARY 3, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-15


U.S. and Angola: The Ties That Confound
LEAD: UNITED STATES diplomats are expected to visit here later this month in a new attempt to break the impasse in Angola's 12-year civil war.


Getting Credit For Life's Experiences
LEAD: AS A COLLEGE student in the late 1960's, Elliott J. Murphy was a classic flop. ''I hated it,'' said Mr.
Murphy, who has since become a successful rock musician and songwriter.
The two years he spent at a local community college, he said, were ''basically a way to keep out of the draft.'' Today, Mr.


WQXR WILL MAKE MAJOR ADJUSTMENTS IN ITS PROGRAMMING
LEAD: Radio station WQXR AM-FM, responding to competition for the New York region's classical music audience, will make major adjustments in its programming this month, reducing the amount of discussion and adding more music on its FM signal, according to station officials.


IT STILL AIN'T BROKE
LEAD: ONCE again this great nation of ours has avoided a major schism.
The center has held.
E pluribus unum and all that.


On Language; Nyet Problemy on Snow Jobs
LEAD: BRUSH UP YOUR RUSSIAN; detente is back.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  BRUBECK AND BRUBECK  Four years ago, Darius Brubeck joined the music faculty of the University of Natal in South Africa to teach jazz.
Since then, Durban has become a mecca for jazz buffs.


Artists' Profits
LEAD: To the Editor:


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Earmuff Exalted In Maine's Chill


GULOTTA FACING A FULL AGENDA OF CHALLENGES
LEAD: WHEN Thomas S. Gulotta was appointed Nassau County Executive a year ago, he inherited thorny problems ranging from solid-waste disposal to a dwindling water supply.


In the Office: See How They Run
LEAD: WHEN Toyota and General Motors opened their joint-venture auto plant in Fremont, Calif., in 1984, workers began each shift with several minutes of calisthenics accompanied by piped-in music.
Today the music remains, but nobody bothers with the calisthenics.


MYSTIC SHIP ON STATEHOOD STAMP
LEAD: IN her 80-year career, the whale ship Charles W. Morgan made 37 voyages, visiting every ocean.
Soon, small pictures of the historic vessel will be visiting many mailboxes.


Police Say Robbery Was Racially Motivated
LEAD: A 28-year-old white woman was forced into a van in Brooklyn by two black men and robbed on Thursday in what the police yesterday called a racially motivated incident.


West Germans Are Moving to Center Stage, Reluctantly
LEAD: THE long-dormant tectonic plates of European politics and economics have shifted again, much to the discomfort of West Germany.
The changes have conspired to create pressure on the Government of Helmut Kohl to assume a role in the world commensurate with the country's economic and strategic importance - a position it has long been reluctant to accept.


Lunchroom Etiquette: It Improves With Age
LEAD: FROM THE AGE of 4, most children can recite the litany of good table manners: I won't talk with my mouth full.
I won't play with my food.
I won't put my elbows - or feet - on the table.


Plane Crash in Turkey Kills 16
LEAD: A West German charter plane carrying 16 people crashed in mountainous countryside near the western coast tonight.
Everyone aboard was believed to have been killed, the Anatolia news agency reported.


A Congressman, a Plane Ride and the Budget
LEAD: Buried deep in the catchall spending bill passed by Congress are two pointed swipes at the Pentagon's Defense Intelligence Agency.
One virtually invites the Defense Secretary to slash the agency's personnel budget; the other takes away two aircraft used at embassies around the world to fly ambassadors, military attaches and visitors.


American Oasis At Harry's Bar
LEAD: IN the first weeks after the liberation of Paris in 1944 an odd game of hide-and-seek involved the more intellectual American G.I.'s on leave there and Jean-Paul Sartre.
Highly literate soldiers made a practice of visiting the Cafe Deux Magots on the Left Bank of the Seine in search of Sartre, who was an habitue.


Two Commemoratives to Celebrate Statehood
LEAD: THE United States Postal Service will release two statehood issues in the next six days.
A Georgia statehood commemorative will be released Wednesday, to be followed Saturday by a Connecticut statehood commemorative.
Both stamps are part of a series of 13.
The series began last July with a Delaware issue to celebrate the bicentennial of that state's ratification of the United States


G. C. BRINK, EXECUTIVE, IS MARRIED TO JILL RUNDLE
LEAD: Jill Chaffee Rundle, a daughter of Joan Rundle of Southport, Conn., and Walter Clemo Rundle Jr. of Eustis, Fla., was married in Dorset, Vt., yesterday to G. Christopher Brink, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
L.
Brink of Coraopolis, Pa.
The Rev.
Hal C. Miller 3d performed the Congregational ceremony at the United Church of Dorset.


PREVENTING PIPES FROM FREEZING
LEAD: FROZEN plumbing is easily one of winter's worst household disasters.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  WINTER CHAMBER SERIES  There's nothing like good chamber music to chase away midwinter blues.
At least, that's what the programmers at the Islip Arts Council suggest.
So once again, the council has put together a series of free concerts for Sunday afternoons through March.
This month, the musicians will make music at the Bayard Cutting Arboretum in Oakdale; in February and March, the activity moves to another Oakdale site, Fortunoff Hall on the Dowling


NONFICTION
LEAD:  BELOW THE LINE.
Living Poor in America.
By Eugene Richards. (Consumers Union, Cloth, $32; Paper, $20.) People will be more concerned about poverty in America if they see its face up close.
That appears to be the premise that inspired Eugene Richards, an award-winning photographer, to put together this book, a collection of photographs and interviews documenting the hardship endured by 21 of the nation's 32.4 million poor people.


Hess Must Make Decisions
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


POLICE TAKE SIMPLE APPROACH IN TEST FOR DRUNKEN DRIVING
LEAD: A simple test for drunkenness while driving, introduced by the Federal Government four years ago, is being praised by police officials across the country.
However, a few officers find difficulty in its simplicity, which involves checking the suspect's gaze.


ARTIST PUTS MEMORIES OF VIETNAM ON CANVAS
LEAD: FOR 20 years, Richard Chamberlain did not speak of his experiences as a United States Marine during the Vietnam War.
This week, he will preside at the opening of an exhibit of 40 of his paintings that deal with the year he spent in Vietnam.


Art
LEAD: Inadvertently, and without benefit of a major retrospective, this is an excellent time to view and review the achievement of Alexander Calder.
At the Whitney Museum of American Art (945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, through Jan. 17), an exhibition of 14 works focuses on Calder's activities during the early 1930's.


A Tale of Two Strike-Tarnished Seasons
LEAD: I REMEMBER it vividly.
The Super Bowl ring that I promised to my father as a senior in high school suddenly appeared on the finger of John Riggins.


Paris Is Still Kicking
LEAD: LAURENCE FANON is backstage at the Lido, putting on her face.
She's tall and lithe, her eyes are huge and run several depths of blue.
Her father worked in the markets in the old Halles, she grew up in Montmartre, and now, lacing up her battered, steel-backed shoes, she's every inch the feisty, self-reliant Parisienne.


MARGARET HOLMES, A LAWYER, IS WED
LEAD: Margaret Keller Holmes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Keller 3d of Ridgewood, N.J., and Donald Alan Sperling, a son of Mrs.
Melville Tannenholz of New York and the late George Sperling, were married yesterday at the Anglers' Club of New York in Manhattan.
Duncan A. Fraser Jr., a justice of the Garden City (L.I.) Village


LAUTENBERG EMERGING FROM BRADLEY'S SHADOW
LEAD: HE'S THE man with no name, the other Senator from New Jersey.


PREVENTING PIPES FROM FREEZING
LEAD: FROZEN plumbing is easily one of winter's worst household disasters.


FICTION
LEAD:  NORTH OF YESTERDAY: Or, Flowers of Waz.
By Thomas McEvilley. (McPherson, Cloth, $20; Paper, $10.) Can we fault the art critic Thomas McEvilley for the preposterous ambition of ''North of Yesterday''?
He flings together the quick and the dead, urban derelicts and characters dreamed up (literally) from an anecdote of Herodotus, and indulges in an orgy of mythologizing - not to mention a mythologizing of orgy.


MOLLY PARKMAN TO MARRY PRIEST
LEAD: Mary Robinson Parkman, the director of St.
Andrew's Nursery School and Kindergarten in Murray Hill, N.J., and the Rev.
Alan C. French, the rector of St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Murray Hill, plan to be married Feb. 13.


'IT'S LIKE BEING LOST IN A DESERT'
LEAD: MORE than 144,000 women in Connecticut's cities, suburbs and rural areas have lost their main source of income, state officials say.
Five years ago, there were roughly 70,000 of these women, termed displaced homemakers.


Dance
LEAD: Martha Graham took on the gods and goddesses in her choreography, following which dance entered into a period of relative abstraction.
A program this week suggests that myths and the subconscious may be becoming popular once more as a subject for dances.
Marjorie Gamso, a postmodernist-era choreographer known for the resonant intensity of her dances, presents ''Her Thousand and One Nights'' at Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street, Friday through next


MISS OUTERBRIDGE ENGAGED TO WED R. S. MCMENAMIN
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Yeaton Duval Outerbridge of Smith's Parish, Bermuda, and Jamestown, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Whipple Outerbridge, to Robert Stout McMenamin, the son of Ann Stout McMenamin of Philadelphia and the late John Francis McMenamin.
The couple plan to marry in


U.S. Is Asking Charitable Groups To Assist the Disabled in Vietnam
LEAD: The United States has issued a report detailing Vietnam's need for charitable assistance and encouraging private organizations to provide the help.


Kodo Drummers Hone Bodies as Well as Skills
LEAD: A decade ago, the drummers of Sado Island in the Japan Sea whipped their bodies into shape for the Boston Marathon by making predawn runs along the island's snowbound roads.


Arbitration Time Gives Clubs Something to Fear
LEAD: STEVE CRAWFORD is a free agent, so he can't extend his record of five times filed and five times settled, but Phil Bradley can try for a third successive victory and Kevin McReynolds and Gary Pettis can try to break their two-year losing streaks.
Andre Dawson can try to break the bank.
It's salary arbitration time, which means clubs can start cringing because they have come to fear that procedure more than free agency.


Player of the Year
LEAD: AMONG top-ranked players, not one in a hundred is as active in bridge administration as he, or she, is at the card table.
When one of these rare mortals achieves a major success, it is time to cheer for dedicated enthusiasm has received a fitting reward.


Question Of the Week; Who Will Win the Pro Football Playoffs?
LEAD: In the A.F.C., Indianapolis and Houston lack experience.
Seattle has the talent but is missing chemistry.
Denver and Cleveland will play again for the title, but this time the Browns will win.


JENNIFER YOUNG IS WED TO PAUL D. SUNDMAN
LEAD: The marriage of Jennifer Ann Young, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Calvin Young of Colorado Springs, to Paul Damian Sundman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Sundman of West Hartford, Conn., took place yesterday at Emmanuel Episcopal Church in Middleburg, Va.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Mary Hansley, the rector.


'Beware the Ides of March'
LEAD:  CLEOPATRA  Directed by Cecil B. DeMille.
With Claudette Colbert (in photo), Warren William (in photo) and Henry Wilcoxon.
Goodtimes Home Video. 100 minutes. $9.95.


STATE ENFORCING CHILD SUPPORT
LEAD: STATE officials, using such methods as wage garnisheeing, property liens and the interception of Federal tax refunds, are becoming increasingly aggressive in their pursuit of child support payments.


Want Top Singers? Buy 'Em
LEAD: EVER SINCE THE RUDOLF BING ERA ENDED and the Metropolitan Opera was gradually taken over by its board of directors, company administrators have offered a flurry of excuses about their inability to cast as many superstar singers as veteran Met audiences were used to.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  The Word-Killer  In an encyclopedic novel that was a recent best seller in France, Georges Perec describes an unusual occupation.
This is from ''Life: A User's Manual'' (Godine).


DR. YEOMANS TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic H. Yeomans of Morristown, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Susan Mary Yeomans, to Dr.
Thomas Francis Breen Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Breen of Burlington, Vt.
Dr.
Yeomans, who graduated from Princeton University and the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, is a chief resident in ophthalmology at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


Rent Vouchers
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Patch for Rose
LEAD: WHEN workers ripped up the nine-year-old artificial turf at Riverfront Stadium two weeks ago to clear the way for the installation of a new surface, they were instructed by Cincinnati Reds officials to save one piece of the carpet - and of baseball history.
That was the patch where Pete Rose's 4,192d hit landed on Sept.


Bulls Run Away From Nets
LEAD: Dave Corzine and John Paxson came off the bench to combine for 22 points during a 25-6 second-quarter spurt tonight as the Chicago Bulls ended a five-game losing streak with a 116-93 victory over the Nets.


Question Of the Week; Who Will Win the Pro Football Playoffs?
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers will win easily.
Montana and Rice are the best quarterback-receiver duet in the league.
JON GELB  New York


SIGN LANGUAGE GETS RECOGNITION
LEAD: AS HIGH SCHOOL students in California start selecting classes next fall, some will be able to get credit for an unusual language course -American Sign Language.
The addition of the language of the deaf as an acceptable alternative to the state's requirement that students complete a course in either a foreign language or visual or performing arts will take effect July 1.


Staying Out
LEAD: Armand Therrien, a murderer who escaped from a Massachusetts prison three weeks ago, has apologized for his early departure.
But he also said he would not be coming back.
The state Correction Commissioner, Michael V. Fair, disclosed last week that he had received the apology in a letter from Mr.
Therrien, a former state trooper who in 1975 was sentenced to serve two consecutive life terms for killing his business partner and a Westwood police officer.


THE NOBEL PRIZE-WINNER NOBODY KNOWS
LEAD: THE announcement that Joseph Brodsky, an exiled Russian poet now an American citizen, won the Nobel Prize for Literature coincided with the course ''Inside Gorbachev's Russia'' that my husband and I were teaching at the Scarsdale Adult School this fall.
I had already planned to lecture on this greatest living Russian poet and had been interested in him for a long time.


PLANNED BRIDGE IS LOWER AND CHEAPER, BUT FOES FIGHT ON
LEAD: EVERYONE agrees that something has to be done about the bridge between Waterford and East Lyme.
Just what is to be done is the question.


A BLOSSOMING OF CREATIVITY
LEAD: THE Christmas tree has been hurled out in the back of the property, where it will gradually turn brown and become a haven for birds and other animals braving the blasts of winter.
The children have just left amid hugs and honks of the car horns.
My husband beats a hasty path to the television set to catch the last seconds of the football game, and


Whalers Tie Devils With Help of Liut
LEAD: Mike Liut, playing in his 500th National Hockey League game, made 11 saves in the third period and two more in overtime tonight as the Hartford Whalers hung on for a 1-1 tie with the New Jersey Devils.


Gephardt Jet Loses Pressure
LEAD: A United Airlines jet carrying Representative Richard A. Gephardt suddenly lost cabin pressure today, forcing passengers to use oxygen masks and the pilot to return to O'Hare International Airport here.
The Missouri Democrat and several members of his Presidential campaign staff were among the 37 passengers and five crew members on United Flight 401 from Chicago to Omaha.


Introducing The 'Advid'
LEAD: MAPLE SYRUP, knitting, a miniature bedroom, a novel, pottery, artwork, slides and photographs are among the supplementary materials sent by applicants these days to college admissions offices.


New Act, Old Tragedy
LEAD: The general strike by almost 750,000 Israeli Arabs was not only an impressive tour de force but a remarkable display of solidarity with their compatriots in the occupied territories of Gaza and the West Bank.
It was also the culmination of a slow, painful process of community building, carried out during 40 years of living in the


The Parents' Place: Right in the School
LEAD: EARLY ONE brisk autumn morning, just as the school buses were beginning to roll, three members of the Parent Team, part of School District One in New York City, jumped into a four-door sedan and sped off to Public School 188.
After stopping briefly to check in with the principal, they charged up five flights of stairs and burst into the computer room where they found exactly what they were looking for: parents and students learning how to run computer programs - together.


Prospects
LEAD:  Global Competition


COCKNEY CHARISMA
LEAD: I became hooked on Hoskins when I saw him in ''Flickers'' on Masterpiece Theater.
Bob Hoskins does not have to concern himself unduly with people ''forgetting about him'' in a few years' time.
He has been ''flavor-of-the-month'' with my family since 1982, and this predilection shows no sign of abating.


ANTI-MISSILE LASER GIVEN FIRST TESTS FOR USE IN SPACE
LEAD: The military has begun top-secret ground tests of a compact, powerful laser that the Reagan Administration wants launched into space in the early 1990's as part of the effort to build a defense against nuclear missiles.


The Clarinet Returns to Jazz
LEAD: JAZZ CLARINETISTS, A RARE breed since the 1940's, are making a comeback.
Two recently released albums, ''Southern Bells'' by the Clarinet Summit and Hamiet Bluiett's ''The Clarinet Family,'' both Polygram imports on the Black Saint label, document the work of no less than 12 contemporary jazz clarinetists.


Brainstorming Begins on a Cup Defender
LEAD: Time is precious these days as planners for the San Diego Yacht Club scurry to come up with an innovative boat design for its America's Cup defense against New Zealand.


Rochambeau Camped Here: Homes on Hill
LEAD: On July 2, 1781, General Comte de Rochambeau chose a 60-acre hillside in Ridgefield, Conn., to encamp his French Army troops aiding the American colonists because it afforded a strategic view of the British camp in New York.
John W. Ryan looked over the same border 206 years later, saw the corporate headquarters of Westchester County, and decided that a 17-home development on the same hillside would have a market.


TV Sports; Bowl Coverage Offered Too Much of a Good Thing
LEAD: IN the end, the winner was Overload.


Quit Sabotaging The Arias Plan
LEAD: The bankruptcy of United States policy in Nicaragua is worsened by the weakness of Congress in resisting that policy and by the trickery of the State Department in promoting it.


WENDY SNOW IS ENGAGED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Norman L. Snow of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Wendy Sheridan Snow to J. Christopher O'Keeffe, a son of Vera Ann O'Keeffe of New Vernon, N.J., and John O'Keeffe of Sea Girt, N.J.
Miss Snow, a graduate of Lynchburg College, is an administrative assistant at Executive Health Examiners in New York.


Guinea-Bissau Tries to Deprogram a Popular Cult
LEAD: From across this West African seaport, crowds converge daily on a modest tin-roofed house.
Stevedores from the docks, smartly dressed office secretaries, market women with babies slung on their backs - they all come seeking medical advice from the ''Yank Yank.''


Reagan and Mulroney Sign Pact To Cut U.S.-Canada Trade Curbs
LEAD: President Reagan and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada signed a landmark trade agreement yesterday that would eliminate tariffs and lower other barriers to trade and investment before the end of the century.


STATE CRACKS DOWN ON KOSHER CHEATS
LEAD: THE state's Division of Consumer Affairs is sending a clear message to kosher food cheaters that they face stiff penalties.


A NIGHT OF DANCE IN LAKEVILLE
LEAD: CULTURE is alive and well in the Connecticut Berkshires.


The Scholastic Empire
LEAD: LAST AUTUMN Junior Scholastic magazine celebrated its 50th year in print - a life that began with reports about a new Supreme Court Justice named Hugo Black and a war between Japan and China.
But for the magazine's parent, Scholastic Inc., the anniversary was no time for nostalgia.


Warsaw Pact and Comecon: Formal Ties
LEAD: The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon) and the Warsaw Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance (the Warsaw Pact) were established to improve economic and military cooperation among the Soviet Union and its allies.


The Spinoff Puzzle for Shareholders
LEAD: WHEN a corporate management decides that a subsidiary no longer fits into its grand design for the future, one solution is to spin off the unit to the company's shareholders.
For the company, one advantage of such a transaction is that unlike an outright sale, it would probably not be subject to Federal income taxes.


MEDICARE BENEFITS: ERRONEOUS ASSUMPTION
LEAD: LINDA ADDIS of Clifton made a common mistake several years ago: She assumed that Medicare would take care of her parents in their old age.


Italy's Aged Balsamic Vinegar
LEAD: IN Modena, until not long ago, a girl could hope to find a husband only if she could make pasta and if her dowry included a little barrel of balsamic vinegar.
Eating well is very important in Modena, hometown of Luciano Pavarotti and Ferrari cars, as it is in next-door Bologna and throughout the region of Emilia-Romagna, the gastronomic heartland of Italy.


LOVE WITH A WHIFF OF THE K.G.B.
LEAD:  RED DOLL  By Juan Luis Cebrian.
Translated by Philip W. Silver. 162 pp.
New York: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $15.95.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. We have a brick patio with a northern exposure, and there is a problem with mold and mildew forming on these bricks.
We have to scrub them several times a year with bleach to remove the growth.
Do you have any suggestions for preventing this growth?


A New Year's Resolution That Counts
LEAD: For most New York children, Christmas and New Year's are dramatic holidays that may entail days of feasting, gift giving and family celebration.
But for thousands of homeless children, the holidays mean only slight variation in a grim routine - a token gift from some charity's Santa Claus, glimpses of New


Record Shops
LEAD: To the Editor: Re ''Shopping in London for Record Bargains'' by Leo Haber (Travel, Nov. 29): We are frequent travelers to London and recognized most of the shops mentioned.
We would, however, like to bring to your readers' attention another.


NOW THE SEASON'S OVER, SETTLE FOR SOME LESS-WEIGHTY FARE
LEAD: IS it time for the great retrenchment?
The last crumbs of christmas fruitcake have been discarded, the holiday eggnog is now a memory and the bathroom scale's indicator is making the inevitable creep upward.


Mullin Belongs With the Knicks
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  Top Dogs  WHEN Tony Bullock, the incoming East Hampton Town Supervisor, was still in the Suffolk County Legislature and gave out his Thanksgiving ''Stuffed Turkey Awards'' for waste in county government, he included in the list $125,000 that had been allocated for ''a police dog academy.'' The Suffolk County


In Historic Roslyn Village: Something New
LEAD: In Roslyn Village, where residents stubbornly preserve what is old, 25 new homes will be built across the street from the Bryant Library, the proudest symbol of the village's past.
The library, on East Broadway, contains the writings and memorabilia of William Cullen Bryant, publisher of The New York Post and the Nassau County port's most famous 19th-century resident.


R. S. LINCOLN, STOCKBROKER, IS MARRIED TO ANITA CHILEN
LEAD: Anita Marie Chilen, the president and a co-owner of Charles Sumner Inc., women's clothing stores in Boston and Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married yesterday at St.
Ignatius Roman Catholic Church in Chestnut Hill to Robin S. Lincoln, a stockbroker at Tucker, Anthony &amp; R. L. Day in Boston.
The Rev.
James


About Men; Out of Depression
LEAD: THOUGH I HAD PERENNIALLY felt anxiety during midwinter's failing light, the nadir of my depression came the spring I contemplated killing myself.
That was nearly two years ago.
Exhausted from insomnia and unable to function, I left my job before noon one day and went home to the suburbs.


FINDING THE SECRETS OF A LONG LIFE
LEAD: THE deed is done.
Upon the doctor's insistence, we have placed my husband's stepmother in a nursing home near us.


Ballet: 2 Role Debuts In Joffrey 'Nutcracker'
LEAD: THE Joffrey Ballet's new Victorian production of ''The Nutcracker'' is so pretty a spectacle and is performed with such liveliness that it seems almost like splitting hairs to talk of mundane things like role debuts.
On Friday at City Center, however, Leslie Carothers and Ashley Wheater danced the Sugar Plum Fairy and the Nutcracker Prince for the first time in New York.


Wearable Mandalas
LEAD: REMEMBER the mandala?
Remember the 60's?
Mandala-painted beach cover-ups known as pareos may inspire good vibrations in the new year.
These hand-painted five-foot squares of silk chiffon are the creations of David Picon, who lives and works on Saint-Barthelemy in the French West Indies, as well as in New


INQUIRY INTO BUSH SEEN ON IRAN SALES
LEAD: The special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair is expected to submit questions to Vice President Bush about his role in the sale of American weapons to Iran and is considering requesting an interview with Mr.
Bush, according to Reagan Administration officials.


PATRICIA A. GALLAGHER TO WED GREGORY RYAN
LEAD: The engagement of Patricia A. Gallagher to Gregory A. Ryan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur F. Ryan of Morristown, N.J., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mr.
Edward F. X. Gallagher of Newburgh, N.Y.
The couple plan to marry in June.


From the Ninth Hole To the Appeals Court
LEAD: After a 22-year-old court battle over errant tee shots, the Quaboag Country Club in Monson has agreed to shorten its ninth hole in hopes of keeping golf balls off the property of John and Miriam Fenton.


When TV Focuses On Itself
LEAD: TELEVISION NEWS IS A RICH SUBJECT.
IT IS SO big, so pervasive and, yes, so intrusive that you can't help but worry about it.
A lot of people do worry about it.
Academics write books and articles.


Stunning Playing of a Wonderful Period Piece
LEAD: THE COMPACT DISK REVOLUTION reminds many old-timers of the early days of the LP.
Starting around 1950, dozens, then scores, then hundreds of small companies started putting out a kind of product, especially in classical music, that the major companies would not touch.
Suddenly we had a plethora of Baroque music.


GROUP TO BATTLE ARMY DAM PROJECT
LEAD: A State Assemblyman, joined by environmentalists, has announced the formation of an organization to stop a $48 million Army Corps of Engineers project because it would flood part of Letchworth State Park.


Housing Bias Cited As U.S. Sues Agency In New Jersey Town
LEAD: The Justice Department has filed suit against the Long Branch Housing Authority, charging the agency with discrimination and maintaining segregated apartment projects.


Increasingly, Court Has Last Word on City Hall's Rulings
LEAD: IF you can't fight City Hall, take it to court.
Increasingly, that is the tack being taken by groups frustrated by the normal political process in New York City.
And in resorting to litigation, they are winning some victories.


NOW THE SEASON'S OVER, SETTLE FOR SOME LESS-WEIGHTY FARE
LEAD: IS it time for the great retrenchment?
The last crumbs of christmas fruitcake have been discarded, the holiday eggnog is now a memory and the bathroom scale's indicator is making the inevitable creep upward.


THEY UNCILIVIZED EACH OTHER
LEAD:  UNUSUAL COMPANY  By Margaret Erhart. 225 pp. New York: E. P. Dutton. $17.95.


WESTCHESTER JOURNAL
LEAD:  CALLING ALL VOICES  Those who would like to become ''Messiah'' participants rather than ''Messiah'' spectators by the time Easter rolls around might get in touch with the Westchester Chorale.
The community singing group directed by Daniel Paget is enlisting new members.
Three evenings of auditions will be held weekly in conjuction with the first rehearsals of the new year, beginning at 7:45 P.M.


DAZZLING THE KILLJOYS
LEAD:  THE LIFE OF KENNETH TYNAN  By Kathleen Tynan.
Illustrated. 597 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $22.95.


Executive Is Appointed Yonkers City Manager
LEAD: The Yonkers City Council today appointed Neil J. DeLuca, a former Yonkers youth services director, as city manager.
He is to serve until a nationwide search for a permanent manager is completed.


Merle Evans Is Dead; Former Band Leader At Ringling Brothers
LEAD: Merle Evans, the ''Toscanini of the Big Top'' who for 50 years thrilled crowds as he led the blaring band of the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus, died Thursday in Sarasota, Fla., the winter home of the circus.
He was 96 years old.


MINNESOTAN AIMS TO BOOST FAITH OF CITY
LEAD: Dr.
Richard R. Green declared yesterday that his basic goals as the next schools chancellor of New York City would be to raise students' academic performance and to restore public confidence in the nation's largest school system.


Islanders Triumph, Somehow
LEAD: No one could quite describe how the goal was scored.
Steve Konroyd bounced the puck into the zone, somehow it bounced back out in front of the net, and then without ceremony, Pat LaFontaine bounced it into the open goal.


SARAH GILLILAND AND DANIEL P. LAWLER, AN ARCHITECT, ARE WED IN CONNECTICUT
LEAD: Sarah Wheeler Gilliland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel A. Gilliland of Fairfield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Daniel Paul Lawler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Traugott Lawler of New Haven.
The Rev.
George Coxe Bland, a Congregational minister, and the Rev.
Richard Russell, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Greenfield Hill Congregational


Piliing Surprise Upon Surprise
LEAD: BY defeating John Nunn in their tie-break match in Budapest, Lajos Portisch became the 14th qualifier for the elimination matches to pick the 1990 challenger for the world championship.


MAGGIE FERDON WED TO JOHN W. COOLEY
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Old Mission Dolores in San Francisco, Maggie Ferdon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Jay Ferdon of San Francisco, was married yesterday to John Withrow Cooley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel P. Cooley of West Hartford, Conn., and Nantucket, Mass.
Msgr.
Edward M. Dullea and the Rev.


SAYING HELLO TO MY TEACHER OF THE 1940'S
LEAD: ONE Sunday I paid a visit to my fifth-grade teacher, Sister Devota Maria, a nun I had't seen since 1945, when I graduated from St.
Pascal Babylon School in St.
Albans, New York City.
It was the ending to a rather unplanned day.


Oiler Fans Can't Believe They've Got a Gusher
LEAD: DON'T worry.
You're not the only one who's surprised the Houston Oilers are in the National Football League playoffs.


STAR WARS
LEAD: In his article ''Star Wars Is Coming, but Where Is It Going?'' (Dec. 6), William J. Broad repeats a common fallacy: ''nuclear weapons cannot be uninvented.''


CAN KEAN DEACTIVATE PARKWAY-TOLL BOMB?
LEAD: GOVERNOR KEAN declared a misdeal last week in the New Jersey Highway Authority's game plan that calls for raising tolls on the Garden State Parkway by April.


Kidnapping by Extremists Stirs India
LEAD: The incident started when a group of high-level local officials was traveling in an unarmed convoy through a heavily forested area in southern India.
Suddenly a gang of radicals emerged from the woods and took the travelers hostage.


Comings &amp; Goings
LEAD: THE Olympic 100-meter champion, Evelyn Ashford, who holds the world record of 10.75 seconds in the event as well as indoor bests of 5.74 for 50 yards and 6.54 for 60 yards, will compete in the United States Olympic Invitational meet at Byrne Meadowlands Arena Feb. 13.
The 30-year-old Ashford, who won the United States Olympic Invitational in 1986 after the birth of her daughter but missed most of last year because of an injury, will run in the 55-meter dash against the defending champion, Gwen Torrence, and Merlene Ottey, the bronze medalist in the 100 meters at the 1984 Olympics.


Corrupt Conference
LEAD: The Senate Ethics Committee can no longer close its eyes to the political fixes that have been infecting the closed-door Senate-House conferences.


Gore Receives 2 Endorsements From Carolina
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr., who has staked his Presidential campaign on the support of the South, picked up two political prizes in North Carolina today, winning the endorsements of Senator Terry Sanford and former Gov.
Jim Hunt.


AT THE SAATCHI COLLECTION, A THIN SHOW OF 'NY ART'
LEAD: ONE OF THE WORLD'S MOST beautiful exhibition spaces is the one that was confected not so long ago by the English architect Max Gordon for the Saatchi Collection here.
It is a mysterious space, in which level is played against level and shape against shape.
It is, in fact, something of a thinking man's maze.


Travel Agents
LEAD: To The Editor: With reference to the Practical Traveler (Nov. 29) concerning travel agents: I am an agent who happily books leisure travel, and I would like to point out a few additional services a good travel agent can offer.


For the Retailers, A So-So Season
LEAD: Retailers' Christmas sales were nothing to brag about, but the modest increases were enough to allay the worst fears of merchants.
Gains were expected to average out to about 3 percent, which is really no gain at all when an inflation rate of more than 4 percent is factored in.
But things could have been a lot worse in a year that saw a dizzying tumble in the stock market, and, in fact, the biggest sales gains came from affluent shoppers.


LITERARY FEMINISM COMES OF AGE
LEAD: In my years of undergraduate and graduate study of literature, I have yet to meet a student or professor who would disagree with the point made in Elizabeth Kolbert's article ''Literary Feminism Comes of Age'' (Dec. 6) that we have a legacy of neglected or forgotten female writers.
However, sexual politics has less to do with who makes the course syllabus than do the practical constraints of the academic year.


HEADING WEST
LEAD: THERE IS A FELLOW who drives around San Francisco with a bumper sticker that says, Il faut boire du pinot noir: ''Drink pinot noir.'' Who would argue with that?
To paraphrase Will Rogers, I've never met a man who didn't like pinot noir.


22 Are Killed in Raid on Mozambique Train
LEAD: At least 22 people were killed last week when a group of right-wing guerrillas derailed and plundered a train packed with migrant workers returning from South Africa, the national press agency reported today.


Court Blocks Use of Illicit Assets for Legal Fees
LEAD: A sharply divided Federal appeals court has ruled that the Government may in effect prevent defendants from hiring the lawyers of their choice by freezing defendants' assets in racketeering and drug cases.


Car Lynched on 10th Street
LEAD: For residents of Manhattan's East 10th Street, Christmas this year meant turkeys, presents - and the burglar alarm on a fancy European sports car, which blasted off and wailed for four hours.


Moving In
LEAD: Never one to duck trouble, Ariel Sharon has now set up housekeeping in the middle of it.
Recently, in what was criticized by many as a provocative gesture, the pugnacious former general, now Israel's Minister of Industry and Trade, took an apartment in the Moslem quarter of Jerusalem.
After Mr.
Sharon spent his first night in the apartment last week, insisting he was promoting ''integration'' of Arabs and Jews, Mayor Teddy Kollek said the move was ''counterproductive.


Soviet Sale Of Space Photos
LEAD: WHEN the Soviet Union offered to sell to the public photos of the earth taken by its space satellites, the United States Geological Survey expressed keen interest.


Cutting Back
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch, who appears to believe he cannot own too many communications companies, has been told that he does.
Under temporary waivers from the Federal Communications Commission, the Australian-born publishing magnate has been allowed since 1986 to own The New York Post and The Boston Herald while simultaneously operating television stations in those cities.


FREE CREDIT IN BUSINESS FOR B.A.'S
LEAD: IN A MOVE to make its liberal arts students more attractive to potential employers, the University of Rochester is spicing up its liberal arts curriculum with a series of ''practical'' business-related courses.
The new program is bound to be alluring to students as well - the university is giving the courses away.


Question Of the Week; Who Will Win the Pro Football Playoffs?
LEAD: In this bizarre season, who else can win but the Saints?
CHRIS LEAVEY  Jamaica Estates, N.Y.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Making Mr.
Right  Directed by Susan Seidelman.
Starring Ann Magnuson and John Malkovich. 1987.
HBO Video. 101 minutes. $79.95.


DEIRDRE CONNOLLY PLANS TO MARRY OLAF SPORNS
LEAD: Deirdre Connolly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard J. Connolly of Locust Valley, L.I., and Olaf Sporns, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl L. Sporns of Kiel, West Germany, plan to marry in June, the future bride's parents have announced.


NOW THE SEASON'S OVER, SETTLE FOR SOME LESS-WEIGHTY FARE
LEAD: IS it time for the great retrenchment?
The last crumbs of christmas fruitcake have been discarded, the holiday eggnog is now a memory and the bathroom scale's indicator is making the inevitable creep upward.


Hawaiians Clean Up As Flooding Recedes
LEAD: Flooding caused by torrential rain abated today on the eastern side of the island of Oahu, and most of the 2,800 evacuated residents returned home to clean up at least $29 million in damage.


When Shopping For Videos, Beware 87's Dogs
LEAD: THE DECENT THING TO DO about the year's bad films used to be to let them go quietly.
But that was in the days when a movie of no merit could be counted on to disappear into the oblivion from whence it came.
Those days are gone, as anyone who regularly visits video stores must surely realize.
It is now possible for a terrible film to resurface in a nice package that bears no memory-jogging information, just an indistinct title and the name of a star or two.


Doing Business, Doing Good
LEAD: Recent insider trading scandals have again focused attention on violations of the law and of the code of business ethics.
But which business leaders - and companies - are conducting themselves with the highest level of propriety?
Business Forum editor Joel Kurtzman sampled the opinions of seven experts on business and ethics.


How 'The Chosen' Became a Musical
LEAD: ''THIS HAS COST ME A novel,'' says Chaim Potok. ''I should be working on it right now.
I really should.
And I will never write it.
You have a finite life to live, so that the price I've paid is a novel, and I don't know whether it is or is not worth it.
Because I don't have that novel and I will never have that novel.


COMPUTER DELIVERED
LEAD: There is a regular chorus of beeps and bleets emanating from one Mount Vernon home today -sounds reverberating in Bronxville and in New Rochelle.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: A POSITIVE attitude is synonymous with the new year.
The two go together like bagels and lox, corned beef and cabbage, toasts and champagne.
The only difference is that unlike the other pairings, the positive attitude and the new year don't stay married for long.
They separate after the first few days and there's usually a divorce within the month.


Keep Masters In New York
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


WHOSE TOWN IS IT, ANYWAY?
LEAD: I RECENTLY attended a performance of that hoary chestnut of the American theater, ''Our Town,'' at the Long Wharf in New Haven.
The Thornton Wilder play had first performance a half century ago, on Jan. 22, 1938, but it remains a classic because of its timeless emphasis on the values of small-town life.


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


GREAT EXHORTATIONS: BOOKS WITH RESOLVE
LEAD: The start of every year invites new resolve about how we will improve ourselves.
The start of every fourth year invites new resolve about how we will improve the nation.
Soon many of us will go on diets, and many of us will begin listening in earnest to what the Presidential candidates have to say.


FALL VICTIMS NEED PROMPT TREATMENT
LEAD: This letter is in response to an article by Elex Ingersoll titled ''How I Was Rescued, Like It or Not''  [ Opinion Page, Nov. 22 ] .


'VIOLENCE IS THE ONLY WAY'
LEAD:  THE BAADER-MEINHOF GROUP  The Inside Story of a Phenomenon.
By Stefan Aust.
Translated by Anthea Bell.
Illustrated. 560 pp.
Topsfield, Mass.: The Bodley Head/Salem House. $21.95.


Limiting The Impact Of Progress
LEAD: ONE of the delights of owning property along a back country road is the appearance of the road itself.
Frequently, that road will be framed on either side by hand-built stone walls.
It may be narrow and winding, allowing mature shade trees on either side to form a canopy across the middle.


IS WALL STREET AS BAD AS IT'S PAINTED?
LEAD: BEFORE THE STOCK MARKET collapse of all too recent memory, the fashion designers got it wrong: hemlines kept climbing, allegedly a sign of good times to come.
But the creative artists of stage, screen and literature got it right: They saw the boom, the big bull market, the age of the yuppies coming to an end, to be brought down by pride, lust, greed and other deadly sins.


General Is Ordered Tried in Brazilian Killing
LEAD: A Brazilian judge has ordered that a retired four-star general be tried for the 1982 murder of a journalist in what could become the first prosecution of a senior army officer since civilian rule returned here almost three years ago.


BENEFITS FOR WINTER NIGHTS
LEAD: Savoyard Sing-Along Jan. 6 -- An opportunity to join in the musical shenanigans of Gilbert and Sullivan will come after a performance of ''the Yeoman of the Guard,'' the spoof of English manners and morals, at symphony space, 2587 Broadway (95th Street).
After the 8 P.M. performance there will be a sing-along with the 30-member cast.


A Needed Rest
LEAD: 'The French have a saying that the cemeteries are full of indispensable people. . . .
If I come back and function better, it is better for the university.'


U.S. Army Puts the New Foot Soldier Back on His Feet
LEAD: ''THE strategic realities are now changing,'' said the briefing officer at the Training and Doctrine Command here, which does long-range thinking for the Army.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. We have a brick patio with a northern exposure, and there is a problem with mold and mildew forming on these bricks.
We have to scrub them several times a year with bleach to remove the growth.
Do you have any suggestions for preventing this growth?


Travel Agents
LEAD: To the Editor: Certainly, you need a travel agent.
But Betsy Wade should not insult her readers.
She says, ''Unless you enjoy doing jigsaw puzzles in solid colors,'' you should use a travel agent to put together an independent tour.


INDIAN RESERVATION TO GET CLEAN WATER
LEAD: FOR the 250 Indians on the Poospatuck Reservation on the Mastic-Shirley peninsula, clean water is finally on its way.
With Federal money through the Clean Water Act of Suffolk County and community development funds from Brookhaven Town, the reservation will be hooked up to public water by spring - a project that will cost $170,000.


NOW THE SEASON'S OVER, SETTLE FOR SOME LESS-WEIGHTY FARE
LEAD: IS it time for the great retrenchment?
The last crumbs of christmas fruitcake have been discarded, the holiday eggnog is now a memory and the bathroom scale's indicator is making the inevitable creep upward.


Film
LEAD: Before the New Year and new attractions overwhelm the past, the opportunity exists in the post-holiday lull to catch up on some movies that arrived amid no great hoopla and boasted no big names but laid their claim to audiences with sheer excellence.


Exploring Puerto Rico From the Ground Down
LEAD: PUERTO RICO'S beaches, historic fortresses, rain forest and charming old capital have long been lures for visitors.
But its newest point of interest isn't new at all.
It is a prehistoric network of caves with an underground river running through it, a hidden, wondrous world in the depths of the earth.


The Baby-Boomers Change Courses
LEAD: ANN HOROWITZ, 27 years old, traveled across the nation and abroad for several years after college, trying her hand at being a chef but finally deciding she would never be as good as she wanted to be.
Instead she turned to graduate school at New York University and discovered that she greatly enjoyed the field of public policy.


The Housing Crunch Moves on Campus
LEAD: AMID THE burst of question marks that traditionally rain down on the freshman heading off to college, the dorm room often emerges as the one certainty - reassuringly available, universally inhospitable.
Parents in tow, the car trunk a tangle of quilts, extension cords and Impressionist posters, the fresh college student arrives on campus, greeted by an overly cheerful junior who motions toward the new home.


Record Shops
LEAD: To the Editor: I enjoyed touring the London record shops vicariously with Mr.
Haber.
I spend a lot of time in the jazz specialty shops every time I'm in London.


Bronx Murder Suspect Stabbed on Rikers I.
LEAD: A Bronx man charged with the shooting death of a 5-year-old boy was stabbed while in protective custody in the New York City jail at Rikers Island but was not seriously injured, a prison spokeswoman said.


Dukakis Vows Push on Health
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, stung by the refusal of Statehouse leaders to take up a universal health insurance bill in the waning days of the 1987 session, pledged Wednesday to bring the measure back next session.


Is Canned Laughter a Joke?
LEAD: IN THE INSULAR WORLD OF television comedy, something curious is happening: On a number of new shows, no one is laughing.


Dutchess Development: Harmony Reigns
LEAD: Joshua Schulman, project manager for Twin Creeks Village, said the architecture of the East Fishkill, N.Y., development would reflect ''the essence of a New England farmhouse and a more formal colonial home.'' He meant not only the 424 town houses planned for the 110-acre project, but also the 54 condominiums for older people and a 24,000-square-foot office and retail building.


Artists' Profits
LEAD: To the Editor:


A SURVIVAL HANDBOOK FOR THE NOVICE GRASS-ROOTS POLITICIAN
LEAD: ELECTION Day has come and gone.
And like a birthday when you are more than 40 years old, another one will be around sooner than you expect -or desire.
For the intrepid, the politically committed or the just plain masochistic who are planning a grass-roots campaign this year, here is a guide to survival, based on first-hand experience.


WALL: A TOWNSHIP OF MANY FACES
LEAD: THIS Monmouth County township has a rich legacy waiting to be written about, including the settlement of its westernmost village (Allenwood) and at least two Revolutionary War heroes.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: The Bishops; An Unseemly Battle
LEAD: ON the surface, it was a fight about condoms, an unsightly brawl on an unseemly topic for the Princes of the Roman Catholic Church.
But at the heart of the matter of last week's debate over the new AIDS policy of the American bishops was a long-simmering struggle between conservative and liberal forces in the


Shades of Sputnik: Who's Ahead in Space?
LEAD: ECHOES of 1957 reverberated from the Soviet Union last week to a snow-coated rocket test site in Utah.
The space age is now 30 years old, moon landings have come and gone and a whole generation has grown up with the reality of space travel.
Yet there was something about the triumphant return of a record-setting Soviet astronaut, and another setback to the grounded space shuttle, that was reminiscent of the grim time following the first Sputnik launching in


Nelson Hunt Honored
LEAD: HE won the Hollywood Invitational with Rivlia, the San Juan Capistrano with Rosedale, the Sunset Handicap with Swink, the Laurel Futurity with Antigua, the Flamingo with Talinum, and the Santa Barbara and Santa Ana Handicaps with the 4-year-old mare Reloy.
And when the victories were totaled up for the year, Nelson Bunker Hunt's horses had 323 of them, so it was no wonder that he was named the winner of the 1987 Eclipse Award as outstanding breeder.


Mitterrand, in Survey, Outpoints All Comers
LEAD: Two polls made public this week brought some good news for France's Socialist President, Francois Mitterrand, and bad news for its conservative Prime Minister, Jacques Chirac.


CHILDREN'S BOOK PUT ON STAGE
LEAD: WEARY, forgetful and slow-moving, Penelope, a fairy godmother, is up for retirement.
All she needs to reach it is to grant one more wish.
But by the time she remembers just who is wishing what - and gets to them - ''they've already gotten what they want.''


Pressure and Pride for Hebert
LEAD: A CAJUN quarterback from a small town in Louisiana may not evoke the most flattering image in some of the more sophisticated towns around the National Football League.
In New Orleans, however, the return of Bobby Hebert in 1985 was a cause for celebration, like discovering another oil field or returning from a fishing trip with the nets bulging.


SOVIET BLOC FEELS THE REINS LOOSENING
LEAD: A few days after Rumanian workers rioted in November in the city of Brasov, a senior Soviet official in Moscow was asked how the Kremlin would respond if the unrest 120 miles from the Soviet Union's western border got out of control.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 3, 1988
LEAD:
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
(Signet/NAL, $4.50.) A fairy tale, complete with
an aged king, an evil wizard and a mouse.
2
8
WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
(Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.


Hirohito Makes a 'Banzai' Showing
LEAD: In a brief ceremony made significant by its ordinariness, Emperor Hirohito appeared before thousands of his subjects today to wish them well and to be heartily cheered in turn.


GARDENING
LEAD:  The Great Plant Collections  One Up Productions P.O.
Box 410777 San Francisco, Calif. 94141 30 minutes. $34.95.


Israel Keeps Its Troops On Guard for Protests
LEAD: The Israeli Army kept a heavy guard on the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip today and only minor disturbances were reported.


Immigrants Give Thanks by Aiding Neediest
LEAD: Growing up on Long Island during the Depression was not easy, Kjeld R. Eriksen recalls.
When he was young, his father died and his mother, a Dane, had to raise her four American children.


THE SKY AS A TOOL FOR LEARNING
LEAD: TO TRADITIONAL educators, the For Spacious Skies program might seem like castles in the air.
But for Katie Masselam, a sixth-grader at the Pollard Middle School in Needham, Mass., the program was a new way of seeing - and speaking, writing and drawing about the world around her.


MISS GRUBER PLANS TO WED
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Dr. and Mrs.
Gary R. Gruber of Bryn Mawr, Pa., of the engagement of their daughter, Martha Gruber, to Richard William Wagner, the son of the Rev. and Mrs.
William O. Wagner of Southbury, Conn.


PROPHECIES FOR THE FAR, FAR FUTURE FROM A SEER OF THE FAR, FAR PAST
LEAD: I AM Amen-Ra, the king of the Egyptian gods, and I'm speaking through the scoundrel whose name is on this article in order to describe the future of that fair and formidable land mass, Long Island.


Something New
LEAD: FILL bird feeders daily.
Put gift house plants in a cool, draft free location and keep soil moist.
Move tender gesneriads, such as African violets, away from cool windows.
From Catalogues


DIANA L. CHANEY IS ENGAGED TO MARRY ANDREW KLAUSNER
LEAD: The engagement of Diana Louise Chaney to Andrew Klausner has been announced by Babette Chaney of New Canaan, Conn., and William R. Chaney of New York, parents of the future bride.
Mr.
Klausner is a son of Dr.
David Klausner of Cleveland and the late Audrey Klausner.
A June wedding is planned.


TIMOTHY SCHIFTER AND HELEN E. LEE PLANNING TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Helen Elizabeth Lee to Timothy Ware Schifter, the son of Melvin Schifter of New York and Southampton, L.I., and the late Margaret Hoyt Schifter, has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Chun-Chao Lee of Arlington, Tex., and Destin, Fla.


JERSEY TAKES DRUG EFFORT INTO SCHOOLS
LEAD: Last September, New Jersey's Attorney General received an urgent call from the Superintendent of the state police.


Transactions
LEAD:  HOCKEY


State Dept. Awarded Custody Of African Boy in Abuse Case
LEAD: A Federal judge awarded temporary custody of the 9-year-old son of a Zimbabwean diplomat to the State Department yesterday, apparently clearing the way for the child's return to Zimbabwe tomorrow.


LITERARY FEMINISM COMES OF AGE
LEAD: Feminist literary studies are a new thing on campuses, but they did not spring full-grown from the heads of the recent polemical feminists.
For generations, well-read women have developed a chain of favorite authors, passed on by word-of-mouth.
My mother was my link to the feminist literary past.
She introduced me to such important and then neglected authors as Olive Schreiner, Elizabeth Gaskell and Maria Edgeworth.


Watch Your Step!
LEAD: RAISING CHILDREN was easier when I was little.


Guinea Frees Toure's Widow
LEAD: Guinea's military rulers have quietly released the wife and a son of the late President, Ahmed Sekou Toure, from a detention camp here, relatives and a Government official said today.
They said that Andree Toure and her son Mohamed were released Thursday.
The two were sentenced to eight years' imprisonment for backing an attempted coup in 1985 against President Lansana Conte, who seized power in April 1984 after Mr.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  RED HORIZONS: Chronicles of a Communist Spy Chief.
By Lieut.
Gen.
Ion Mihai Pacepa. (Regnery Gateway/ Kampmann, $19.95.) In 1945, Rumanian intelligence officers provided the nascent United States intelligence organization with copious secret files on the Soviet Union - of value in part because they covered Soviet territory occupied by Rumanian forces during World War II.


Boitano's Big Attempt
LEAD: ALTHOUGH a quadruple jump has never been completed in competition, Brian Boitano, who goes after his fourth straight United States Figure Skating championship this week in Denver, has come close and he says he will be trying to come even closer. ''Whether the jump is successful or not on a particular night will not make that much of a difference in the results,'' said Boitano, who won the 1986 world championships then finished second to Brian Orser of Canada last year.


Making A Difference
LEAD: After the Helsinki Conference of 1975 reached its accords on human rights, a handful of brave Russians formed a group to report on Soviet compliance.
They paid dearly for their courage.
The organizers of the Moscow Helsinki Watch, as they called it, were all eventually imprisoned.


Alliance With Turkey
LEAD: To the Editor:


PHYSICIAN IS WED TO MISS MURDOCH
LEAD: Elizabeth Patterson Murdoch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Francis Murdoch Jr. of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Henry Clinton Maguire 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Maguire Jr. of Merion Station, Pa.
The Rev.
Frank C. Strasburger, the Episcopal chaplain of Princeton University, performed the ceremony at the university chapel.


'EDWIN DROOD' PROVIDES CHALLENGE IN METUCHEN
LEAD: ''THE Mystery of Edwin Drood,'' a very loose musical version of Charles Dickens's unfinished thriller, has a clever gimmick going for it: The ''surprise final denouement,'' as the show's master of ceremonies-chairman puts it, is up to the audience.


Village Rich in History Is Now Just Plain Rich
LEAD: A history of Weston's role in the Revolutionary War notes that the farming town was half a day's carriage ride to Boston and a favorite overnight spot for weary travelers headed for the state capital.


Admissions Jitters
LEAD: A STRAIGHT-A high school senior in Connecticut's Fairfield County is caught with crib notes while taking a midyear test in history.
Asked to explain himself, he responds, ''If I get a B, I won't get into Princeton.''


Meeting the Needs Of Adult Undergrads
LEAD: ADULTS WHO decided to forgo undergraduate degrees in earlier years are now pursuing them in record numbers, and a growing number of colleges have stepped up their efforts to accommodate them.


Broadcast TV
LEAD: Things look good for TV-movie addicts early this new year, judging by the varied and well-slotted agenda that begins and ends the week.


Flying Fish
LEAD: To the Editor: With apologies to Regina Schrambling (Fare of the Country, Nov. 15), by far the best flying fish and cou-cou in Barbados is made by Ada Lewis in Carrington Village, St.
Michael.
I order it ahead of time and have it waiting for me when I arrive.


AN ANTI-DRUG AD UPSETS NEW BRITAIN
LEAD: AFTER suffering municipal corruption and a failing economy, New Britain is undergoing a rejuvenation.
A highlight was President Reagan's visit to the city last July, in which he cited New Britain as an example of a remarkable economic comeback.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''The Chicago market is a made-for-speculation market, but it leads New York around by the nose.''


Ultraconsumers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Santayana Might Have Flunked the Exam
LEAD: To the Editor:


Queens Theater Palace: Dark Tile and Dim Future for Boulevard
LEAD: Seven Broadway theaters designed by Herbert J. Krapp were designated New York City landmarks in November.
Another Krapp theater, the Boulevard, in Jackson Heights, Queens, was not.
Altogether, eight interiors and six exteriors of Mr.
Krapp's 15 Broadway palaces have been given landmark status.
Meanwhile, the brick exterior of the Boulevard, at 82-28 Northern Boulevard, has been covered with brown tile.


The 13th Year: A Breather Before College
LEAD: WHEN Jeanne Lorenz graduated from the Milwaukee High School for the Arts last spring, she had a scholarship to the University of Wisconsin, and she thought she was destined for college in the fall.
Because she is the oldest of four children in a single-parent family, her mother was relieved that her daughter's higher education was being paid for.


Photos That Capture the Sculptor's Spirit
LEAD: THE PHOTOGRAPHS IN the recently published book ''Alberto Giacometti'' do something rare: they convey a measure of what we feel when we encounter the sculptor's work in the flesh.
The pictures may be missing the sculpture's scale, texture and command of space, but they elicit its essential spirit through the pictorial equivalent of metaphor.


ERIC D. CARLSON IS TO BE MARRIED TO MISS ANSPACH
LEAD: Elizabeth Bodne Anspach and Eric David Carlson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
David Carlson of Munster, Ind., plan to marry in June, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew A. Anspach of New York and Edgartown, Mass., have announced.


Question Of the Week; Who Will Win the Pro Football Playoffs?
LEAD: The Giants!
In a surprise Presidential action under the Football Powers Act, President Reagan decrees all strike games null and void.
Computer programs conclude that the Giants would have won all their strike games, making them 9-6 for the year and a playoff qualifier.
BRANDON DUNN  New York


'Make Mine Sarsaparilly!'
LEAD: CALAMITY JANE  With Doris Day (in photo), Howard Keel, Allyn McLerie, Philip Carey, Dick Wesson. 1953.
Warner Home Video. 101 minutes. $24.98


STAR WARS
LEAD: As many studies have shown, most notably the recent one by the American Physical Society, there is no way either now or in the foreseeable future to build a Star Wars defense that would shift the balance from offensive to defensive weapons.
Given the dim military prospects, given the risks in deployment, given that the Russians seem eager to negotiate limits on research, why would anyone want to spend $4 billion a year on Star Wars research?


Bending Minds as Well as Muscles
LEAD: THE early weeks of January are golden times for the health spa industry, as thousands of flabbed-out, stressed-out Americans seek a quick fix.


Pittburgh Loses Starter but Beats Florida, 80-68
LEAD: Charles Smith scored 30 points and Jerome Lane grabbed 21 rebounds today as Pittsburgh dominated Florida inside for an 80-68 victory.


Reagan's Search for New Year's Diplomatic Resolutions
LEAD: PRESIDENT Reagan now has about a year left to work his will on international events, to shape his legacy.
But, as he has certainly seen in the last seven years, the capacity to control world affairs from the Oval Office is sorely limited, and the prospects for dramatic accomplishments in the final period seem slim.


RANDY S. CAPLAN TO WED PHYSICIAN
LEAD: Randy Sue Caplan, a third-year student at the Fordham University school of Law, and Dr.
Michael Hunter Perskin, a resident in internal medicine at the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York, plan to be married on Jan. 31.


TYING WELFARE TO SCHOOL ATTENDANCE
LEAD: THE NATION'S first program that links welfare payments to students' attendance will start in Wisconsin on Feb. 1.
The program, known as ''Learnfare,'' was passed at the urging of Gov.
Tommy Thompson in what he described as an effort to discourage welfare dependency.


Covenant House Sells a Times Square Hotel
LEAD: Covenant House, the shelter for runaway youths that hoped to build its endowment when it bought the Times Square Motor Hotel on West 43d Street three years ago, has sold the hotel to the New York International Hostel Corporation after operating it at a loss.


The Moment of Truth for Big Blue
LEAD: SIXTY years ago, Thomas J. Watson Sr. paced the maple floors in the International Business Machines Corporation's giant plant here in the center of New York State, presiding over the production of time clocks and meat slicers.
Now, on those same floors, I.B.M. has spent hundreds of millions of dollars building a state-of-the-art production line that can snap together in minutes its newest, smallest and most price-competitive mini-mainframe computer.


ADVENTURE WAS WHAT SHE GOT
LEAD:  A TIME TO DANCE, NO TIME TO WEEP  By Rumer Godden.
Illustrated. 243 pp.
New York: Beech Tree Books/William Morrow &amp; Company. $16.95.


TENEMENTS OF 1880'S ADAPT TO 1980'S
LEAD: IN most cities the phrase luxury apartment refers to an apartment in a new building.
But in New York, increasingly, it is also being used to describe a renovated apartment in a former tenement.


Stock Plunge Chills Co-op Resale Market
LEAD: THREE days before he expected to pocket the proceeds of the sale of a cooperative apartment on West End Avenue, Tom Carder watched the deal fall apart.
Amid boxes already packed for a move to Stowe, Vt., Mr.
Carder hastily began searching for a new buyer who would not back out of a sales contract.


A FAVORITE OF BUSINESS PEOPLE
LEAD: MARIO RESTAURANT on Motor Parkway in Hauppauge is at the epicenter of the fastest-growing business and industrial complex on Long Island.
Restaurants have blossomed along the parkway in response to this burgeoning business community.
Mario, now seven years old, was one of the first.
It has retained its early popularity and tops many a businessman's list of favorite dining spots.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article in The Week in Review on Dec. 20 about New York's Congressional delegation incorrectly traced the history of New Yorkers who have served on the Senate Finance Committee.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan is the first Senator from New York to have served on that committee since the 1930's.
Calvin Coolidge was from Massachusetts and never served in Congress.


WHERE THE OUTRAGEOUS GO IN SPRINGTIME
LEAD:  TWO WEEKS IN THE MIDDAY SUN  A Cannes Notebook.
By Roger Ebert.
Illustrated by the author. 182 pp.
Kansas City, Mo.: Andrews &amp; McMeel.
Paper, $8.95.
THERE'S something outlandish about the very notion of the Cannes Film Festival, which lures thousands to a Mediterranean town during the second two weeks of May so that they can spend most of their time in the dark.


MARY D. SHAFTER, ENGINEER, TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Shafter of New Canaan, Conn., and Peru, Vt., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Dunn Shafter to James Thomas Sullivan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Sullivan of Bristol and Old Saybrook, Conn.


Rediscovering A Great Jazz Guitarist
LEAD: THE GUITAR WAS PRIMARILY A rhythm instrument in jazz until Charlie Christian brought the electric guitar into the jazz mainstream in 1939 when he came out of Oklahoma to join Benny Goodman.
In the big bands that dominated the 1920's and 30's, it was difficult for an acoustic guitar to be heard as a solo instrument, which was one reason the banjo was favored over the guitar until electrical recording arrived in the mid-1920's.


Price Rises Due on Japanese Audio
LEAD: THE SAD TRUTH THAT there is no free lunch is about to reassert itself in 1988.
Looking ahead into the new year, audio fans are bracing themselves for steep and inevitable price increases.


Baltimore Policeman Is Held In Sales of Heroin by Phone
LEAD: A police officer here has been charged with selling heroin over one of the department's emergency communications telephone lines, which include the 911 emergency number.


Tar Heels Defeat U.C.L.A. By 80-73
LEAD: J. R. Reid scored 25 points today to lead North Carolina to an 80-73 victory over U.C.L.A.


JANET A. SCHIERLOH, A TEACHER, TO MARRY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Schierloh of Oradell, N.J., have made known the engagement of their daughter Janet Appleton Schierloh to Reese Evans Howard Jr., the son of Mrs.
Alger Howard of Far Hills, N.J., and Mr.
Howard of New York and Southport, Conn.
The couple plan to marry in April.


A Place to Show One's Pedigree
LEAD: THERE are several daily fashion parades on the gilded shopping stretch of Madison Avenue between 60th and 96th Streets.


JESSICA LEE STEDMAN IS WED TO ANDREW J. GUFF JR.
LEAD: Jessica Lee Stedman and Andrew Joseph Guff Jr. were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in Manhattan by Msgr.
John V. Bartos, an uncle of the bridegroom.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Livingston  $280,000
6 Rale Terrace
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old split level; C/A, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $3,354.
Millburn  $235,000
750 Ridgewood Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 43-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,141.


1988 RECITALS BEGIN IN NEW ROCHELLE
LEAD: IT will be well into the middle of the month before the concert calendar builds up to anything resembling its usual midseason pace, but music at the New Rochelle Public Library hardly misses a beat.
Having last Sunday sponsored one of the final county concerts of 1987, the library this afternoon ushers in the '88 recitals roster.


Correction
LEAD: Because of mechanical errors, a review of William Duggan's ''Lovers of the African Night'' on Dec. 20 included two incorrect phrases.
They should have read: ''Ata Four is a woman of courage; when a vicious Boer sets his dogs loose and three innocent Africans are killed, Ata pays the Boer back with honey-and-mustard goat meat pies laced with rat poison''; and, ''She has a son, Kanye -which means 'enough' - and lives to see him become a hero: In a student demonstration against abuses in education he is shot by the police.


After 55 Years, Is It Time to Deregulate the Banks?
LEAD: SOMETIME in February, Senator William Proxmire, the Wisconsin Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, plans to have it take up the next step in bank deregulation - repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act.


LITERARY FEMINISM COMES OF AGE
LEAD: In her article, Elizabeth Kolbert refers to a ''classic'' feminist article by Sandra Gilbert, in which Ms.
Gilbert attacks the image of Milton, alluding to his ''well-known misogyny'' and his ''antifeminism.''


WAR AND DROUGHT INFLICTING FAMINE IN SUDAN
LEAD: Mass starvation is threatening refugees in Equatoria, a southern province of the Sudan, as rebels mine roads and prevent food convoys from reaching there.


Food Inspection Results
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 22 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


Experts Say Mass Murders Are Rare but on Rise
LEAD: Sixteen people are killed in Arkansas.
An Iowa farm family is wiped out in a suspected murder-suicide by a son.
A postal employee kills 14 co-workers in Oklahoma, then kills himself.


For Expert Skiers in Austria
LEAD: ZURS is an expert skier's jewel in the crown of the Arlberg, the spectacular range of chalk-stone mountains in western Austria.
For skiers whose mission is to find challenging slopes in an intimate European village high above the tree line, it is close to perfection.
The main street, which you can walk in 10 minutes, is bordered by chalet-style hotels and a few shops.


A LA CARTE
LEAD: IT'S the season for bulging waistlines, the aftermath of holiday parties.
Eggnog, plum pudding and fruitcake have taken up permanent residence on the hips.
Big eating leads to big promises in the form of New Year's resolutions.
But there will be restaurant dining and socializing even after the resolutions.


INCREASE IN TUBERCULOSIS TIED TO SPREAD OF AIDS
LEAD: Federal researchers have reported a substantial increase in tuberculosis in the United States for 1986, the first in more than three decades of record-keeping.
They said AIDS was partly to blame.
The nation recorded 22,768 cases of tuberculosis in 1986, up 2.6 percent from 22,201 in 1985, the Federal Centers for Disease Control reported


LYOVA'S DEATH WAS TEMPORARY
LEAD:  PUSHKIN HOUSE  By Andrei Bitov.
Translated by Susan Brownsberger. 371 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.50.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. We have a brick patio with a northern exposure, and there is a problem with mold and mildew forming on these bricks.
We have to scrub them several times a year with bleach to remove the growth.
Do you have any suggestions for preventing this growth?


Japan's Lethal Whale 'Science'
LEAD: Japan's whaling fleet, reconfigured as a ''research expedition,'' steams toward the Antarctic.
In defiance of the International Whaling Commission, Japan plans to kill 300 minke whales in the name of science.
The meat would be sold, as usual, for profit.
The U.S., traditionally the conscience of the treaty that protects whales, can have only one reaction to this brazenness: sanctions.


Sports of The Times; The Saints Raise the Roof
LEAD: UNTIL these New Orleans Saints emerged as a wild card, their predecessors were jokers.
They once had a 1-15 season.
They laughed about leading the National Football League in interim coaches.
They had an astronaut as a general manager and the owner's bodyguard as a chief administrator.
They had a running back who weighed less than their sideline mascot, a St.


The New Math for Joining a 401(k) Plan
LEAD: NOW that the stock market has recovered somewhat from its recent rout, shaken investors are reassessing their long-term finances.
Those who are counting on investment earnings to fund their retirement may find new appeal in 401(k) employee retirement plans, especially because the new tax law now prevents many people from making tax-deductible contributions to Individual Retirement


BRIDES OF THE REICH
LEAD:  MOTHERS IN THE FATHERLAND  Women, the Family, and Nazi Politics.
By Claudia Koonz.
Illustrated. 556 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $25.


AN ARTISTIC ALLIANCE AT HARTFORD STAGE
LEAD: WHILE it may not be unusual for directors of regional theaters to call upon the same performers with regularity, it is a rare thing for an actress and a director to establish a working relationship that has the earmarks of a sustained artistic alliance.


GREEN STAMPS RESURRECTED IN A PEEL-AND-SEAL FORM
LEAD: THE lick-and-stick S &amp; H Green Stamps that faded substantially in the 1970's are reappearing in Connecticut in a new peel-and-seal form.


THE REGION: Pro &amp; Con: Tactics of Transit Officers; Police Decoys, Temptation and Crime
LEAD: SINCE the days when burly, bewigged policemen masqueraded as women to catch molesters, police departments around the country have used decoy officers to trap suspected muggers, rapists and other criminals.
The technique works, but it has sometimes been abused.
Officers have been accused of entrapping suspects by dangling money, flaunting jewelry, planting evidence - a practice sometimes called ''flaking,'' though the origin of the term is uncertain - or tricking a target into picking up a valuable item an officer has purposely dropped.


AMNESTY REQUESTS BY ALIENS DECLINE
LEAD: The number of aliens applying for legal status under the new immigration law has dropped steadily in recent months, raising serious questions about whether the program will reach its envisioned total of two million applicants before it ends May 4.


Boy Dies in Trash Compactor
LEAD: A teen-ager was trapped inside a trash compactor and was crushed to death Friday while workers tried to rescue him.
Michael Hucorne, 17 years old, was compacting trash in a large compactor behind a supermarket with another young employee when he became trapped.
He was squeezed between the top of the compactor and a lower compacting level, the police said.


Blacks, to Jeers of Whites, Protest Racism in Brooklyn
LEAD: Through a gantlet of residents, many of them screaming racial epithets, 450 blacks marched for three miles in the Bath Beach section of Brooklyn yesterday afternoon to protest racial discrimination in the city and, in particular, the beating of two black men in the neighborhood last week.


Sick Thinking
LEAD: WAKING AT night, I made my way in the dark to the bathroom without trouble, but when I switched on the light, I was stunned: it wasn't my bathroom at home - or, in fact, any bathroom I'd ever seen.
I supposed I must be in a hotel on a business trip - but what trip?
What hotel?
I had no idea.
Panic such as one feels in certain nightmares swept over me, but this was no nightmare; I was definitely awake.


TRACEY SHEWMAKER WED IN MARYLAND
LEAD: At Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church in Bethesda, Md., Tracey Lee Shewmaker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Shewmaker of Bethesda, was married yesterday to Patrick Joseph McCormick 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McCormick Jr. of New York, East Hampton, L.I., and Buenos Aires.
The Rev.
H.
Vernon


INSIDE
LEAD:  Hart Complicates Campaign  Political professionals think Gary Hart will have a major influence on the Democratic Presidential race even if he does not prevail.
Page 16.
A Kidnapping Jolts India  An abduction that forced India to release prisoners has stirred debate on dealing with extremists and focused attention on leftist radicals.


POETRY AND WORD PROCESSING: ONE OR THE OTHER, BUT NOT BOTH
LEAD: I WANTED to learn something about word processors. ''The Word Processing Book'' by Peter A. McWilliams was recommended to me.
It has all sorts of useful information: it tells students how, when they have bought a term paper, they may alter it with a word processor to suit their own ''personal style.


Going After the Press in the Panhandle
LEAD: To the Editor:


Green Must Hurdle a Wall of Skepticism
LEAD: Despite expressions of good will from top politicans and educators, Dr.
Richard R. Green must contend with a widespread sense of skepticism that an outsider can master the intricacies of the job of New York City Schools Chancellor.


Helping Novices to Survive the Bumpy Beginning
LEAD: SKI instructors call them never-evers.
These are people who have never been on skis and usually arrive at a ski school with visions of dashing down racecourses, jumping off cliffs or gliding through waist-deep snow.


Let Those Menorahs, Crosses and Creches Stay
LEAD: To the Editor:


Strong '88 Profit Rise Doubted
LEAD: The profits of American corporations are likely to rise again this year, aided by growing exports that have been made more competitive by the weak dollar.
But, at this point, it looks like consumers will not buy enough in 1988 to give corporations a year of strong income growth.


Business and the Law; Prospects of Action On Bank Legislation
LEAD: SINCE September, when Senator William Proxmire announced his intention to repeal the Glass-Steagall Act, the prevailing view has been that any bill to deregulate banking that got through the Senate would hit a brick wall in the House.


Global Investing More Complex as Markets End Wild Year
LEAD: What a year.


Retail: Consumer Caution Likely to Persist
LEAD: For retailers still reeling from one of the most difficult Christmas seasons in years, 1988 offers little hope for improvement - at least in the early months.


CANADA
LEAD: The story of the Toronto Stock Exchange in 1987 was the story of the commodities markets.
Creeping inflation and increased economic activity helped raise the prices of such important commodities as gold and copper.
That proved a boon for many companies on Canada's resource-oriented exchange.


Telephones: Winners and Losers Might Change Places
LEAD: In the telephone industry the winners of recent years seem likely to lose their momentum in 1988, while losers of the recent past could be the companies to watch.


Dog Survives Arrow Attack
LEAD: Hundreds of people have offered to adopt a dog that was found wandering in the desert with razor-tipped hunting arrows dangling from its head and body, the police say.
The dog, a male shepherd mix under a year old, was found by two women on horseback near Sunset Park.
Clark County animal control officers took the dog to an animal hospital, where a veterinarian removed the arrows, disinfected the wounds and kept him under observation.


Hundreds of Youths Mourn Loss of a Friend, 57
LEAD: Many people in Manhasset, L.I., have compared Gus Potter to George Bailey, the character in the classic Frank Capra film ''It's a Wonderful Life.''


Greenspan's Fast Action Reassured the Skeptics
LEAD: When Alan Greenspan was sworn in as Federal Reserve chairman in August, few doubted his powers as an economic analyst, but whether this lifelong adviser could adequately set policy as head of the nation's central bank remained to be seen.


Soviet Plans to Explore Mars And to Expand Space Station
LEAD: The Soviet Union will add extensions to its manned orbiting station Mir this year, a senior space official said today.
Other projects call for conducting space research with France and Poland, and sending a probe to one of the moons of Mars.


In Poland: Lines, Lines, Lines, Especially for Vodka
LEAD: Krystyna's office opens for business at 7 A.M., but the stores open at 6.
So the Polish housewife from the edge of Warsaw starts her day early, standing in line ''maybe for 10 or 15 minutes'' for staples like bread, butter and cheese.


A CHANGING OF THE GUARD, AND A RECKONING IN INSIDER CASE
LEAD: The flow of economic and financial news in 1987 - which seemed dominated by insider trading investigations, questions about international economic cooperation and the stock market plunge - thrust many people into the spotlight.


Vikings Smash Saints
LEAD: Somehow, a page from the past must have been planted in the New Orleans Saints' playbook last week without the Saints' knowledge.
How else can anyone explain what happened today to a team that thought it had put 20 years of football follies behind it, stirring the imagination of its fans, who proudly painted their faces when just a few years ago they covered their heads with paper bags?


Steel: Domestic Producers Seeking 2d Good Year
LEAD: The steel industry has made one of the great comebacks in American corporate history.
The question now is whether it can continue to hold its own against foreign competition.


Anchorage Journal; Perilous Driving in Land of the Moose
LEAD: Few things grab the attention of drivers speeding along the icy, six-lane Glenn Highway here quite so quickly as the sight of a 1,000-pound moose with a vast array of antlers, galloping into the beam of their headlights.


Horse Racing; An Old Combination Starts to Click Again
LEAD: When Cherokee Colony rallied to a promising victory in the Flamingo Stakes here Saturday, it marked the emergence of a new Kentucky Derby contender but the return of a familiar team.


An Empty Weapon
LEAD: A growing international determination to stop a regional war that actually endangers world peace is reflected in the Soviet Union's abandonment of its opposition to sanctions against Iran.


20 Are Reported Hurt At a Bangladesh Rally
LEAD: At least 20 people were hurt today when policemen charged demonstrators who were demanding that President H. M. Ershad step down, opposition party leaders and witnesses said.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: How many players have hit home runs in their first time at bat in the major leagues and which one of the group wound up with the most homers for a career?
Have any made it to the Hall of Fame?


Sabres Prevail, 2-1
LEAD: Tom Barrasso made 27 saves tonight as the Buffalo Sabres beat the Quebec Nordiques, 2-1.


Broadcasting: Best Performer Could Be Cable
LEAD: This year the performance of various segments of the media industry could vary widely.
Cable television, for example, is expected to have a very strong year.
But the growth of cable is among the key factors that may make it a relatively lackluster year for broadcasters.


In Tennessee, a Grand New Opry
LEAD: Every Friday night in an old school auditorium tucked back in the southeast Tennessee mountains, a brand of bluegrass music in the tradition of the early days of the Grand Ole Opry takes center stage.


New Albany Session: Hard Issues and Delicate Politics
LEAD: The beleaguered New York State Legislature returns to Albany on Wednesday for what promises to be a rocky 211th legislative session, filled with tough issues and shadowed by pending corruption trials.


FRANCE
LEAD: Even before Oct. 19, traders on the Paris Bourse were suffering through a tough year.
The leading French stock index, the index of the Compagnie des Agents de Change, started the year at 397.80 and peaked on March 26 at 460.40.


New Name Is Sought For Babbitt Airport
LEAD: Former Gov.
Bruce Babbitt may have poor name recognition in Iowa and New Hampshire, but some residents of his home state think his name is too prominent.


Ellen Schaffer Weds A Professor of Physics
LEAD: The marriage of Ellen G. Schaffer, the international and foreign law librarian at the Georgetown University Law Center, to Sidney A. Bludman, a professor of physics at the University of Pennsylvania, took place yesterday at the Thomas Law House in Washington.
Rabbi Mindy Portnoy performed the ceremony.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 3, 1988:  MONDAY  Carolina Freight  Nevada Power  TUESDAY  Centerior Energy  Puget Sound Pwr &amp; Lt  Orange &amp; Rockland Util  WEDNESDAY  American Water Works  Rite Aid Corp  Houston Industries  THURSDAY  General Pub Utilities  Pillsbury Co  WR GraceSun Co


Metro Matters; Rhetoric, Rage And Discussing Volatile Issues
LEAD: Mayor Koch declared his own ''Day of Outrage'' last week, but almost nobody came.


JAPAN
LEAD: The October collpase ended what had been an astounding bull market here.
This was the year that the Tokyo stock market's capitalization exceeded New York's - at the end of October, the New York Stock Exchange was capitalized at $2.254 trillion, while Tokyo was worth $2.677 trillion, according to Morgan


A Jersey Town Searches For Vanishing Volunteers
LEAD: The drastic remaking of this old farm town has changed what it means to be a volunteer.


Light Activity For Bond Sales
LEAD: Treasury financings this week consist of today's regular weekly sale of new three-month and six-month bills, followed on Wednesday by an auction of seven-year notes.


9-Month-Old Boy Dies in Fire at Apartment
LEAD: A 9-month-old boy died and three of his relatives were injured in a fire that was so hot firefighters initially had to retreat from the family's apartment in the Bronx, fire officials said yesterday.


France Moves to Curb Campaign Funds
LEAD: Officials in the administration of Prime Minister Jacques Chirac said today that they would formally propose legislation later this month that would set limits for the first time on campaign spending and donations.


Banking: Regional Powers Gain As Giants Struggle
LEAD: The shake-up in the nation's banking industry will accelerate this year.
Regional banks will continue to consolidate into bigger and bigger institutions, while the traditional behemoths - based in New York, Chicago and California - will remain locked in their struggle to deal with huge loans to deeply troubled third-world countries.


Buyout Artist Kravis Had a High-Ticket Year
LEAD: For Henry R. Kravis, the man who perfected the art of the leveraged buyout, it is hard to imagine a better year than 1987.


American Irks Bonn as an Agent for Surrogate Births
LEAD: Franklin Torch says he was reading the latest West German census, which shows a declining birth rate, when ''it clicked in my mind that they could use surrogate mothers.''


Gay Catholics Resume Protest At St. Patrick's
LEAD: A group of gay Roman Catholics resumed their protests during Mass at St.
Patrick's Cathedral yesterday, one month after 11 of them were arrested at the Cathedral when they refused to be seated during the sermon.


Indoor Lacrosse; N.J. Saints Win In Season Opener
LEAD: Lacrosse at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, an ancient game in a modern setting, mixed marketing and mild mayhem tonight.


At Tully Hall, Ushers Gain a Spot in the Lights
LEAD: The only problem at Alice Tully Hall tomorrow night will be finding someone to show you your seat, because all but a few of the ushers will be performing.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It's a shame we had to pick this week to be terrible.''  - Tony Elliott of the New Orleans Saints.  [ C4:1. ]


Hasidic Jew Killed in Borough Park Is Remembered
LEAD: Some of the hundreds of Hasidic Jews who gathered yesterday at Beth Jacob School in the Borough Park section of Brooklyn at a memorial service for Eli Wald, who was stabbed to death as he returned home from work on Christmas morning.
The gathering was also intended to protest what the participants called increased violence against residents of the predominantly Jewish neighborhood.


Pope Dines With Homeless
LEAD: Pope John Paul II had dinner with about 130 poor and homeless people today, becoming the first Pope in modern history to sit down and eat with the poor inside the Vatican.
Vatican sources said the Pope was greeted with applause as he entered a refectory near St.
Peter's Basilica to share a meal of pasta, meat, fruit and wine with the homeless men and women, many of whom sleep in the streets of Rome throughout the year.


Israeli Army Decides To Deport 9 Arabs In Wake of Rioting
LEAD: The Israeli Army announced today that it would permanently expel nine Palestinian nationalists arrested during the riots of the last three weeks.


Bridge: A Taiwanese Could Qualify For 1987 Apology of the Year
LEAD: The game of bridge surely generates more apologies than any other activity, unless one counts late arrival as an activity.
Millions of them cross the world's card tables every year, and as many again fail to materialize through stubbornness, lack of courtesy or lack of understanding.


Another Low For Dollar
LEAD: The dollar rebounded after opening at a record low against the Japanese yen today, while stocks declined sharply in an abbreviated post-holiday session.


Autos: Detroit's Rosy View Has Some Support
LEAD: America's passion for new transportaton vehicles remains nearly as ardent as ever.
Most industry forecasts call for sales of about 10 million cars and 5 million light trucks - roughly the same as last year but down from 1986, when 16.3 million vehicles were sold.


'ANN JILLIAN STORY,' ON NBC
LEAD: ANN JILLIAN has kept a tight rein on ''The Ann Jillian Story,'' the television movie on NBC at 9 this evening.
A year or more of skirmishing took place before Ms.
Jillian settled on a teleplay by Audrey Davis Levin.
Corey Allen is the director.
And Ms.
Jillian plays herself.
The result is admirable in some ways, puzzling in others.


Don't Mock New Yorkers Who Want Air and Light in Their City
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hart Seeks to Demonstrate Character and Integrity
LEAD: Gary Hart said today that his resurrected Presidential campaign would be directed at the task of convincing voters that he really can govern the country despite the scandal that drove him from the race for seven months.


Distribution of AIDS Resembles That of TB
LEAD: To the Editor:


African Nation Turns to Song To Warn of AIDS Infection
LEAD: Gripping a microphone, Buca Pussick charmed the crowd with the ballad of Maria, a girl with a ''honey-sweet mouth'' and a ''beautiful body.''


Byzantine Coins in Egypt
LEAD: Archeologists have unearthed a trove of ancient gold coins while restoring a 1,500-year-old Coptic monastery, the head of Egypt's Antiquities Organization said today.
Ahmed Kadri said at a news conference that the 820 Byzantine coins, dating to the fifth and sixth centuries, were found last month in two clay jars.


Chinese Crime Groups Rising To Prominence in New York
LEAD: Chinese organized crime's involvement in extortion, prostitution, loan sharking, gun smuggling and murder is sharply on the rise in the New York area, law-enforcement officials say.


Comedy: A. Whitney Brown
LEAD: A. WHITNEY BROWN, whose sardonic political commentaries inject a note of ferocious cynicism into the ''Weekend Update'' segments of ''Saturday Night Live,'' brings an air of offended gentility to his analyses of world affairs and governmental mismanagement.
An apple-cheeked smoothie, whose deep-set eyes glint with inscrutable comic cool, Mr.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: MY FIRST LOVES by Ivan Klima.
Translated by Ewald Osers. 164 pages.
Harper &amp; Row. $14.95.


In 45th Street Apartments, Time of Change for Actors
LEAD: A French singer with a pet pigeon lives there.
So do a former vaudeville female impersonator, a saxophonist who played with Benny Goodman and a woman who began her theater career as a cat.


No Need for a New Token War
LEAD: New York City Transit Authority officials are still fuming over Connecticut's unneighborly issuance of 17.5-cent turnpike tokens that also worked in $1 subway turnstiles.
Until the turnstiles were rewired in 1986 to reject slugs, the T.A. lost more than 7,000 full fares a day to the Connecticut coin.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; Developer vs. Himself Over Coliseum Project
LEAD: Mortimer B. Zuckerman is at odds with himself.


BRITAIN
LEAD: It was also a year of extremes in London.
The Financial Times 100-share index closed the year at 1,712.14, up 2 percent from its opening for 1987 at 1,679.
But in between, the market soared to new heights.


Wagner's Call to Teachers' Leader Cleared Way to Schools Decision
LEAD: Toward the end of the withering four-and-a-half-month process of choosing a New York City schools chancellor, a critical moment came when the president of the Board of Education, Robert F. Wagner Jr., telephoned Sandra Feldman, the head of the teachers' union, on Thursday morning.


Purchasers Cite Gains for December
LEAD: The nation's industrial economy expanded briskly in December, significantly outshining November in new orders and production, the National Association of Purchasing Management said in its monthly report scheduled to be released today.


Boom in U.S. for Latin Writers
LEAD: A half-dozen years ago, so many American publishers were issuing fiction by Latin American authors that critics dubbed the period the ''Latin boom.'' The boom inevitably subsided, but now it is returning stronger than ever - not just with more titles, but also with books that are already major critical or commercial successes in Latin America and


Sports World Specials; Still No Pardon
LEAD: George Steinbrenner has just about everything money can buy, but the one holiday present he has wanted for years still eludes him: a Presidential pardon.


Most of Police Force Off Job In a Poor Suburb of Chicago
LEAD: A majority of the police officers in this Chicago suburb, one of the poorest in the country, walked off the job this weekend because they have not been paid in more than two weeks.


G.M. SETS TRADE SHOW TO AID IMAGE
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation, in an obvious effort to divert attention from its recent market-share losses and other woes, is opening a three-day exposition of its advanced technology in New York City beginning Tuesday.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, JANUARY 4, 1988
LEAD: International A2-11


28 Chilean Exiles Occupy U.N. Offices in Brazil
LEAD: For the last four weeks, 28 Chilean exiles, including 10 children, have been occupying the local offices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as part of a campaign to obtain political asylum in a country other than Brazil.


E.P.A. REASSESSES THE CANCER RISKS OF MANY CHEMICALS
LEAD: New evidence of the way chemicals cause cancer is leading the Environmental Protection Agency to reassess the risks of many of the substances it regulates.
It is finding some of them less dangerous than it previously believed.


Entertainment: Bright Prospects At the Box Office
LEAD: Hollywood not only shrugs off economic uncertainty but thrives on it, according to legend.
Despite the ripple effects of the stock market collapse, customers keep pouring into movie theaters, even as ticket prices reached $7 in some areas.


Washington Talk: Briefing; An L-word Acronym
LEAD: There is such a thing as official lust in the Federal Government.
Among the many little-known provisions tucked deep within the $17.6 billion deficit-reduction bill adopted by Congress just before Christmas is a Senate amendment covering the excise taxes that are levied on diesel and certain other motor fuels sold wholesale to dealers.


VIKINGS' 'DIFFERENT' WEAPON
LEAD: IN preparing for the Super Bowl playoffs, coaches often talk about how it's just another football game. ''We haven't approached this game,'' Jim Mora of the Saints said before yesterday's wild-card game, ''any differently than any other game.'' But a playoff game is different.
And the Minnesota Vikings approached it differently.


Semiconductors: Recovery Is Expected To Continue in 1988
LEAD: After two years of heavy losses that turned the plight of the nation's semiconductor industry into an international political issue, chip makers returned to profitability in 1987.
Industry officials and analysts generally expect a continuation of the recovery in 1988.


UNITED STATES
LEAD: Only three weeks into 1987, the year was already shaping up as an historic one on Wall Street.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which had closed out 1986 at 1,895.95, promptly waltzed past 2,000 on Jan. 8 and then 2,100 on Jan. 19.


Philharmonic Radiothon
LEAD: The 11th New York Philharmonic Radiothon, a three-day broadcast of music, interviews and pledges, will take place in February on WQXR (1560 AM and 96.3 FM).
The broadcast, an annual fund-raising event for the orchestra, will begin at noon on Feb. 5 and last until midnight Feb. 7.
Included in the 60-hour broadcast will be taped excerpts of performances.


Workshops in Theater Look at Writing Lyrics
LEAD: Martin Charnin, a Broadway lyricist, is to lead a workshop in lyric writing and directing for the musical theater, during two-hour sessions, Jan. 7, 11, 14 and 21 at 7:30 P.M., at the 92d Street Y School of Music, at 1395 Lexington Avenue.


Joseph Sittler, 83, Dies; Was Lutheran Scholar
LEAD: Joseph Sittler, a Lutheran theologian known for his work on religion and ecology, died of cancer Dec. 28 at his home in Chicago.
He was 83 years old.


The Editorial Notebook; Nation Building in Argentina
LEAD: Everyone hears this is a difficult time in Argentina, but it's also a promising one.
Fashionable Buenos Aires fills its conversation with the troubles.
To discern the positive requires poking beneath the surface of the capital's complex and Italianate political life and venturing into the million-square-mile interior.


The Basic Speech: Michael S. Dukakis; A Call to Meet the Challenges of 'the Next American Frontier' Stump Speech: Roots Were Planted in '96
LEAD: The following speech, by Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, is the first in a series of basic, or stump, speeches that will be published over the coming months in The New York Times.


The Chicago Lyric Opera Savors Its Most Successful Season
LEAD: The 10 inches of snow that fell on Chicago this week snarled the city's airports and roads.
But down at the Civic Opera House, where the Lyric Opera is halfway through its most successful season, the big winter storm seemed barely a flurry.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Shriver Overcomes Novotna: Top-seeded Pam Shriver of Lutherville, Md., had to struggle for almost two hours yesterday, but she defeated Jana Novotna of Czechoslovakia, 7-6, 7-6, in the championship of the Ariadne Classic at the Milton Courts in Brisbane, Australia.
Shriver won $25,000.


Takeovers Revert to the Old Mode
LEAD: The fall of the stock market is rewriting the rules of corporate takeovers.
Gone are the swashbuckling raiders who used junk bonds to plunder the business landscape.
Instead, Wall Street is expecting a return to normalcy: back to the days when corporations merged for strategic business reasons and not for quick financial gain.


FILM CRITICS' GROUP HONORS 'THE DEAD'
LEAD: ''The Dead,'' the work that marked the extraordinary synthesis of a great literary talent with a great cinematic one, was voted the best film of 1987 by the National Society of Film Critics yesterday.


Villanova Gets Tough To Establish Credibility
LEAD: An hour before his team was scheduled to face Virginia on Saturday night, Rollie Massimino sat in a deserted locker room at the John E. duPont Pavilion contemplating the Big East season.


Market Place; Potential Gains In Foreign Stocks
LEAD: A FURTHER decline in the value of the dollar against major foreign currencies would be, on balance, bullish for foreign stocks.
However, one risk of investing abroad is that a drop in foreign stock markets could offset the advantage of the currency play.
With that caveat in mind, what are some foreign stocks that appear attractive for 1988?


Miami No. 1 in All Three Rankings
LEAD: Miami was voted the No. 1 college football team in the nation yesterday in both The Associated Press and United Press International polls and also finished on top in The New York Times's computer rankings.
Florida State and Oklahoma were second and third, respectively, in all three rankings.


Correction
LEAD: A report on Dec. 25 about charities in the Soviet Union misidentified the chairman of a fund to help Soviet orphans.
He is Albert A. Likhanov.


Queens Man, 59, Held In Slaying of Woman
LEAD: A 59-year-old Queens man was arrested early yesterday in the shooting death of a woman who was described as his girlfriend, the police said.


Shearson's Chief Cohen Built a Brokerage Army
LEAD: Reminiscing about the growing pains of Shearson Lehman Brothers, Peter A. Cohen, who at 41 is possibly the youngest investment chief on Wall Street, recalls what his daughter, Lauren, told him when she was a little girl.


Computers: A Potential Boom Faces Uncertainties
LEAD: Rarely has the computer industry entered a new year so uncertain whether it would soar or stagnate.


Advertising; JWT's Saga Topped 1987's High Points
LEAD: IN a year that was crowded with major advertising developments, the ongoing saga of the J. Walter Thompson Company was clearly the dominant news story.


Arizona Stunned By New Mexico
LEAD: After going 25-10 last season and not being picked for the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, New Mexico felt it had a score to settle.


Rules on Debt Recast By Reed and Preston
LEAD: The world of big banking acknowledged reality last year, largely as the result of moves by two men: John S. Reed, chairman of Citicorp, and Lewis T. Preston, chairman of J.P.
Morgan &amp; Company.
In a one-two punch of sorts, the two bankers smashed the myth that such big third-world debtors as Mexico and Brazil would ever fully repay their hundreds of billions of dollars in foreign debt.


Giuliani Led Crusade Against Wall St. Crime
LEAD: When Rudolph W. Giuliani, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, requested that insider trading indictments be dropped against three Wall Street professionals, he promised reporters that a new round of broader indictments against the three would be handed up ''in record-breaking time.''


Fitness Regimen for Eyes May Help Coordination
LEAD: GLENN SEIFERT, a Long Island optometrist, tells the story of a top amateur tennis player with a blistering serve who sometimes had difficulty holding up his end on the volley.
Someone suggested that a vision problem might be a factor.


Running It Up
LEAD: Three teams in the country average more points a game than the University of Oklahoma basketball team, and they all play in the National Basketball Association.


A Link to Warmer Weather
LEAD: Despite the presence of snow, and a forecast of snow, sleet and rain for today, a golfer kept his swing in tune yesterday at the driving range at Eisenhower Park in East Meadow, L.I. for future milder temperatures. (NYT/Barton Silverman)


Coliseum Pact Criticized By Goldin as a Bad Deal
LEAD: The New York City Comptroller, Harrison J. Goldin, and an attorney for the Municipal Art Society yesterday sharply criticized a new agreement by the Koch administration to keep alive a controversial Columbus Circle development.


The Year of the Brave
LEAD: On the human rights calendar, 1987 belonged to the brave, especially those who risked their skins monitoring governments.
These are freedom's foot soldiers, volunteers who courageously record the names of political prisoners and report on torture and star-chamber justice.


Fletcher F. Acord, Postal Official, Dies at 56
LEAD: Fletcher F. Acord, the third-ranking official in the United States Postal Service, died today of a cerebral hemorrhage, a Postal Service spokesman said.
He was 56 years old.


Tipper Gore Widens War on Rock
LEAD: Two years after beginning a campaign against sexually explicit and violent lyrics on record albums, Tipper Gore has moderated her tone but expanded her scope to include music videos, television programming and video cassettes.


Yes, the Feds Should Test Students
LEAD: The Senate has shown good sense in voting to expand Federal school testing.
Now the opposition is unlimbering its rhetorical guns for an assault in the House.
But its arguments against national tests of student achievement still sound mostly vague and self-serving.


Brooklyn Man Held in Killing Of Boy at Door of Apartment
LEAD: A 41-year-old Brooklyn man was arrested last night and charged with the slaying of a 12-year-old Coney Island boy who was shot in the head Dec. 30 as he looked through the peephole of his family's apartment door.


Ph.D. Candidates Need Faculties That Care
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fighting AIDS in Song
LEAD: A song contest is one method used by Guinea-Bissau to fight AIDS, which has spread in that nation without many visible signs.
Page A2.
Higher Profits Are Seen  Corporate profits will rise a modest 5 to 7 percent this year, economists say.
Page D1.
The outlook for 11 industries, pages D6.


Ph.D. Candidates Need Faculties That Care; Learning to Teach
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japanese Fight Invading Sea For Priceless Speck of Land
LEAD: Japan, always a bit self-conscious about its limited size, has taken a giant step to keep itself from shrinking.


Collapse of Diesel Tank Pollutes Drinking Water Near Pittsburgh
LEAD: The collapse of a new storage tank poured an estimated one million gallons of diesel oil into the Monongahela River over the weekend, threatening drinking water for 750,000 residents of suburban Pittsburgh.


1973 Georgia Murders Back in Courts
LEAD: Fourteen years after six members of a south Georgia family were murdered, the case, which has caused many Georgians to debate the justice of the legal system, is before the courts again.


Outdoors: A Risky Profession
LEAD: ANY young man thinking of a career as a professional black-bass fisherman would do well to read Nick Taylor's just-published ''Bass Wars,'' (McGraw-Hill) which describes the fierce struggle either to remain in the big money or to get a small bite of it.
So forewarned, he might decide to buy a mule and prospect for gold.


21 REPORTED DEAD IN ISRAEL AIR RAIDS IN SOUTH LEBANON
LEAD: Twenty-one people were killed and 14 wounded in overnight Israeli air strikes on Palestinian districts and Lebanese militia positions in southern Lebanon, the Lebanese police said today.


Washington Talk: The Pentagon and the Press; Gathering News in the Persian Gulf: Suntans and Simmering Frustration
LEAD: The six American journalists, members of a Pentagon-sponsored news pool covering military operations by the Navy in the Persian Gulf, were fed up.
They had languished in the sun at their harborside hotel for nearly a week without setting foot aboard a ship.


U.S. Warns Dairy Farmers of Drop in Income
LEAD: Dairy farmers can expect the price processors pay them for their milk to slide to a 10-year low in 1988 as a result of a reduction in Federal price supports that went into effect Friday, an Agriculture Department economist says.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Treasury Speculation
LEAD: Inauguration Day is more than a year away, but speculation has already begun on candidates for the new President's Cabinet, in particular the person who might become Secretary of the Treasury.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, JANUARY 4, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  None  Friday  Unemployment...
Dec.
Consumer Borrowing...
Nov.


PTL Ministry's Cost For Hahn's Silence Is Put at $363,700
LEAD: Payments by the PTL ministry to Jessica Hahn in exchange for her silence about a tryst with Jim Bakker totaled $363,700, nearly $100,000 more than previously reported, according to an Internal Revenue Service report.


MEXICO
LEAD: For the Mexican stock market, 1987 has been a year straight out of Charles Dickens: the best of times, the worst of times.
For the first nine months of the year, the Bolsa de Valores in Mexico City performed more impressively than any other market in the world, rising eightfold in local currency terms.


Health Care and Drugs: Squeeze Tightening For Medical Providers
LEAD: The vise tightens on the $450 billion health-care industry, which runs the gamut from drug and medical-supply houses to hospital chains and nursing homes.
Many costs are soaring, and skilled workers are scarce in the labor-intensive hospitals, where revenues have been cut by insurer-imposed restrictions.


Washington Talk: Briefing; That Mars Venture
LEAD: The Resident Associate Program of the Smithsonian Institution has for years been enriching the Washington scene with a variety of offerings for people who hold membership in the institution - from lectures, concerts and film programs to courses and seminars on architecture, religion and the arts.


Huge Projects For Britain
LEAD: Costain Group P.L.C., a construction and mining company, is seeking support from investors to build a privately owned, high-speed rail network across southeast England, The Financial Times reported.


Trial Opening For Chambers In Park Killing
LEAD: In the 16 months since Jennifer Levin was killed in Central Park, the story of her last hours, and how she spent them with Robert E. Chambers Jr., has emerged in patchwork form.
Today, in a 13th-floor courtroom in lower Manhattan, where Mr.
Chambers stands charged with her murder, a jury is expected to begin hearing the full fabric of the tale - and prosecutors and defense lawyers say many widely held assumptions about the case may fall.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Press Corps Index
LEAD: The Black Book, proclaimed by its sponsors to be the most comprehensive and useful index to the Washington press corps ever produced, is scheduled to appear this month.


Vikings and Oilers Advance As Pro Football Playoffs Begin
LEAD: Vikings' Anthony Carter, left, being congratulated by Jim Gustafson after scoring a touchdown during Vikings' 44-10 rout of Saints in New Orleans.
In Houston, Oilers' Tony Zendejas kicked field goal in overtime as Oilers beat Seahawks, 23-20.
SportsMonday, page C1. (NYT/Joe Traver)


Robins Merger Plan Stirs Some Skeptical Responses
LEAD: Opposition by the A. H. Robins Company's shareholders and claimants to a merger between Robins and a French drug maker appeared to be mounting yesterday.
The $600 million deal was announced this weekend.


A Long Scouting Trip
LEAD: The New York Mets will go to any lengths to try to return to their championship form of 1986.
Even to Australia.


COACH OF CHAMPIONS GOES FOR MORE GOLD
LEAD: THE building was erected in 1928 as a grand equestrian stable.
Ten years later, it was converted to its present form, a skating rink, when the owner felt like watching some hockey.
For his horses, he built another stable across the street.


GERMANY
LEAD: The West German stock market got off to a bad start in 1987.
Foreign investors, who had accounted for 60 percent of the turnover, began to pull out amid concern that the market's bull run was ending.
The relative stability of the dollar in the spring led to some improvement, but the summer would prove a calm before the storm.


Energy: Forecast for Prices Is Weak, At Best
LEAD: Ask a Texas oilman about the outlook for oil prices in 1988 and the answer typically is about $18 a barrel, or a little more than $1 above the spot price last week for American crude.


Less Growth Expected in '88
LEAD: Previous forecasts for the agency business might have been too optimistic, according to Greg M. Ostroff, an analyst with Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, who is reducing his own domestic growth forecast for 1988 to the 6.5 to 7.5 percent range, from 8-plus, and to 4 percent in a worst-case scenerio.


Is Moscow Vanguard Of Kitsch?
LEAD: Boris Baryshnikov saw on television that an entrepreneur in Finland was getting rich peddling Mikhail S. Gorbachev souvenirs.
Suddenly a light went on over his head - possibly the word ''glasnost'' in marquee lights.


HONG KONG
LEAD: In Hong Kong, the stock market underwent a devastating collapse in October that seriously harmed confidence.
The market's Hang Seng index started the year at 2,568.30 and finished at 2,302.75, down about 10 percent.
Its high for the year was 3,944.24 on Oct. 1.


Expatriate Americans Keep Giving to Neediest Cases Fund
LEAD: Two Americans living in Toronto, Alda and Robert Bell, are often homesick and they try to return to the United States, specifically New York City, several times a year.


Cairo Journal; Of Cars and Drivers (and the Body Shop Boom)
LEAD: Business - the Lord be praised - is good thanks to human ineptitude, Said Ead remarked.


Protection for Runners
LEAD: What runner hasn't had to contend with yapping dogs, a car that swerves too close, or a dimly lit route?
A dentist in Rockville, Md., who is an avid runner, has come up with a device meant to thwart those annoyances.


A Man Is Shot and Killed At a Restaurant in Queens
LEAD: One man was fatally shot and another was critically wounded in a sudden burst of gunfire yesterday afternoon as the two men were leaving a restaurant in Elmhurst, Queens, the police said.


Airlines: Labor Agreements Are Key For Carriers
LEAD: Lower fuel prices, fewer discounts, more modest additions of new planes, continuing good traffic.
All portend a good year for the airlines.
The wild card is labor settlements.


Panama Strongman Fights Back Against U.S.
LEAD: American servicemen and government civilians arriving in Panama are given a printed ''fact sheet'' by the United States Embassy warning them of civil unrest and providing a radio frequency to tune to for information and instructions in case of trouble.


Soviet Letting Trade Partners
LEAD: In the Polish city of Cracow recently, Soviet and Polish businessmen drank Crimean champagne to celebrate their countries' first joint venture.


UNSELD IS NAMED BULLETS' NEW COACH
LEAD: Kevin Loughery, who coached the Washington Bullets to an 8-19 start this season, was dismissed today and replaced by Wes Unseld, a Bullets assistant coach.


Phelan Kept His Cool Amid Stock 'Meltdown'
LEAD: It seemed nothing more than a colorful bit of hyperbole from a passionate reader of mystery novels when John J. Phelan Jr., the chairman of New York Stock Exchange, began to talk a year ago about the prospect of a stock market ''meltdown.''


Europe Is a Desert for U.S. Issues
LEAD: For American companies seeking to sell debt or equity, Europe is looking barren and forbidding.


Redmen, and Coach, Are Going With Quicker Flow
LEAD: Sooner or later, all things must change.
Winners become losers, the weak become strong, the young become old.


Colombia Denies Vow To U.S. on Drug Figure
LEAD: Colombia said today it had never promised the United States it would hold Jorge Luis Ochoa, a reputed major figure in the drug traffic, in jail, and called the attitude of the United States Government offensive.


Oilers Win in Overtime
LEAD: The Houston Oilers, the team their fans and the rest of the National Football League forgot, produced a rare but spectacular playoff victory today - their first since 1979.


Natural Gas Prices Reach 2-Year High
LEAD: Natural gas prices climbed to their highest levels in two years on the spot market today amid what experts said was a combination of bitter cold weather and a fresh dispute between pipelines and gas producers over a Government ruling that went into effect last Friday.


Special Prosecutor Is Sought
LEAD: A civil-rights association and a federation of block associations in Queens said yesterday that they had formally asked Governor Cuomo to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate the fatal shooting by white police officers of a black man on a residential street in Laurelton, Queens.


The Power Of Tenzin Gyatso
LEAD: The man in the maroon robes took a ballpoint pen, carefully put his name and calling on a scroll and read aloud what he had written.


Bell &amp; Howell Breakup Likely
LEAD: The investment group that has agreed to acquire the Bell &amp; Howell Company for $64 a share said today that it was considering selling certain ''non-core'' Bell &amp; Howell assets in order to finance the transaction.


Temple (8-0) Routs Rutgers by 86-60
LEAD: Tim Perry, a senior forward, scored 16 points, including the 1,000th of his career, as Temple defeated Rutgers, 86-60, tonight in an Atlantic 10 game.


Albert Nipon In Chapter 11
LEAD: Albert Nipon Inc., a producer of women's designer clothing, has filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code, after an unfavorable assessment from the Internal Revenue Service on its 1986 taxes.
In its petition, filed on New


Winter Storm Leaves the Year's First Snowfall
LEAD: Steve Scanniello clearing a path in the rose garden at the Brooklyn Botanic Gardens.
About 3 inches fell in Manhattan and northern New Jersey and 6 to 7 inches fell on Long Island, in-cluding parts of Brooklyn and Queens.
Although driving was hazardous, few major tie-ups were reported as the Sanitation Department mobilized 1,800 pieces of equipment to clear roads.


Differing Roles of Cancer Agents Are Studied
LEAD: Deepening knowledge of the differing ways that chemicals can turn normal cells into runaway masses of malignancy may add new complexity to the effort to regulate cancer-causing substances, many experts say.


SUBSTANTIAL RISE SOUGHT NEXT YEAR IN OUTLAY ON AIDS
LEAD: Dr.
Otis R. Bowen, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, has requested a substantial increase in funds to fight AIDS next year.
Budget officials have urged President Reagan to approve most of the request, saying that significant cuts ''would embarrass the Administration.''


Success of Oilers Points to Zendejas
LEAD: THE way the Oilers' exuberant coach, Jerry Glanville, was talking yesterday, Sunday's sudden-death victory over the Seahawks was merely a diversion on the way to Super Bowl XXII.


Books: Iraq's Jews
LEAD: OPERATION BABYLON.
By Shlomo Hillel.
Translated from the Hebrew by Ina Friedman.
Illustrated. 301 pages.
Doubleday. $19.95.


A Visa for Walters
LEAD: Rumors during the superpower summit last month had it that Raisa Gorbachev, wife of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, had agreed to be interviewed by Barbara Walters.
Yesterday a large pile of visa papers was spotted at the Soviet consular office in the capital, apparently to permit Ms.
Walters and a television entourage to travel to Moscow next week.


The Past Of a Town Is at Stake
LEAD: When California was known to people in southern China as ''the Golden Mountain'' a century and more ago, Chinese immigrant settlements dotted the rural regions of the state.
Chinese communities, born in the Gold Rush of 1849, thrived in the countryside until job opportunities began swelling the Chinatowns of big cities like San Francisco.


Tourists in London
LEAD: Foreign visitors spent a record $5.7 billion in London in 1987, the London Tourist Board estimated today.
There were 8.9 million visitors, and 23 percent of them were Americans.


China Is Reported to Execute 17
LEAD: At a mass rally, 17 people were tried and convicted last month of crimes including murder, rape and robbery, then immediately shot in one of the largest reported group executions in recent years, according to a radio report.


AIDS Research On New Drugs Bypasses Addicts And Women
LEAD: AIDS experts are growing more concerned that results from many trials of experimental drugs against the disease may not be valid for key segments of the population that the epidemic is increasingly hitting: drug users, nonwhites and women.


FILIPINO TESTIFIES ON AQUINO'S KILLER
LEAD: After four years of silence, an airport worker testified today that he saw a soldier shoot and kill Benigno S. Aquino Jr. as the opposition leader stepped off a plane to end years of exile.


Questions Swirl Around a Fatal Shooting by Police
LEAD: In a matter of seconds last Tuesday evening, 11 shots from two police revolvers rang out on a Queens street.
Moments later a man who the police say had lunged at an officer with a five-inch knife lay dying, struck by at least six bullets.


Give Them Milk, Cookies and Vitamins
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.75
n.a.
6.86
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.85
n.a.
5.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.24
n.a.
5.55
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.61
n.a.
6.94
30-YR.


Two Mayors Begin Their Second Terms With Visions of Jobs and Integrity; Flynn Vows Anew To Aid Youth
LEAD: Mayor Raymond L. Flynn, building on a theme he has often sounded in his first four years in office, today pledged his administration to providing jobs for the city's young people.


Advertising; Johnstown, Pa., to Mark Centennial of Big Flood
LEAD: Johnstown, Pa., has had a number of tragic floods, the worst one being almost 100 years ago.
Indeed, the Johnstown flood is almost a part of the language.


Shevardnadze in Kabul Amid Efforts to End War
LEAD: Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze flew to Kabul today and met with the Afghan leader, Najibullah, as speculation grew that the Soviet Union has increased its efforts to find a way out of the eight-year-old war in Afghanistan.


Oil Rig Count Declines
LEAD: The number of oil and gas drilling rigs working in the United States fell by 24 last week, to 1,121, Baker Hughes said today.
A year ago the total was 962.


Coalition Defends Cuban Mothers Facing Separation From Children
LEAD: A coalition of legal and church groups here is trying to prevent the deportation of a handful of Cuban women, detained around the country, so they will not be separated from the children to whom they gave birth in this country.


A's Sign Hubbard
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics have signed the free-agent veteran second baseman, Glenn Hubbard, to a contract for the 1988 season, plus an option year, the club announced yesterday.
The Athletics did not reveal other terms of the pact.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. What flesh-and-blood person would be the source of the genetic material used to map, or ''sequence,'' the entire human genetic code?
A.
Each person has 23 pairs of chromosomes, which together contain about 3 billion bits of DNA.
Only one in a thousand differ from person to person, said Dr.


RITE AID CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RITE AID CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
648,132,000
432,509,000
Net inc
20,213,000
17,396,000
Share earns
.49
.42
9mo sales
1,789,826,000
1,273,280,000
Net inc
b104,631,000
48,826,000
Share earns
2.53
1.18


No End to Streak By Vanbiesbrouck
LEAD: In the first 34 games, Michel Bergeron used at least three goaltending schemes and produced zero solutions.
Six games ago, his imagination nearly exhausted and his intentions unclear, Bergeron threw up his hands and told John Vanbiesbrouck to start.


List Submitted on Babbitt Delegates
LEAD: Supporters of Bruce Babbitt yesterday submitted to the New York State Democratic Committee the names of 140 prospective candidates for delegate to the party's national convention.
It was the first day such filings were permitted under state party rules.


Clark Won't Re-sign
LEAD: Jack Clark, who led St.
Louis to two division titles in the last three seasons but was injured for parts of all three years, will not re-sign with the Cardinals, his agent said yesterday.


Town Election Is First Since '33
LEAD: Emma Gresham, a retired schoolteacher, was chosen mayor and four other blacks were named to the five-member City Council today in the election of the first municipal government in this town of 300 people since 1933.


Portrait of the Artist as a Speaker
LEAD: In an inspired moment, House Speaker Jim Wright drew this portrait of himself yesterday to illustrate how he will wield the gavel when the House of Representatives convenes Jan. 25 in a new session of Congress, the second session of the 100th Congress. (Jim Wright)


Primerica-De Luxe
LEAD: The Primerica Corporation said the sale of its direct marketing subsidiary, Looart Press Inc., to De Luxe Check Printers Inc. had been completed, resulting in an after-tax gain of about $35 million for the fourth quarter of 1987.
The proceeds from the previously announced sale of Looart and its operating subsidiary, Current Inc., totaled about $180 million, or about $150 million after taxes, Primerica said.


Building Outlays Up
LEAD: Construction spending shot up 2.2 percent in November, the biggest increase in nine months, as the building industry benefited from widespread gains in both residential and nonresidential construction, the Government reported today.


Steel Production Grows
LEAD: Steel production rose to 1.75 million tons last week, up 3.7 percent from the previous week's 1.68 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute said yesterday.


Notable Pensioners
LEAD: To the Editor:


CRAVING FOR PAINKILLERS IS RECALLED BY JACKSON
LEAD: Jesse Jackson told patients at a drug-rehabilitation center he was briefly dependent on a painkiller more than 25 years ago, but he said in an interview today that the episode lasted less than a day.


VW's Price Rise
LEAD: Volkswagen United States, a subsidiary of Volkswagen A.G., said it had raised suggested retail base prices by an average of 5.6 percent, or $377, on its Fox models, effective immediately.
The base price of Volkswagen's Fox two-door model will increase to $6,290, from $5,990; its four-door GL model to $7,280, from $6,890, and its wagon to $7,380, from $6,990.


Sikhs Are Blamed for Killing 10 Over 24 Hours in Punjab
LEAD: Sikh militants in Punjab state killed 10 people, one a senior member of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's Congress Party, in attacks over a 24-hour period Sunday and today, the police and news organizations said.


Deal for Lincoln Bank Pleases Unicorp Chief
LEAD: Wayne J. Stemmer was snowed in yesterday at his home in Westport, Conn., and he had a cold to boot.
But he also had a deal wrapped up to give him some cheer - the $150 million acquisition of the Lincoln Savings Bank.


130 Seized in Argentina At Tina Turner Concert
LEAD: About 130 people were arrested in disturbances during and after a concert by the pop singer Tina Turner in an Argentine soccer stadium, the police said.


After an All-Day Siege, Actor Commits Suicide
LEAD: A 53-year-old unemployed actor shot himself to death last night after having held his former girlfriend hostage for seven hours earlier in the day in her West Side apartment, the police said.


French Singer at Wallman's
LEAD: Yvonne Constant, a French singer and actress, will offer cabaret songs in French and English at Jan Wallman's, 49 West 44th Street, tonight, Saturday and Jan. 16.
Miss Constant first performed in New York in the revue ''La Plume de Ma Tante,'' and later was featured in ''No Strings.'' She has appeared on television on ''Tonight'' and recently in the CBS miniseries ''Sins.


Ski-Lift Death in Italy
LEAD: A cable car loaded with about 50 skiers here started up accidentally with its door open and without its conductor today, and one teen-age skier fell 50 feet to his death, the police said.
Two other teen-agers were injured when they also fell to the parking lot below the valley station.


HELENE CURTIS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HELENE CURTIS INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
120,564,000
97,016,000
Net inc
3,804,000
3,076,000
Share earns
1.03
.84
Shares outst
3,697,327
3,666,999
9mo sales
351,962,000
286,208,000
Net inc
2,470,000
4,224,000
Share earns
.67
1.15
Shares outst
3,687,013
3,667,675


Plum Resumes Bidding for Holly
LEAD: The New York investor group Plum Associates, which appeared to have lost a takeover bid for the Holly Sugar Corporation to the Imperial Sugar Company, re-emerged as a suitor.
In its third proposal in two weeks, Plum Associates, a group headed by Peter R. Harvey of Illinois, is now offering to acquire 60 percent of the company's stock at $92.50 a share, or $61.5 million, instead of the previous cash price of $85 a share, or $56.5 million.


MENTAL PATIENTS IN SOVIET TO GET NEW LEGAL RIGHTS
LEAD: The Soviet Union has adopted a new set of legal rights for mental patients, the official press agency Tass reported tonight.
It was the first fundamental revision of the Soviet regulations governing psychiatry in 27 years.


N.B.A. Notebook; Once Again, Bullets Call Upon Unseld
LEAD: On June 7, 1978, the Washington Bullets' dressing room was filled with the laughter and shouting that go with winning the National Basketball Association championship.
But, off to the side, away from the din and the flowing champagne, there were tears.


E.I.L. INSTRUMENTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*E.I.L. INSTRUMENTS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,012,100
13,479,200
Net loss
b39,100
cd227,800
Share earns
-
.16
Yr rev
53,218,300
50,798,700
Net inc
b303,300
d1,039,300
Share earns
.20
.71


Advertising; Lois Pitts Gershon Pon Wins Playboy Account
LEAD: Lois Pitts Gershon Pon/GGK, the Swiss-owned agency long favored by media accounts and currently serving USA Today and MTV, has now been chosen to promote Playboy magazine.


U.S. Presses Colombia on Drug Suspect
LEAD: The State Department stepped up its protests today over the release from a Colombian prison of a man described as one of the world's leading cocaine smugglers.


Korean Trade Outlook
LEAD: South Korea's trade surplus in 1988 is expected to exceed $4 billion, down from last year's $6.55 billion, the Trade and Industry Ministry said today.
It predicted that exports would grow by 8 to 13 percent, to about $52 billion, despite the rise of the won against the dollar.


Stock Index Inquiry Report
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission said today that it had found no evidence of price manipulation in the Major Market Index, a stock index futures contract traded on the Chicago Board of Trade, during the October market collapse.


No Five-Story Bunkers for the Village, Please
LEAD: To the Editor:


Advertising; Hearst Gives Its Magazine Deals a Push
LEAD: TEN years ago Hearst Magazines, which then had eight magazines, began offering a ''corporate buy'' that gave advertisers discounts for running ads in at least three of the magazines at least three times each.


U.S. and Florida Split Over Fruit Ban
LEAD: New outbreaks of citrus canker in Florida have split Federal and state disease experts over the success of efforts to prevent the disease from establishing a permanent foothold in the continental United States.


Reader's Digest to Acquire Magazine
LEAD: For 60 years, the Reader's Digest Company's sole magazine was the highly successful Reader's Digest.
Now George V. Grune, the company's chairman since 1984, is seeking to expand the company's publishing empire.


Chicago Provides Free Calculators to Students
LEAD: In an effort to take some of the misery out of mathematics, the Chicago public schools began providing free pocket calculators to students today, but some critics warned that the program could cause learning problems.


Houston Journal; The Drive-Through, A City's Love Affair
LEAD: Once thought of as a a cow town, this city has long been one of the ultimate car towns.
There are drive-through florists, drive-through dry cleaners, drive-through liquor stores and drive-through pharmacies.
There is even a drive-through pawn shop for those who do not want to leave their cars and expose their hard luck to the world.


MAFIOSO'S ART EXHIBITED
LEAD: Luciano Liggio, the real-life ''Godfather'' of Corleone, is spending his long hours in prison painting.


A.M.I. Investor Plans A More Active Role
LEAD: M. Lee Pearce, a doctor and lawyer who is president of a Miami health-care consulting company, wrote out a sobering prescription yesterday for one his clients, American Medical International Inc.


Robins Bids May Go Up
LEAD: Bidding for the A. H. Robins Company appeared to be headed higher yesterday - only three days after France's big drug producer, Sanofi S.A., announced that Robins had accepted its $3.1 billion takeover offer.
Other bidders contended that Sanofi's offer was difficult to evaluate.


Why Is This Man Yawning?
LEAD: THE yawn is something of a biological mystery.


Holtzman's 6 Years: Innovations and Antagonism
LEAD: In six years as District Attorney of Brooklyn, Elizabeth Holtzman says, she has raised the professional standards of her office, introduced new strategies to deter crime and forged closer ties with the black and Hispanic communities by aggressively investigating complaints of police brutality.


Julius S. Impellizzeri, Lawyer and Executive
LEAD: Julius S. Impellizzeri, a lawyer and business executive who helped investigate police corruption in New York City, died Wednesday at Roosevelt Hospital after a long illness.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan and Cold Spring, N.Y.


Concert: Harris's 'James Robert Sonata'
LEAD: IT took three-quarters of a century but finally, on Sunday afternoon in Merkin Concert Hall, Theodore Harris got the break he had been waiting for all his life.
The performance by Malle Magi of Mr.
Harris's ''James Robert Sonata,'' a work for piano, dedicated to the composer's grandson, marked the first time a serious piece by the 75-year-old composer from


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: N.H.L.
Oilers 2, Bruins 2: Charlie Huddy scored an unassisted goal on a long shot apparently deflected by a Bruin player with 2 minutes 17 seconds left in the third period, giving Edmonton a tie last night.
Huddy's 60-foot shot apparently hit Boston's Ken Linseman and spun past the goalie.
Edmonton played without the injured Wayne Gretzky.


Music: New Setting of 3 Lorca Poems
LEAD: A NEW song cycle by David MacBride was the main feature of Sunday evening's concert by the Prism Chamber Orchestra at Merkin Concert Hall. ''Nocturnos de la Ventana'' is a setting, in Spanish, of three Garcia Lorca poems for tenor, string quintet, keyboards, percussion and a small wind complement.


U.S. Matching Aid Is Being Disbursed To 12 Candidates
LEAD: The Treasury began disbursing $28.7 million today in Federal matching funds to 12 Presidential candidates.


Long Views In Poland
LEAD: Mieczyslaw Rakowski has been at the leading edge for reform among Polish Communists for over a generation.
He never quit the party, as so many did, and his fortunes waxed and waned according to the climate.
Along the way he accumulated enemies among party officials who thought him too soft and critics of the party who thought he lacked the courage of his conclusions.


Koch, at the Movies, Gives $7 Tickets Thumbs Down
LEAD: It could have been a scene from a made-for-television movie.


HOUSING AND WELFARE: A LOGICAL LINK
LEAD: The first housing bill in seven years is on its way to the Oval Office.


Drug Cases Top Others In Prisons
LEAD: For the first time in New York State, the number of inmates serving time for drug-related offenses has surpassed those imprisoned for any other type of crime, officials of the overcrowded prison system said yesterday.


Boitano's Coach Rules Out Risky Figure
LEAD: For something that has never been performed successfully in competition, the quadruple toe loop gets a lot of attention.
It came up again when Brian Boitano, the only American skater with a realistic chance of landing it, said he did not intend to try it during the United States figure-skating championships, which began here today.


FIRST FEDL SAVINGS-ARK reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDL SAVINGS-ARK (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b15,900,000
c797,000
Per share
-
.22
Yr net loss
b83,800,000
c11,033,000
b-After an extraordinary credit of $132,000 for both the quarter and year.


HEALTHCARE COMPARE reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTHCARE COMPARE (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,958,000
2,330,000
Net inc
369,000
b250,000
Share earns
.08
.09
Shares outst
4,230,000
2,919,000
b-After a tax credit of $60,000.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE DROWNED AND THE SAVED.
By Primo Levi.
Translated from the Italian by Raymond Rosenthal. 203 pages.


Monongahela Oil Spill Threatens Water Supplies in Pittsburgh Area
LEAD: Faucets dried up for tens of thousands of people in suburban Pittsburgh yesterday as emergency crews battled to contain a huge fuel-oil spill oozing more than 50 miles downstream from a collapsed storage tank on the Monongahela River.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''Among the people as a whole, as long as she can deliver bread and circuses, as long as the prosperity is there, she can go on and it will be hard to stop her.''  - Robert D. Waller, Conservative Party polltaker, describing Margaret Thatcher.  [ A6:4. ]


U.S. Bond Prices Rise Moderately
LEAD: Treasury bond prices retained moderate gains late yesterday after soaring earlier in the session.
While relatively light, trading was described by dealers as somewhat unnerving, as illustrated by the behavior of the key long-term Treasury bond.


Market Place; Buying Laggards Of Previous Year
LEAD: THE worst performers in the Dow Jones industrial average sometimes turn into winners the following year.
This laggard approach to investing is of more than passing interest on Wall Street, where any theory that pans out even once in a while - dart-throwing comes to mind - engenders a certain respect.


New Treatments May Aid Women Who Have Repeated Miscarriages
LEAD: FOR some scientists, the question is not: Why does a woman's body sometimes reject a developing fetus?
Instead, they ask: Why does any fetus survive all the way to term?


Court Finds Gandhi Opponent Guilty of Nepotism
LEAD: An Indian court has dealt a severe blow to one of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's sharpest political foes, saying that he had misused his office to benefit his relatives.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article yesterday about the coming session of the New York State Legislature misidentified State Senator John R. Dunne.
He is the deputy majority leader.


Saudis Impose An Income Tax On Foreigners
LEAD: Ending an era in which it seemed to be a fountain of untaxed wealth, Saudi Arabia has introduced income taxes on all foreign businesses and foreign workers, increased import duties on many goods, issued its first public debt in a quarter-century and drawn from its foreign currency reserves.


Tax Watch; Intricate Changes Frustrate C.P.A.'s
LEAD: AT a professional training course for accountants in the Bay Area, there were signs that tax practitioners have not kept up with the sweeping changes of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and thus have failed to give their clients important advice on critical matters.


Careers; Some Advice On Securing Business Jobs
LEAD: LIKE advice to the lovelorn, helpful words for job losers and job seekers are widely available.
Now an economist and a forecaster offer some advice for middle managers who have lost their jobs and for people with new M.B.A. degrees who are looking for their first jobs.


Constitution Allows Pardons Before Conviction
LEAD: To The Editor:


BankAmerica's Settlements
LEAD: The BankAmerica Corporation said today that it had reached settlements involving a number of lawsuits against its employees and others that will net the company about $28 million in payments from its insurance company, the Employers Insurance of Wausau Mutual Company.


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, JANUARY 5, 1988
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL  The U.S. and other governments bought an estimated $2 billion to $3 billion in dollars, helping the currency recover from a sharp decline in Asian trading, dealers said.
To some market analysts, the purchases indicated that Washington and other governments feared another uncontrolled fall in the dollar.


TRANSFORMING A BROOKLYN THEATER
LEAD: Armed with pickaxes and jackhammers, a contingent of 40 stagehands worked furiously yesterday to tear apart the set of ''The Mahabharata'' at the Majestic Theater in Brooklyn, barely 10 hours after the last performance of Peter Brook's epic production.
Looking more like a muddy contruction site than the scene for this season's most-talked-about theatrical work, the Brooklyn Academy of Music's controversial new performance space was rapidly being transformed.


California Leads States In Money From Filming
LEAD: California remained the favorite location for motion picture and television filming in 1987, taking in some $6 billion, slightly more than last year, according to early figures made public today by The Hollywood Reporter newspaper.


SUPER RITE FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUPER RITE FOODS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
164,340,000
153,056,000
Net inc
1,364,000
1,124,000
Share earns
.27
.22
9mo sales
474,687,000
446,625,000
Net inc
3,012,000
2,573,000
Share earns
.60
.51


Price Waterhouse Plan to Aid Banks
LEAD: Price Waterhouse &amp; Company, the accounting firm, is expected to announce today, according to accounting industry sources, that it will not require its clients to write down the value of all their Mexican loans if they participate in a recently announced plan to exchange part of those loans at a loss for new


Our Towns; I Live for Art, But Getting Paid Is Great, Too
LEAD: It was Sunday night, so Bill had his ARTS Anonymous meeting in Hicksville.


For 'Silver Hair'
LEAD: Senator John Melcher of Montana, chairman of the Senate's Special Committee on Aging, is working to convene a ''Silver-Haired Congress'' alongside the regular Congress sometime next year.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Saturday about the proposal to develop Columbus Circle misstated the role of Richard I. Beattie, an attorney.
He was an unpaid adviser to Salomon Brothers, the company that has withdrawn as a partner in the project.


Tyson's Big Deal
LEAD: Mike Tyson's big deal was sealed yesterday.


Power in a Pocket
LEAD: MANY people keep their distance from personal computers, even those who could find a use for one, because of an impression that only the mathematically inclined can truly understand them.


KAYPRO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAYPRO CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 27
1987
1986
Sales
22,486,000
29,985,000
Net loss
616,000
b1,279,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income and includes a tax credit of $515,000.


Loosening Up: A New Look in Men's Wear for Fall
LEAD: When retailers went to Ronaldus Shamask's showroom to look over his spring fashions for men, the designer was sure his sports jackets and pants in bright red or purple wouldn't sell.


By Design: Wet Wear
LEAD: If you are lucky enough to be heading south you are now confronting the bathing suit problem.
The scenario is all too familiar.
First comes the debacle of the dressing room.
There are few fashion moments as depressing as this one.
The bare facts about your body are facing you in the mirror.
How to find a suit that will enhance what's all right but also disguise what isn't?


BRIDGFORD FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRIDGFORD FOODS (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,932,350
14,240,753
Net inc
425,983
296,774
Share earns
.23
.16
Yr sales
56,484,963
54,110,257
Net inc
1,606,952
628,233
Share earns
.86
.33


The Planes in Spain
LEAD: Washington is unhappy about Spain's insistence on pulling out American warplanes when an existing base agreement runs its course about three years hence.
True enough, the Socialist Prime Minister, Felipe Gonzalez, promised in 1986 to cut back U.S. forces if Spain voted to remain in NATO, which it did.


Court Keeps Envoy's Son in Custody
LEAD: A Federal appeals court decided yesterday that the 9-year-old son of a diplomat from Zimbabwe should remain in foster care on Long Island pending a full hearing later this week in a case involving accusations that the boy had been beaten by his father.


Dr. Max Siegel, Psychotherapist, 69
LEAD: Dr.
Max Siegel, a New York psychotherapist for many years, died of a heart attack Friday at Boca Raton (Fla.) Community Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Boca Raton.


Conquering Christmas
LEAD: On Jan. 1 a person who has never before made a New Year's resolution made one.
She resolved to get Dec. 25, 1988, over with this month.


Arthur Lumsden, 68, Publishing Chairman
LEAD: Arthur J. Lumsden, a former head of the Greater Hartford Chamber of Commerce and chairman of the publishing house of Dodd, Mead &amp; Company, died of lung cancer Sunday at Bethesda Memorial Hospital in Boynton Beach, Fla.
He was 68 years old and lived in Delray Beach, Fla., and West Hartford, Conn.


OLD FASHION FOODS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OLD FASHION FOODS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Revenue
4,861,000
4,143,000
Net inc
179,000
122,000
Share earns
.15
.09
Shares outst
1,220,051
1,340,408
6mo rev
9,482,000
8,047,000
Net inc
359,000
275,000
Share earns
.30
.21
Shares outst
1,220,422
1,342,494


Van Hits Boy, 7, on L.I.
LEAD: A 7-year-old East Meadow, L.I., boy, Anthony Accetta, was critically injured yesterday afternoon when he was hit by a Cablevision van in the road in front of his home on Maurice Avenue, according to the police.
The driver of the vehicle, James Terry, 34, of West Babylon, L.I., was issued a summons for driving a vehicle with a suspended license.


Soviet Path Is Cleared
LEAD: Marat Gramov, the chairman of the Soviet Union's sports committee, said today that his country intended to participate in the Summer Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea, and that an official announcement was expected next week.


Mugabe Picks New Cabinet, Giving a Key Post to Nkomo
LEAD: President Robert Mugabe appointed a new 27-member Cabinet on Saturday, dropping several longtime supporters and giving key posts to former foes, including Joshua Nkomo.


Currency Traders Kept On Edge by Fed's Moves
LEAD: In the instantaneous world of foreign exchange trading, no bit of market gossip spreads faster than reports that the Federal Reserve or some other central bank is intervening to buy a particular currency.


Decision to Pay Fees to Econocom
LEAD: The Decision Industries Corporation has agreed to pay Econocom International N.V. $1.85 million for certain expenses relating to Econocom's failed takeover offer for the computer concern based in Horsham, Pa.


Go Slow on Ratifying the I.N.F. Pact
LEAD: The treaty limiting intermediate-range nuclear forces has been welcomed in the West as a small step that may have constructive results, depending upon the next step in the nuclear arms-control negotiations.


Shamir Defends Expulsion Move, Terming the 9 Arabs 'Incorrigible'
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir today defended the army's decision to order nine Palestinian nationalists deported, saying the Gaza Strip and West Bank residents being thrown out were ''incorrigible.''


SLAVAGING OF AIRPLANE IN ANTARCTICA IS ON SCHEDULE
LEAD: Plans by the National Science Foundation to recover a airplane used for polar exploration that crashed in 1971 are still on schedule despite the crash last month of a second plane carrying spare parts for the first, officials here say.


Atomic View of Insect Virus
LEAD: APPLYING advanced X-ray techniques, scientists have for the first time determined the three-dimensional structure of an insect virus in atomic detail.


Cyclosporine and Kidneys
LEAD: About one in 10 people receiving cyclosporine to prevent rejection of transplanted organs develops kidney problems, including fatal kidney failure.
Now a group at the Albany Medical Center has found experimental evidence that the reason those people develop kidney trouble is that the drug breaks down into poisonous fragments in their bodies.


Violin Was Stolen, Mourned, Replaced and Then Returned
LEAD: Dana Goode-Veistrup with her 78-year-old, $14,000 Rodolfo Fredi violin.
It was stolen last September and returned on Sunday after a young man bought it from a man in the street for $10, and gave it to the police.
She now faces a problem because she bought a replacement last month for nearly the same price.


OFF BROADWAY'S BIGGEST GAMBLE
LEAD: ''The Chosen,'' which opens Thursday at the Second Avenue Theater, is the biggest gamble in Off Broadway history.
Its $2.5 million capitalization is more than the combined cost of all Off Broadway productions last season, according to Paul Libin, head of the League of Off Broadway Theaters and Producers, a trade group.


Chess: American Open Tournament Is Won by Yasser Seirawan
LEAD: Yasser Seirawan won the $10,000 first prize in the 23d annual American Open Tournament at the Los Angeles International Airport Marriott Hotel.
The 27-year-old Seattle grandmaster scored the winning, 7-1, in the eight-round Swiss-System competition sponsored by Software Toolworks and organized by the Santa Monica Bay Chess Club.


East Bloc's Wind of Change Now Blows in From Moscow
LEAD: In Eastern Europe, where for four decades the Soviet leader has represented to millions the main source of their discontent, Mikhail S. Gorbachev has wrought an astonishing transformation.


Cordero Out 3 Weeks
LEAD: Angel Cordero Jr., thoroughbred racing's No. 2 career money-winning jockey behind Bill Shoemaker, with more than $121 million in purses earned, will be sidelined for at least three weeks because of injuries he sustained in a spill last Wednesday at Santa Anita Park in Arcadia, Calif.


'Doublespeak' Crusade
LEAD: ABOUT a year ago, in a small airport in Kentucky, I was alarmed by a sign that read:


TEMCO SERVICE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEMCO SERVICE INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
25,478,516
20,854,312
Net loss
92,472
b205,356
Share earns
-
.35
Yr rev
101,721,098
84,785,414
Net inc
426,398
1,035,574
Share earns
.72
1.72


German Diplomat Slain in Paris; Hint of Kurdish Role Is Disputed
LEAD: A West German diplomat was shot and killed here early today, and there were hints and denials that a Kurdish group was responsible.


Reagan With Scissor
LEAD: President Reagan will cut the ribbon Friday morning when the Army-Navy Club, a 102-year-old institution, rededicates its clubhouse on Farragut Square after almost four years of remodeling and reconstruction.
The light-yellow brick building was dedicated by President Taft in 1912 after a move from a building across the street that President Harrison had dedicated in 1892.


Salah Hindawy, Egyptian Diplomat, 48
LEAD: Salah Hindawy, a senior Egyptian diplomat who took part in efforts to resolve a border dispute with Israel, died of a heart attack Sunday in Kuwait.
He was 48 years old.


The Goose Factor
LEAD: In the early 1950's, a flock of migrating geese made an alarming appearance on the nation's Distant Early Warning radar screens.
Steadily advancing across the DEW line, their formation resembled that of an enemy bomber squadron.
Fortunately, the error was discovered and nuclear scenarists lived to think again.


Pritzker Has Union Talks
LEAD: Representatives of Jay A. Pritzker met with union leaders of Pan American World Airways Inc. in an effort to revive his attempt to take over the airline, sources close to the talks said yesterday.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Gary C. Robert has joined Greenstone &amp; Rabasca Advertising, Melville, L.I., as executive vice president in charge of client services.


A Thatcher Milestone Spurs Debate on Her Forceful Style
LEAD: Margaret Thatcher has become Britain's longest-serving Prime Minister of the century, and the main effect of her new historical status seems to be a broadening of the debate about authoritarianism and the concentration of power in her third term.


'Carmen' From Brooklyn
LEAD: The Brooklyn Lyric Opera's professional workshop, the Opera Stage, is to perform Bizet's ''Carmen'' on Thursday at 8 P.M., Sunday at 3 P.M., Jan. 14 at 8 P.M. and Jan. 17 at 3 P.M. in Hirsch Hall at Temple Ansche Chesed, 251 West 100th Street.
Tickets are $7.50.
Information: (718) 837-1176.


Many in Congress Feel Urge to Write
LEAD: Along with writing the nation's laws, members of Congress have shown a 200-year passion for pen and paper by writing everything from college textbooks to boastful biographies to spy novels.


Rolf Presthus, Norwegian Party Chief, 51
LEAD: Rolf Presthus, chairman of the Conservative Party and a former Finance Minister, died of a cerebral hemorrhage Friday, his family said.
He was 51 years old.


Cheap, Clean Needles
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ruins Yield Tales of Ancient Wars and Spies
LEAD: WRITTEN in the clay, a sunbaked tablet from the 18th century B.C., was a message from one ruler of a city-state of upper Mesopotamia to another.
We have released your spies, the ruler said, so where is the money you promised as ransom?


Nora Kaye Honored In Memorial Tribute By Artist Colleagues
LEAD: Members of the dance and theater worlds gathered yesterday afternoon at the City Center to honor Nora Kaye, the American ballerina who died last year.
Known for her dramatic power, Ms.
Kaye, who was born in New York City in 1920, was a member of American Ballet Theater from its inception in 1940 until 1951, and again from 1954 to 1959.


Traces of Muscle Drug Are Found In Body in Nurse Inquiry on L.I.
LEAD: Traces of a muscle-paralyzing drug have been found in the body of one patient suspected of dying from unauthorized injections given by a West Islip nurse, a Suffolk County prosecutor said today.


Continental's First Class Offered for Full Coach Fare
LEAD: Continental Airlines struck a blow at the concept of first-class service yesterday, announcing that passengers who belong to its frequent-flier program and pay the full coach fare could get first-class seats on most flights by making reservations on a first-come, first-serve basis.


New York's 2 Senators Seek To Alter Rule on Murdoch
LEAD: Both United States Senators from New York, Alfonse M. D'Amato and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, said yesterday that they would seek to reverse legislation passed by Congress that would likely require Rupert Murdoch to sell The New York Post.


O'Neill on 'Playhouse'
LEAD: ''American Playhouse,'' public television's weekly drama anthology series, will open its seventh season on Jan. 18 with a three-part adaptation of Eugene O'Neill's ''Strange Interlude.''


Picking Over the Pork in the 1988 Spending Bill
LEAD: As usual, the behemoth spending bill that Congress passed just before adjourning in December contains tucked-away provisions serving special interests of individual legislators.
But, surprisingly, some Capitol Hill analysts suggest that, in a reflection of general budget constraint, the bill may have fewer pork-barrel items than in the past.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers suspended Andrew Toney yesterday after the guard failed to complete the team's West Coast tour while complaining of chronic foot problems.
Toney, who has appeared in only nine games this season, started and played 29 minutes at Portland Friday, tying his season-high of 13 points and handing out a season-high nine assists.


Charges Sought For a Principal Reagan Praised
LEAD: At a tumultuous public meeting, the Board of Education voted tonight to draw up insubordination charges against the principal of Eastside High School, Joe Clark, because of his suspension of 60 students last month.


5-Year Term in Check Fraud
LEAD: A man who was convicted of stealing more than $428,000 from his employer was sentenced today by Judge Gerard Goettel of Federal District Court to five years in prison and ordered to return the money.
The man, Charles Bates, 41 years old, had pleaded guilty to defrauding the company, Equitable Relocation Management Corporation, during a 10-month period in 1986.


FOOTBALL COMES CLEAN
LEAD: FOR a while last Friday night I rooted for the University of Miami to be No. 2 because I thought it was a dirtier team than Oklahoma.
Why else were so many of its players wearing towels on their belts?


Apartheid Takes a New Year Break
LEAD: Tyson Kobus sat under an oak tree here the other day and vented his disgust.
Mr.
Kobus is black and works as a $65-a-week driver for a local engineering company.
But what troubled him as he relaxed on a garden chair was nothing to do with apartheid.


New Headache on Roads: Drunken Bicycling
LEAD: Paul Lynch had been drinking beer at a party a few hours before he decided to ride his bicycle to the neighborhood market for cigarettes one foggy night last January in Lebanon, Pa.





A Thatcher Milestone
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who, on Sunday, became the longest serving British Prime Minister in the 20th century.
Details, page A6. (Agence France-Presse)


SAFETY EXPERTS QUESTION PROGRESS BY NASA
LEAD: An internal report by safety experts concludes that two years after the Challenger disaster the space agency still lacks the engineers, guidelines or leadership to ensure the safety of manned spaceflight.


For Israeli Soldiers, 'War of Eyes' in West Bank
LEAD: Leading an Israeli patrol through the streets of the Balata refugee center, Lieut.
Col.
Yisrael explained that on most days the confrontation here is not a war of bottles, stones or bullets.


UNITED FOODS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED FOODS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
33,312,000
29,910,000
Net loss
1,471,000
31,000
9mo rev
83,081,000
83,395,000
Net loss
b4,415,000
c484,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Attributable primarily to $2.6 million in strike-related costs, $1.8 million in costs related to decreased production volume due primarily to crop shortages and a $700,000 loss on the disposal of underutilized assets.


Moscow Journal; For Russian Shoppers, a Touch of Rodeo Drive
LEAD: Murat T. Gadginsky wants to change the way Russians shop.


'A Bulging Cabinet'
LEAD: Few issues have so riled old-fashioned Reagan supporters as the plan that Mr.
Reagan has endorsed for elevating the Veterans Administration and its 250,000 employees to the status of a department of the Federal Government and its chief to membership in the Cabinet.


Japan Gains In Chip Market
LEAD: Japan increased its share of the worldwide semiconductor market in 1987 despite United States trade sanctions, a survey by the research concern Dataquest Inc. showed today.


Dee Might Cut Ties With Citibank
LEAD: The Dee Corporation, parent of Herman's Sporting Goods Inc., said it might cut its ties with Citibank, its investment banker, because the bank is also helping to finance a hostile takeover bid for the British retailer.
Alec Monc, chairman of Dee, said in a statement to shareholders that Britain's Monopolies Commission should investigate the $:2.04 billion bid, or about $3.8 billion, it received from Barker &amp; Dobson P.L.C., a small


Anti-Takeover Move Advances in Delaware
LEAD: Delaware, which is home to more major corporations than any other state, moved a step closer yesterday to adopting a law that would make unfriendly takeovers more difficult.


Soviet Computer Push
LEAD: A Soviet crash program to catch up with the West in designing powerful new computers is beginning to pay off, but the Russians still lag far behind, according to industry reports.


Electrical Gremlins
LEAD: SURGE suppressors are devices that stand between a computer and its power source, guarding the machine's delicate circuitry against surges and other electrical fluctuations that are normal along AC power lines but potentially disastrous in a computer.
I like to think of them as gremlin guards.


Comment on OPEC Output Helps Bolster Oil Contracts
LEAD: Oil prices climbed yesterday after an OPEC minister was quoted as saying members of the oil organization had been adhering to production levels agreed upon last month.


W. J. Cagney, Producer For His Brother James
LEAD: William J. Cagney, a brother of James Cagney and the producer of such films as ''The Time of Your Life'' and ''Kiss Tomorrow Goodbye,'' died of a heart attack Sunday at Hoag Memorial Hospital here.
He was 82 years old.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allis-Chalmers Corp., Milwaukee, a developer of specialized technology for process control equipment, said it had completed the sale of its mining equipment unit to Boliden A.B. of Sweden for $97.9 million.


Despair Prompts Gifts to the Neediest Cases
LEAD: Euphemia M. Bruenner of Manhattan does not dare open her purse on the street to respond to pleas of those in need.
Instead, she sent $100 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


In the Space Age, the Old Wind Tunnel Is Being Left Behind
LEAD: AEROSPACE engineers have hit a dead end in conventional efforts to test designs for the next generation of spaceships, planetary probes and other futuristic flying machines, prompting a rush of new proposals and projects for exotic techniques to help develop 21st-century spacecraft.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Atlas Corp., Princeton, N.J., elected as a director Harry Winters Jr., president of the Winters Co., Tucson, Ariz., a mining industry consulting concern.


REBUKES TO ISRAEL ARE MUTED BY U.S.
LEAD: The State Department has decided to refrain from further strong public criticism of Israel's handling of Palestinian protesters, a well-placed Administration official said today.


OHIO MATTRESS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OHIO MATTRESS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
168,514,000
84,901,000
Net inc
7,835,000
2,881,000
Share earns
.36
.18
Yr sales
598,149,000
297,405,000
Net inc
23,371,000
11,628,000
Share earns
1.15
.72


Dock Union Organizer Is Found Slain in Auto
LEAD: A 61-year-old union organizer, reputed to be an organized-crime figure, was found shot dead yesterday afternoon in his automobile parked in front of his home in Brooklyn, the police said.


Viking Problems Left Behind
LEAD: Now, it is on to San Francisco, where the Minnesota Vikings fully expect to be regarded as an appetizer on the 49ers' playoff menu.
Their one-sided victory Sunday against New Orleans probably will end the talk that they did not deserve to be in the playoffs, but ultimately, the Vikings figure the National Conference wild-card game will be remembered as the day the Saints reverted to their losing ways.


Westinghouse Growth Projection
LEAD: The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said that sales for the industrial and broadcasting company are expected to grow 8.5 percent this year.
John C. Marous, the company's new chairman and chief executive officer, and Paul E. Lego, president and chief operating officer, who both took office today, said acquisitions and new business generated internally would account for three percentage points of the revenue growth.


Bridge: A Computer Takes 5 Weeks To Digest a 10-Day Tourney
LEAD: At the end of a decathlon the track-and-field computer can normally digest the results of 10 events and produce final standings within five minutes or so.
The American Contract Bridge League's computer in Memphis, however, took more than five weeks to digest the results of 10 days of national play, admittedly involving much more data.


Nevada's Radioactive Jackpot
LEAD: Just before Christmas, Congress gave Nevada an expensive present - the Federal repository for highly radioactive waste, now to be tunneled out of Nevada's Yucca Mountain.
The gift comes with a special evergreen greeting: $20 million, every year.
Yet the Governor of Nevada, Richard Bryan, does not sound grateful.


Day 1: Minnesota Educator Meets New York
LEAD: On his first day in New York City as Schools Chancellor, Dr.
Richard R. Green, displayed confidence, flashes of humor and a certain no-nonsense attitude toward what he clearly thought were fringe issues.
And at his baptismal City Hall news conference yesterday he suggested, ever so gently, that he, not Mayor Koch, was the star.


PATTERNS
LEAD: Bargain Time for Furs


CSX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CSX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,131,000,000
2,004,000,000
Net inc
129,000,000
132,000,000
Share earns
.82
.86
Shares outst
154,814,387
153,329,010
Yr rev
8,043,000,000
7,292,000,000
Net inc
b138,000,000
418,000,000
Share earns
.88
2.73


No Medal for Mr. Meese
LEAD: Not content with the usual year-end self-congratulations, the Justice Department makes an extravagant prediction about Attorney General Edwin Meese, a frequent grand jury witness and subject of special prosecutor interest.


76.42 Jump Sends Dow To 2,015.25
LEAD: Stock prices staged a powerful year-opening rally yesterday, and traders said a strengthening dollar and program trading were behind the surge.


INTERNATIONAL KING'S TABLE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 12
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL KING'S TABLE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 12
1987
1986
Sales
22,050,000
19,969,000
Net inc
599,000
435,000
Share earns
.21
.15
6mo sales
44,313,000
40,886,000
Net inc
1,353,000
1,471,000
Share earns
.46
.51


STOCK PRICES RISE
LEAD: The United States and other leading governments reportedly bought $2 billion to $3 billion in American currency today, helping the dollar to recover from a sharp decline in Asian trading.


Gulotta Is Given Oath in Nassau As County Chief
LEAD: Pledging to protect suburban values threatened by continued growth, Thomas S. Gulotta was inaugurated today as Nassau County Executive.


Gaston Eyskens Dies at Age 82; Led Six Governments in Belgium
LEAD: Gaston Eyskens, a former Prime Minister of Belgium, who led six Governments during a period that spanned 24 years, died at his home in Louvain on Sunday.
He was 82 years old.


Two Mayors Begin Their Second Terms With Visions of Jobs and Integrity; A Call for Honesty in Philadelphia
LEAD: With a call for public integrity and a pledge of governmental unity that even this city's boosters acknowledge have often eluded it, Philadelphia's top officials today embarked hopefully on a new four-year term of office.


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, JANUARY 5, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-12


Strike Left Mark on Network Ratings
LEAD: DESPITE a strong finish, the three major networks were not able to erase the effects of the players' strike from their National Football League broadcasts.


Troubled Waters: The Concern Grows
LEAD: On the beaches of southern New Jersey, children hunting for seashells came upon broken hypodermic needles and other hospital debris.
Off the craggy coast of Connecticut, lobstermen found their catch already dead because of the paucity of oxygen in the water.
Biologists in New York, performing autopsies on sea turtles that had washed ashore, discovered plastic shopping bags in their stomachs.


Devils Pay Penalty For Shoddy Play
LEAD: Having never finished with a winning record in 13 years as a National Hockey League franchise, the Devils are not accustomed to playing in games they are supposed to win.


E-II Seeking Key Role At American Brands
LEAD: E-II Holdings Inc., a publicly traded spinoff of the Beatrice Company, said today that it plans to nominate six candidates for election to the board of American Brands Inc., the diversified giant whose businesses includes tobacco and numerous consumer products.


Wildcats Pound Redmen On Inside
LEAD: The Villanova Wildcats invaded Alumni Hall last night and, despite a lapse late in the second half, dominated St.
John's with a pulverizing inside attack that gave them a 69-62 victory.


AMERICAN NURSERY PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN NURSERY PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,261,000
1,510,000
Net loss
704,000
525,000
Shares outst
3,621,509
3,225,000
6mo sales
6,099,000
2,749,000
Net loss
1,316,000
1,062,000
Shares outst
3,621,509
2,912,499


Advertising; New Yorker's New Publisher
LEAD: Steven T. Florio, the president of The New Yorker, announced yesterday that Rebecca Wesson Darwin, a long-time associate, had been promoted to publisher of the magazine, a title that he had previously held.


Iranians Reported in Turkey for Talks About a New Pipeline
LEAD: An Iranian delegation has arrived in Turkey to begin negotiations on a new oil pipeline, Turkish Government and oil industry officials said today.


Defense in Chambers Trial Raises Question of Motive
LEAD: The defense attorney in the murder trial of Robert E. Chambers Jr. stood before the jurors yesterday and urged them to ask a single question: Why would Mr.
Chambers kill Jennifer Levin in Central Park in August 1986?


TV Review; Date Rape on 'Cagney and Lacey'
LEAD: WHY does CBS keep conveying the distinct impression that, all things being equal, it would prefer not to have ''Cagney and Lacey'' on its schedule?
You may remember that the series was officially canceled a few years ago and then brought back, thanks largely to viewer protests.
Since then the show had been doing reasonably well in the ratings on Monday nights, although rumors of its permanent cancellation continued to circulate each year at renewal time.


Cold Snap Aids Olympic Skiing
LEAD: The recent cold snap in Alberta has put snowmaking on Mount Allan back on schedule.


Unmet Aspirations
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollar Up After Tokyo Fall; Gold and Silver Prices Drop
LEAD: The dollar rallied yesterday after touching new lows during overnight trading in Tokyo, bolstered by signs that several central banks, including the Federal Reserve, had bought dollars.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Biotech: A Sales Challenge


A First in 40 Years
LEAD: Incumbent mayors also returned to office Monday in Phoenix and Memphis, while Council Bluffs, Iowa, got its first elected mayor in 40 years.


Lily Laskin, Harpist, 94
LEAD: Lily Laskin, a French musician who helped make the harp a featured solo instrument in concert halls, died today in a Paris nursing home.
She was 94 years old.


10 Salieri Scores Are Found
LEAD: A Czechoslovak museum has unearthed 10 manuscript scores by the Italian composer Antonio Salieri, the press agency C.T.K. reported today.


Fast Start for Bioengineered Drug
LEAD: At Williamsport Hospital and Medical Center in Pennsylvania, a special committee is supposed to decide whether the hospital's pharmacy will carry a particular drug, and the process can take several weeks.
But when Genentech Inc.'s heart attack drug came out in November, hospital officials eager to get their hands on it bypassed the committee and placed an order immediately.


South Korea Tests Blind U.S. Anti-Communism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Donnelley Marketing, Stamford, Conn., a unit of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp., to Marquardt &amp; Roche, Stamford, for Carol Wright's couponing promotion package.


Dow's Textbook Unit Sold to Times Mirror
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company, publishers of The Wall Street Journal, yesterday announced the $135 million sale of Richard D. Irwin Inc., its textbook-publishing subsidiary, to the Times Mirror Company, publishers of The Los Angeles Times.


Vietnam Acts On Investing
LEAD: A Vietnamese investment code governing business and trade with foreigners has been passed by the country's National Assembly.


The Basic Speech: Paul Simon; An Appeal to Seek Out 'a Better, Brighter Future'
LEAD: Candidates seeking the Presidential nomination make dozens of speeches in their campaigns.
Some address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
But more often the candidate uses a basic speech.
It summarizes, with little variation from one occasion to the next, how the candidate wants to present himself to the voters.


Palestinians Admit Terror Guilt in Pakistan
LEAD: Five Palestinians today admitted involvement in the hijacking of a New York-bound Pan Am jumbo jet in 1986.
But they blamed Pakistani commandos for the deaths of 21 hostages killed by gunfire and grenades.


Film: 'The Horse Thief'
LEAD: THE Chinese film ''The Horse Thief'' is best watched as pure spectacle, since it unfolds almost entirely without benefit of dialogue.
What little talk there is tends to be plain and to the point (''If only we had stew'').
However, from the scenic and ethnographic standpoints the film is often quite arresting.


Inquiry on Nestle Unit
LEAD: Peru has started an investigation of a subsidiary of Nestle S.A. here, accusing it of stockpiling three million cans of evaporated milk. ''This is serious because it involves a foreign company and we have to intervene to safeguard the economy,'' Peru's President, Alan Garcia, told reporters Monday as he announced the investigation into the company, called Perulac.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''For the past two days the central banks have been like a basketball team that uses fast breaks to keep the opposition off balance.
For the past two days they have been buying dollars as the currency has risen in value, an action that has pushed the dollar even higher.
For the last year or so they always bought dollars as the currency was sinking.


Advertising; Spreading The Word of Cable Guide
LEAD: WHINING chief executives of agencies and magazines, in search of publicity, are fond of saying, ''We are the best-kept secret in the business.'' Few, however, back up that cliche with proof.


Study of Plunge Due in a Month
LEAD: By early February, the Securities and Exchange Commission staff is expected to complete its study of the October stock market collapse, the commission's chairman, David S. Ruder, said today.
S.E.C. officials had hoped to have the report ready in early January.


Death of L.I. Nurse's Patient Ruled Homicide, Aide Says
LEAD: The Suffolk County Medical Examiner has issued a ruling of homicide in the death of a patient at Good Samaritan Hospital who was treated by a nurse suspected of injecting lethal drugs into patients, a law-enforcement official said today.


'Three Men and a Baby' Top Film at Box Office
LEAD: ''Three Men and a Baby'' remained the top film at the box office for the first weekend of 1988, earning nearly twice as much as the second-place movie.


Congress Acts to Ease Plight of Black Colleges
LEAD: Congress, attaching special significance to the financial plight of black colleges and universities, has increased the amount of Federal aid for those schools by about 50 percent this year, to $73.1 million.


Postmaster General Plans to Step Down by Spring
LEAD: Postmaster General Preston R. Tisch announced today that he would leave office to return to private business in the next few months.


3 Die in Connecticut Fire
LEAD: A firefighter standing near the charred entrance to a two-story house yesterday in Newington.
John Quintaglie, his wife, Faith, and their 16-year-old son, John, were killed in the early morning blaze. (AP)


Bond Prices Continue to Advance
LEAD: Bond prices rose modestly yesterday for the second consecutive day, following the lead set by the foreign exchange market, where the dollar continued to strengthen.


New President Named By Pacific Exchange
LEAD: Herbert G. Kawahara, a longtime executive of E. F. Hutton &amp; Company, has been named president of the Pacific Stock Exchange.


Swimmer Dies After Sting
LEAD: A swimmer has died after being stung by a Portuguese man-of-war, a bubble-like relative of the jellyfish.
Emily H. Small, 67 years old, screamed and lost consciousness when she was bitten about 30 feet from shore, friends who were with her said.
She was in a coma for five days before she died Friday.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Credit Card Deficit
LEAD: Calculating that each American taxpayer, in theory, could be responsible for $18,569.10 of the debt now on the Federal books, a Republican Congressman from New York is trying to force the Internal Revenue Service to make that more widely known.


BRAZIL NAMES NEW FINANCE MINISTER
LEAD: President Jose Sarney today named an economist and longtime Government official, Mailson Ferreira da Nobrega, as Brazil's new Finance Minister, succeeding Luiz Carlos Bresser Pereira, who resigned last month in a clash over economic policy.


Israeli Troops Kill Arab In a Fresh Riot in Gaza
LEAD: Israeli troops shot and killed at least one stone-throwing Palestinian youth today and wounded seven others while trying to quell another outbreak of rioting in the Gaza Strip.
Five Israeli soldiers were slightly wounded by rocks and bottles.


Muller Jordan Adds Blair Entertainment
LEAD: John Blair Communications is made up of Blair Television, a national advertising representative for a number of stations, and Blair Entertainment, which produces and syndicates TV programming.


A Computer's Penmanship Problem
LEAD: Computers are dumb beasts that do exactly what they are told.
When told to do something perfectly, they do it perfectly.
Inscribe, a Cambridge, Mass., company marketing computerized calligraphy , is finding that the computer is . . . well, not human enough.
It doesn't make mistakes.


Investigators Seek a Motive In Diplomat's Death in Paris
LEAD: Investigators are considering the possibility that the shooting death of a West German Embassy employee was related to a private matter and not terrorism, an Interior Ministry spokesman said today.


A Closer Look at Drugs in Animals
LEAD: Manufacturers of drugs given to animals that are used for food will be required to develop new tests for residues, in order to meet a stricter safety standard proposed by the Food and Drug Administration, officials announced Monday.


Fox Sneakers In Agency Shift
LEAD: Travel Fox sneakers, which created quite a stir last year by running an ad featuring a male and female clad only in sweat socks and the product, have been switched to another agency.


Ward Calls for Increased Training To Reduce Use of Guns by Police
LEAD: Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward said yesterday that New York City officers needed more training in subduing violent people without using guns and in ''overcoming a mindset'' that makes them reluctant to retreat.


Jackson Obtains Matching Funds
LEAD: The Federal Election Commission today declared the Rev.
Jesse Jackson eligible to receive Federal matching funds for his 1988 Presidential campaign.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Rolando Blackman, whose 18.5- point scoring average is second highest on the team, will miss the Dallas Mavericks' next five games after spraining his knee in a 117-107 loss to Houston Monday.
The 6-foot-6-inch Blackman was injured when Allen Leavell of the Houston Rockets fell on him after fouling Blackman on a drive to the basket.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the snow, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Optimistic Rangers Are Starting to Jell After a Slow Start
LEAD: Michel Bergeron removed his glasses and smiled determinedly before he answered.
John Vanbiesbrouck, as he is predisposed to do, spoke quickly and earnestly when the question was put to him.
Everyone, it seemed, prefaced their remarks differently, but almost all of the Rangers arrived at the same response.


Capitals Top Flyers To Extend Streak
LEAD: Dave Christian and Mike Gartner scored first-period goals tonight as the Washington Capitals defeated the Philadelphia Flyers, 3-1, and extended their unbeaten streak to five games.


THEY CALLED HIM PISTOL
LEAD: THE first thing you noticed were the eyes, sad eyes, moist eyes, unfulfilled eyes.
Bil Keane has made a career of painting sad-eyed clowns, waifs who have seen too much, but Pete Maravich was not merely a Keane painting, he was a man trying to go straight.


Myerson &amp; Kuhn Arises From Finley, Kumble
LEAD: Myerson &amp; Kuhn is making its debut in New York City this week, arising from what was recently the nation's fourth-largest law firm.


Threat by Wagner to Resign Resolved Schools Stalemate
LEAD: Robert F. Wagner Jr., his authority as president of New York City's Board of Education imperiled, resolved a sensitive political stalemate over the choice of a new schools chancellor last week with a threat to resign, city and education officials said yesterday.


Let Us Not Praise Any Famous Womanizers; A Complicitous Press
LEAD: To the Editor:


Washington Talk: Capital Reading; Rehnquist Taking Stock of the Federal Judiciary
LEAD: Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist last week issued his year-end report on the Supreme Court and the Federal judiciary.
Following are excerpts:


13,000 Deaths a Year Indicated By Science Academy Radon Study
LEAD: Exposure to radon, the odorless radioactive gas that seeps into buildings from underground rocks, appears to be responsible for about 13,000 lung cancer deaths annually, according to new data compiled by the National Academy of Sciences.


Alysheba Is Top 3-Year-Old
LEAD: Alysheba lost to Java Gold the only time they met on the race track last year, but scored a resounding victory yesterday in the Eclipse Award balloting for the champion 3-year-old of 1987.


Stuart Perlman, 60, Co-Founder Of Caesars World With Brother
LEAD: Stuart Z. Perlman, who with his brother founded Caesars World Inc., a chain of opulent gambling casinos and hotels, and then severed ties with it amid charges of ties to suspected organized-crime figures, died of a heart attack Monday at the North Miami Medical Center in North Miami Beach, Fla.
He was 60 years old.


U.S.-Mexico Export Pact
LEAD: Textile and apparel exports from Mexico to the United States would grow by 6 percent annually in the next four years, compared with a 50 percent increase in 1987 imports, under a pact between the two countries announced today by the United States trade representative, Clayton K. Yeutter.


With a Gallic Touch: 3 French Chefs At Epcot
LEAD: THERE aren't many French restaurants in the United States where a couple wearing Bermuda shorts, T-shirts and Mickey Mouse ears would be tolerated, much less welcomed.
But Chefs de France is no ordinary French restaurant.
In this extravaganza at the futuristic Epcot Center at Disney World in Orlando,


McGwire Leaving Iowa
LEAD: Saying he didn't get a fair shake at Iowa, Dan McGwire, who dropped from starting quarterback for the Hawkeyes in the preseason to No. 3 by the end of the year, said he plans to transfer to San Diego State. ''Very unhappy.
Very unhappy.
You can underline that,'' McGwire said. ''They built me up to be real big and they didn't give me a chance.


G.M.'s High-Tech Visions of Sales
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation showed off its technological visions of the future yesterday, even though some of its high-tech efforts have been less than wildly popular with consumers.


Koch Discloses Cuts in Hiring Police Officers
LEAD: Mayor Koch, seeking to dissuade the State Legislature from approving increases in municipal pensions, said yesterday that New York City would hire 1,548 fewer police officers and sanitation workers over the next two months than had been anticipated.


Waxing and Waning at Mme. Tussaud's
LEAD: Once a month, eight people meet to decide which world figures will remain immortal and which will be smashed and melted down.


Behind New York City Policy on Restraining Prisoner Patients
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brockway Stock Posts a Decline
LEAD: Brockway Inc.'s stock dropped yesterday amid signs the Federal Trade Commission would seek to block its proposed $750 million takeover by Owens-Illinois Inc., a fellow glass-container maker.
Owens-Illinois said it expected that the F.T.C. would try to stop the deal after talks with the agency ended on Monday.


Life in the 30's
LEAD: I HAVE been married almost 10 years to the same person.
Sometimes it's hard for me to believe.
Neither of us was sure that any human being could be expected to live over the long haul with anyone as stubborn, opinionated and difficult as the other.
Somehow it has worked, and it is not a gross exaggeration to say that this is partly because I am a much better cook than he is, and he tells much better jokes than I do.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Jan. 1
Dec. 25
Jan. 2
1988
1987
1987
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.3
3.0
Gasoline stocks
227.5
227.4
237.9
Distillate stocks
136.7
131.2
153.6
Crude imports, daily
4.5
4.2
4.1
Product imports, daily
2.2
2.0
2.1
Crude stocks
352.2
357.3
326.7
Crude production, daily
8.3
8.3
8.4
Refinery utilization (%)
85.0
85.0
85.1


Boxing Notebook; Hagler's Future: No Decision
LEAD: By now it seems as if Marvelous Marvin Hagler would have made up his mind about his boxing future.


Cuomo to Ask Rise in Jobless Aid
LEAD: Governor Cuomo, in his State of the State message on Wednesday, will propose raising the maximum weekly benefit for unemployed workers in New York by almost 30 percent, aides to the Governor said today.


Oil Contracts Rise Modestly After 'Squeeze' In London
LEAD: Crude oil futures posted modest gains yesterday on carry-over buying from Monday, when prices of all energy contracts soared on reports of a ''squeeze'' in London's cash market for North Sea Brent grade oil.


8 1/2%-9% Rates By Fannie Mae
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association is offering today four-year and seven-year debentures totaling $1.35 billion through various securities dealers.


Germans Open Terror Trial Against Lebanese
LEAD: Abbas Ali Hamadei, a dual Lebanese-West German citizen, went on trial here today on kidnapping and other charges.


DOLLAR RISES AGAIN AS CENTRAL BANKS CONTINUE SUPPORT
LEAD: The dollar's value rose dramatically in heavy trading yesterday, bolstered by a growing belief that, for now, Washington and other governments are committed to preventing its further decline.


Best Sellers From 1987's Book Crop
LEAD: Stephen King's ''Tommyknockers,'' a nightmarish tale set in a Maine village, was the best-selling hard-cover book in the United States in 1987, according to a survey by The New York Times.
Even though it went on sale only in October, there are already 1,345,000 copies in print.


Hirshhorn Given 8 Major Works
LEAD: The Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden has been given eight major works of modern art from the estates of Gustave Ring, a leading builder in the Washington area, and his wife, Marion.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Skiing  Schneider Wins Giant Slalom: Vreni Schneider of Switzerland won a women's World Cup giant slalom yesterday at Tignes, France, holding off challenges from Catherine Quittet and Carole Merle, both of France.
Schneider was timed in 2 minutes 33.68 seconds for the two runs.
Quittet, who led after the first heat, came in second at 2:33.83.


Salvador Leader Says Rebels Killed Head of Rights Group
LEAD: President Jose Napoleon Duarte asserted today that Salvadoran leftist guerrillas were responsible for killing a leading human rights official here three months ago.


Ex-Senator Enters Plea In Fraud Case in Jersey
LEAD: David J. Friedland, the former New Jersey state senator who was captured on an island in the Indian Ocean last month, pleaded not guilty today in Federal court to charges of conspiracy to defraud a teamsters union pension fund.


Lotus and Rossin Suits Settled Out of Court
LEAD: The suit and countersuit involving the Lotus Development Corporation and the Rossin Greenberg Sereonick &amp; Hill agency and the question of the security of company secrets have been settled out of court, with the agency promising not to solicit business from any Lotus competitor for 10 months, as well as promising in writing not to release any confidental information of


Fellini Asks Court to Ban French Version of Film
LEAD: Federico Fellini, whose latest film, ''Intervista,'' opened two weeks ago in France to rave reviews, asked a Paris court today to ban further showings, complaining that the French dubbing was vulgar.


Syracuse Tops Boston College
LEAD: Rony Seikaly and Derrick Coleman scored 19 points each, and Steve Thompson added 15 tonight as Syracuse scored an 80-67 Big East victory over Boston College.


EVEN AT $7, FANS WANT THE HIT FILMS
LEAD: In 1912, when Adolph Zukor, founder of Paramount Pictures, exhibited the first full-length feature film in the United States at the Lyceum Theater in New York, he charged $1 for admission.


Yeutter Files Complaint
LEAD: Clayton K. Yeutter, the United States trade representative, decided today to file a formal complaint against the European Community, charging that its subsidies for soybean and other oilseed producers unfairly damages American soybean exports to Europe, an aide said.
The complaint will be filed with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Ending a Schools Stalemate  The president of the New York City Board of Education ended a stalemate over a new schools chancellor by threatening to quit, city and education officials said.
Page B1.
East Bloc's Shadow Society  Across Eastern Europe, a shadow society has sprung up outside the control of the ruling


G.M. Fills Key Post
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said that J. T. Battenberg 3d had been promoted to vice president.
Mr.
Battenberg, who is 44 years old, heads the design and manufacturing of cars for the Flint Automotive division of the Buick-Oldsmobile-Cadillac Group.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Gun Lobby Protests
LEAD: Pro-gun forces in the capital, who have long perceived Senator Edward M. Kennedy and other gun control advocates in Congress as their chief adversaries, are now viewing with alarm a purported threat from an entirely different quarter - the Reagan Administration.


Knicks Stumble Against Suns
LEAD: Don't assume anything with the Knicks.
Just when it seemed they had taken two major steps forward, they found a way to take a big step back last night.


George Grayson Tyler, a Lawyer And Expert on Taxes, Dies at 81
LEAD: George Grayson Tyler, a former head of the tax department of the law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore and a former president of the University Club, died of a heart attack Monday.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan and in West Redding, Conn.


Saday Courville, Fiddler, 82
LEAD: Saday Courville, who played second fiddle on the first known Cajun record in 1928 and was one of the last links with the ''pure'' sounds of the Acadian heritage, died of heart failure Sunday.
He was 82 years old.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 6, 1988
LEAD: International A2-12


Eating Well
LEAD: MILLIONS of adults brought up on breakfast grains that were colored, sugared, flavored and shaped like little O's or chocolate-chip cookies are continuing their lifelong cereal habit.
But as they have grown older their tastes have changed.
Today, they want something a little less sweet, a lot more sophisticated, with emphasis on nutrition.


A Vital Shadow Society: East Bloc Breadwinner
LEAD: Across Eastern Europe a shadow society has sprung up outside of the control of the ruling Communist parties, tolerated because the authorities have neither the money nor the ability to fulfill Marxism-Leninism's promise to build a better life for working people.


Soviet Bloc Proposes Talks Toward Battlefield Nuclear Missile Ban
LEAD: The Warsaw Pact has proposed negotiations that could lead to the elimination of the battlefield nuclear missiles deployed in Central Europe and along the border between the Germanys.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  KRAZY KAT.
A Novel in Five Panels.
By Jay Cantor. 250 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.


What Could Be Colder Than Yesterday? Today!
LEAD: It wasn't modesty that caused walkers in midtown to cover their faces yesterday.
Chilly winds made it feel decidedly colder than the 23-degree high temperature that was recorded.
But if you think that was bad, wait until tonight, when the temperature is expected to drop as low as 8 degrees below zero.


Brushing Up
LEAD: A small girl with a big brush taking part in an annual New Year's calligraphy contest yesterday in Tokyo.
Some 7,400 youngsters demonstrated their skill in producing characters. (AP)


John Hancock Unit Hires Ex-Prescott, Ball Chief
LEAD: John H. Goldsmith, who lost his job as chief executive of a Midwestern brokerage firm in a dispute with the firm's parent, has landed on his feet with a new post in the regional brokerage industry.


Monopoly By Shuberts Is Charged
LEAD: Three ticket agents charged yesterday that Broadway's largest theater owner has a monopoly on theater-party sales of tickets to the musical ''Phantom of the Opera,'' in violation of antitrust law.


LESSONS
LEAD: Here in Texas by the Colorado River is a man from Oregon whose story begins in Chicago.
He is a mountain man, a lover of Douglas firs, the self-appointed watchman who keeps a summer vigil high on a Pacific peak.
It seems strange to encounter him on a cold, leaden day among cinder block and steel.
And yet, this is an apt place.


VNU Sets Acquisition Of Media Records
LEAD: VNU, the United States subsidiary of a Dutch publishing company, has acquired Media Records, a company that keeps track of the advertising content of newspapers, and will add it to its Marketing Services division.
Since the division already operates Leading National Advertisers, a major media-measuring service, it means a more complete service for the industry.


GLADLY, THE JAPANESE IMPORT AN AMERICAN CAMPUS
LEAD: Shinya Watanabe was amused at the unlikely sight of his fellow students panicking over a term paper that was almost due.
Nearby, students sitting in study carrels with their heads bent over Western classics occasionally looked longingly out the window.


Savings Deposits Grow
LEAD: Net new deposits at savings and loan institutions rose by $2.7 billion in November, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board said today.
It was the second consecutive monthly gain: Deposits rose by $6.1 billion in October as stock market investors shifted money to savings accounts.


Gifts to Fund Seek to Help The Homeless
LEAD: Chris Columbus says that it is a privilege to live in New York City and that he ''wanted to give something back to the city I love so much.''


Bridge: A Player Declined to Double And Also Avoided a Disaster
LEAD: If you and your partner have ample values for a game contract, and you allow an opponent to play undoubled at the level of one, the result is almost always a disaster.
But not invariably, as the diagramed deal from the Blue Ribbon Pairs at the recent Fall Nationals in Anaheim, Calif., demonstrates.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Gene Lees's 'Singers'


2 Soviet Families Defect
LEAD: Two Soviet families asked for political asylum in Turkey last week, a Foreign Ministry official said today.
The spokesman, Inal Batu, said the Government was reviewing the requests and had not made a decision.


Citicorp Rates Off
LEAD: Interest rates fell for the third consecutive week at Citicorp's regular commercial paper auctions yesterday.
The bank holding company sold $50 million of 91-day paper at an average rate of 6.908 percent, down from 7.3946 percent last week, and $50 million of 182-day paper at an average rate of 7.0184 percent, down from 7.2978 percent.


'World News Tonight' Is Given New Producer
LEAD: ABC has named Paul Friedman executive producer of ''World News Tonight,'' replacing William Lord, who will take on a new assignment.


Gadgets From the Attic Are Put Back to Work
LEAD: FOUR years ago, De Gustibus discussed useless kitchen gadgets that were collecting dust in the attic: things that were broken, like electric mixers and electric frying pans, and things that were in good working order but served no useful purpose at the time.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.33
7.30
6.56
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.93
5.88
5.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.34
6.27
5.52
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.59
8.64
6.93
30-YR.


Market Place; Drug Stocks Gain On Sterling Offer
LEAD: DRUG stocks took off yesterday in the wake of Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company's $72-a-share, or $4.2 billion, hostile takeover bid for Sterling Drug Inc., which makes Bayer aspirin and other products.


NEW FLAW IS FOUND AFTER TEST FIRING OF SHUTTLE ROCKET
LEAD: A second flaw in the redesigned shuttle booster rocket has been discovered by engineers from the space agency and Morton Thiokol Inc.
Their further examination of last month's test firing showed that hot gases reached an O ring seal in a critical rocket joint.


ASPIN DENOUNCES REPORT BY REAGAN
LEAD: The chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, Representative Les Aspin, issued a blistering criticism today of a year-old report from President Reagan on his strategy for achieving national security.


A.T.&amp;T. Case To Continue
LEAD: The General Services Administration's board of contract appeals said yesterday that it would resume considering a protest by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, ruling in the process that the Government had not provided enough information to justify a continued delay.


F.C.C. to Revive Minority-Help Policies
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission plans to reinstate policies designed to increase ownership of radio and television stations by members of minority groups and by women, according to a commission spokesman.


How Can U.S. Continue Indefinite Detention?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Grand Auto's Sale To Paccar Is Set
LEAD: Grand Auto Inc., the struggling chain of automobile parts stores based in Oakland, Calif., has agreed to be acquired by Paccar Inc., a manufacturer of trucks and oilfield equipment based in Bellevue, Wash., for $16 a share, or about $49.2 million.


Pete Maravich, a Hall of Famer Who Set Basketball Marks, Dies
LEAD: Pete Maravich, the leading career and single-season scorer in major college basketball history, died yesterday in Pasadena, Calif., after suffering an apparent heart attack while playing in a pickup game.
He was 40 years old.


Islanders Alone in First After They Salvage Tie
LEAD: Nobody was gratified by the 3-3 tie that followed three plodding periods and the blizzard of offense both clubs appeared to save for the five-minute overtime.
Still, the Islanders and the Minnesota North Stars admitted to feeling a sense of relief about at least being able to emerge unbeaten from a lengthy game whose difficulty grew as it neared its conclusion.


Prison Revolt Ends in Brazil As Police Wound Ringleader
LEAD: Police sharpshooters wounded the leader of a prison revolt today, ending a 30-hour uprising that left four inmates and guards dead and eight wounded, officials said.


Marmie Named Coach
LEAD: Arizona State named defensive coordinator Larry Marmie as its new head football coach last night, just five days after John Cooper resigned to take the job at Ohio State.
Although Marmie, who is 45 years old, has no previous head-coaching experience, he had Cooper's support as his successor plus the unanimous approval of the Sun Angel Foundation - the school's main booster group.


Paris Landmark Bought by Chain
LEAD: After more than 60 years as a Left Bank landmark, the restaurant La Coupole has been sold to a French restaurant chain for about $10 million, the buyer said today.


BULLETS DEFEAT NETS
LEAD: Bernard King scored 15 of his 27 points in the fourth quarter, and Moses Malone scored 26 points as Washington snapped a five-game losing streak by defeating the Nets, 101-97, tonight.
It was Wes Unseld's debut as the Bullets' head coach.


Stage: 'Song of Refuge,' Environmentalist Show
LEAD: THE most vivid images in ''Song of Refuge,'' a kind of environmentalist Punch and Judy show, suggest a high-minded, low-budget theatrical offshoot of the movie ''Robocop.'' Following scenes in which the unpolluted natural environment is depicted in shadow puppetry underscored by ethereal chanting, actors clad in outfits made entirely from metal cans battle one another clumsily in a sequence of clanking duels.


Let Us Not Praise Any Famous Womanizers; Willkie and Wallace
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reinforcements Reach Iowa For Final Push on Caucuses
LEAD: Presidential contenders in both parties are bringing in reinforcements for their final political offensives before Iowa's important caucuses on Feb. 8.


Eating Right? Not In America
LEAD: Sugary snacks, soft drinks and french fries are still high on the list of America's favored foods, a nationwide New York Times telephone survey has found.
Despite recommendations to decrease sodium, sugar and cholesterol in the diet, and despite greater consumer awareness, the diets of Americans of all age groups are not significantly more nutritious.


Manhattan Weekly Reduces News Staff by 25%
LEAD: The New York Observer, a four-month-old weekly serving Manhattan, cut its news staff by 25 percent yesterday to try to reduce costs, said Arthur L. Carter, the owner and publisher.


John Millis, College Chancellor
LEAD: John S. Millis, chancellor emeritus of Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, died of cancer Friday at his home in Cleveland Heights, Ohio.
He was 84 years old.


U.S. Rules on Documentaries Challenged
LEAD: Independent film makers have challenged new rules by the United States Information Agency that allow the Government to label documentary films as propaganda when certifying them for duty-free distribution abroad.


Football Helps NBC Gain Ratings Win
LEAD: NBC celebrated the new year with its biggest ratings win of the season, thanks to high-rated holiday football games.


Harold Matson, Literary Agent for Major Authors
LEAD: Harold Matson, a literary agent who represented Evelyn Waugh, C. S. Forester, Arthur Koestler, Malcolm Lowry and William Saroyan, died yesterday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 89 years old.


Death of Black In Jail Beating Stuns 2 Towns
LEAD: Early Christmas night Loyal Garner Jr. said goodbye to his wife and six children in nearby Florien, La., hopped in his pickup truck and headed with two companions to retrieve a friend's automobile just across the border in Texas.


Cuomo Years: The Words vs. the Deeds
LEAD: From Maine to California, from Detroit to New Orleans, Governor Cuomo traveled the country 27 times last year, mostly to sound the impassioned theme that has become his trademark: Ronald Reagan is wrong.
More money and programs are needed to help the poor and others who do not share in the American dream.


Nominees Announced For 1988 Golden Globes
LEAD: ''Broadcast News,'' ''The Last Emperor'' and ''Moonstruck'' each received five 1988 Golden Globe nominations today from the Hollywood Foreign Press Association.


MUBARAK TO TOUR GULF ARAB LANDS
LEAD: Amid reports of a deepening Egyptian military involvement in the Persian Gulf, President Hosni Mubarak is to embark this week on a tour of gulf Arab nations, sealing Cairo's emergence from ostracism because of its peace with Israel.


New York Shelters Step Up Work Programs
LEAD: New York City officials said yesterday that more than 2,700 residents of city shelters had been placed in jobs through work programs since they began in 1982, with almost half the placements since last fall.


Hold the Salt at the Food Factories
LEAD: To the Editor:


H.C.A. Completes Repurchase Plan
LEAD: The Hospital Corporation of America has completed a $564 million stock repurchase plan.
The offer for 12 million of common shares at $47 a share expired at midnight Monday.


Food Notes
LEAD: Chefs on the Slopes


CSX Corporation Joins Hawaii Plan
LEAD: Castle &amp; Cooke Inc. said that the CSX Corporation had agreed to become a partner in a $200 million project to develop two hotels and 150 homes on the Hawaiian island of Lanai.


Washington State's Young Wine Industry Seeks Recognition
LEAD: THE horizon seems boundless as scanned from many vineyards in eastern Washington, with the snowy Cascade Mountains rising far away across semi-arid deserts.
For Simon Siegl, executive director of the Washington Wine Institute, the economic horizon of the state's steadily rising wine industry seems equally expansive.


Chairman Would Go In Pan Am-Union Deal
LEAD: C. Edward Acker's days as chairman and chief executive of the Pan Am Corporation appear numbered.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: DEAR Diary:


3 More Will Go to Seoul
LEAD: Three more Eastern European countries - Poland, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia - have said they will compete in the Seoul Olympics, increasing to 133 the number of nations who have accepted invitations.


REDSKINS' ENDS ARE AT FOREFRONT
LEAD: At one end of the Washington Redskins' defensive line, there is the sometimes ebullient, sometimes troubled Dexter Manley, one of the better known players in the National Football League.


op That Drop
LEAD: Here's an acronym you should know: MEGO. It stands for ''My Eyes Glaze Over.''


Topics of The Times; Bagging the Tree
LEAD: This being Twelfth Night and the end of the Christmas season, it's safe to say that millions of American homes will sport a trail of needles from tree stand to front door tomorrow.
But not where the homeowners had the foresight to invest in a tree removal bag.


A Gorbachev Ally Calls Latest Changes 'Fiction'
LEAD: A member of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's economic brain trust today published an unusually strong critique of the country's latest economic innovations, saying the measures introduced throughout most of Soviet industry just four days ago were ''a fiction.''


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Business Day last Saturday listing Nasdaq stocks with the biggest gains and losses for 1987 misstated the percentage decline for National Bancshares of Texas.
The stock fell 81.6 percent.
In addition, a chart of the leading underwriters misidentified a top-ranking firm.
It was Credit Suisse First Boston, which shared the top spot with First Boston.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Alliant Computer Systems Corp., Littleton, Mass., said it was restructuring to add 50 new jobs in its international organization and to eliminate 40 positions at its headquarters.


ECLIPSE AWARD WINNERS
LEAD:  Alysheba  Three-year-old colt  Ferdinand  Older horse  Miesque  Female turf horse  Epitome  Two-year-old filly  Sacahuista  Three-year-old filly  North Sider  Older filly or mare  Forty Niner  Two-year colt  Groovy  Sprinter  Inlander  Steeplechaser


Montand to Be Honored In Film Society Tribute
LEAD: The French singer and actor Yves Montand will be the recipient of the 1988 tribute by the Film Society of Lincoln Center, April 25 at Avery Fisher Hall.
As it has done annually since the first tribute in 1972, the society will show excerpts from several of the honoree's films, including his latest, ''Jean de Florette'' and ''Manon of the Spring.


Henrique de Souza, 43, A Brazilian Cartoonist
LEAD: Henrique de Souza Filho, a prominent Brazilian cartoonist better known locally as Henfil, died here from pneumonia and other AIDS-related complications Monday.
He was 43 years old.


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 6, 1988
LEAD:  International


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: FRIENDS are often surprised when I tell them that one of the favorite foods of my childhood in Burgundy was macaroni and cheese taken bubbling from the oven of the wood-burning stove.
Their response is conditioned by the thought that macaroni and cheese is as solidly American as Boston baked beans and clam chowder.


Let Us Not Praise Any Famous Womanizers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bilzerian, Investor End Their Talks
LEAD: The Florida investor Paul A. Bilzerian said he had ended negotiations with an unidentified investor who he said had previously given an oral commitment to purchase $150 million in stock to help Mr.
Bilzerian complete his $1 billion bid for the Singer Company.
Mr.
Bilzerian has already raised $895 million for the bid, but the loans are contingent upon his obtaining the remaining $150 million, now being offered as high-yield bonds.


What Americans Really Eat: Nutrition Can Wait
LEAD: THE dramatic nutrition revolution that was going to change the way Americans eat is not happening, judging by a recent nationwide telephone survey conducted by The New York Times.


All's Well at Manhattan
LEAD: Jack Powers, the Manhattan College athletic director, announced yesterday that school officials had met with the basketball coach, Bob Delle Bovi, and would not take any disciplinary action against him for pulling his team off the court and forfeiting a game against Drexel in a Texas tournament two weeks ago.


Guests Coming to 'Evening News'
LEAD: The ''CBS Evening News,'' hoping to capitalize on the allure of its star journalists, will begin next week to schedule regular guest appearances on the newscast by the correspondents from the CBS prime-time program, ''60 Minutes.''


The Vice President's Advice
LEAD: It's always been hard to accept that George Bush could, at the same time, be the most ''completely involved'' Vice President of modern times, as he and President Reagan assert, and still have been disengaged from the Iran-contra affair, as he asserts.
And it's getting harder as Mr.
Bush still refuses to say more about his role in that disaster.


A Weather Emergency Is Declared in Capital
LEAD: The District of Columbia Council declared an emergency today because of sub-freezing temperatures and ordered the Mayor to open government buildings to the homeless.


Oil Experts Call Tank Typical But Question Dike's Capacity
LEAD: The collapse of an oil storage tank near Pittsburgh on Saturday was highly unusual, according to experts in the field, but they said it was also surprising that surrounding dikes did not keep a million gallons of diesel fuel out of the Monongahela River.


U.S. Literature: Canon Under Siege
LEAD: Many college professors around the country are rethinking the very notion of what is literature.


Washington Talk: Briefing; '88 Predictions
LEAD: Among dozens of political tout sheets that give the morning line on Presidential and Congressional campaigns, the Cook Political Report is one of the most respected.
In its latest edition, Charles E. Cook Jr., editor, finds that ''with every week, the Republican nomination becomes more of a two-way contest'' between Vice President Bush and Senator Bob Dole.


TOP CONTENDERS IN HAITI DECLARE BOYCOTT OF VOTE
LEAD: Less than two weeks before the presidential election scheduled by Haiti's army-dominated Government, the four leading candidates have carried out their threat to call a boycott and the field is dominated by seven former associates of the deposed Duvalier dictatorship.


G.M.A.C. Offering Noncallable Notes
LEAD: The General Motors Acceptance Corporation is offering $250 million of 8 3/4 percent noncallable notes, due in 1991, at a price of 99.95 to yield 8.767 percent through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Solomon Telushkin, Accountant, 81
LEAD: Solomon Telushkin, an accountant, died of a stroke Dec. 24 in his home in Brooklyn.
He was 81 years old.


Water Conservation Called For in Wake of Spill
LEAD: Workers dragging a boom into the Monongahela River to help contain fuel spill near Pittsburgh.
Officials called yesterday for renewed efforts at conservation as about 13,000 homes were without water.
Page A19. (AP)


Vote Puts Small-Town Blacks on Top
LEAD: The small, impoverished town of Keysville, 120 miles east of here, on Monday re-established a local government that had been dormant for 54 years.
The election, seen by many as a symbol of efforts by rural blacks to gain political power, marked a victory for blacks seeking more municipal services over whites who fear higher taxes.


New Center to Review The Rochester Schools
LEAD: The public schools here will be the focus of a national research center on education being established with the goal of restructuring American education and making the country's work force more competitive with foreign workers.


U.S. Crude Output Off
LEAD: United States crude oil production declined 4.1 percent, to 3.03 billion barrels, in 1987, a year when the oil industry was thought to be showing signs of recovery from its nose dive in the early 1980's, Petroleum Information reported on Monday.
Meanwhile, natural gas production, bolstered by increased production from the Gulf of Mexico, increased by 1.7 percent above 1986 to an estimated total of 18.2 trillion cubic feet, according to the Denver-based reporting service for the oil industry.


Palestinians Again Clash With Israeli Troops in Gaza Strip
LEAD: Protesters throwing stones at Israeli soldiers in Khan Yunis, where one youth was killed and seven wounded.
Despite deportation order for nine militants and the arrest of more than 1,000 demonstrators, Israel has been unable to impose order in the Gaza strip or the occupied West Bank.
At the U.N., the Security Council, in a unanimous vote, called on Israel to drop deportation orders.


Study of Drinking Water Assails E.P.A. as Derelict in Monitoring
LEAD: Nearly one out of five public water sys-tems tested in the United States has been found to be contaminated by chemicals, a group affiliated with the consumer advocate Ralph Nader said today.


'Chess': On, Off, and On Again
LEAD: The Broadway production of ''Chess,'' which for the last year has been scheduled, threatened with cancellation and, only last week, postponed indefinitely, is now scheduled to open in April, the producers announced yesterday.


U.S. Joins U.N. in Vote Against Plans by Israelis
LEAD: The United States joined with the rest of the Security Council tonight in unanimously adopting a resolution calling on Israel to drop plans to deport nine Palestinians involved in disturbances in the occupied territories.
The Council said such expulsions would violate the Palestinians' human rights.


Peace Plan Panel Meets in Nicaragua
LEAD: Jose Luis Chea, foreground, Deputy Foreign Minister of Guatemala, and other members of the Central American peace plan's watchdog commission at a meeting yesterday in Managua.
It was the second day of the panel's six-day trip through Central America to monitor progress of the pact.
The commission is scheduled to visit Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador before presenting the results of its findings at a Central American summit meeting Jan.


Dr. Denton Cooley Petitions For Bankruptcy Protection
LEAD: Dr.
Denton A. Cooley, one of the nation's foremost heart surgeons, filed for protection Monday under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code, an apparent victim of the foundering real estate market here.


British Reserves Surge
LEAD: Britain's foreign currency reserves rose by $3.74 billion in December, which was more than expected, the Government said today.
Analysts attributed this to actions by the Bank of England to limit the rise of the pound and to support the dollar.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


25 Charged In Bribes Tied To Asbestos
LEAD: The officials of 23 companies - the majority of all the concerns involved in the removal and disposal of asbestos materials in the New York metropolitan region - were arrested yesterday and charged with bribing a Federal environmental protection inspector to overlook violations of Federal rules and regulations.


Optical Sets $13 Payment
LEAD: SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 5 -


Darmstadt Journal; Still Free and Proud: The G.I.'s Hometown Paper
LEAD: With the stacks of unruly paper on his desk, the faded cardigan, the gruff talk and the nostalgia for good old-fashioned reporting, Mert Proctor is the image of the hometown editor.


Allen Ginsberg's 'Howl' In a New Controversy
LEAD: Thirty-two years ago, Allen Ginsberg sent shock waves through the seemingly placid cultural landscape of mid-1950's America with a poem that proclaimed ''the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness.''


Trading Plan for N.A.S.D.
LEAD: Still smarting from criticism that some of its market makers failed to cope with the crush of customer orders in the Oct. 19 stock trading rout, the National Association of Securities Dealers plans further improvements in executing transactions electronically.


Vile as Smoke
LEAD: There was another one of those smoke fights on an airplane the other day.
It's always the same: a smoker so desperate for a cigarette he's ready to start screaming in pain.
Somebody willing to die rather than be subjected to cigarette smoke.
Pandemonium in the sky, police meeting the plane at the gate.


In North Africa, Feminists on Diverging Paths
LEAD: Hinde Taarji and Assia Belghiti consider themselves in the vanguard of change for women's rights in North Africa.


Bell &amp; Howell Sued
LEAD: The Bell &amp; Howell Company faces seven shareholder lawsuits, contending that the company failed to negotiate fairly with all parties during the bidding that developed between the British publisher Robert Maxwell, the New York publishing company Macmillan Inc. and the Bass family of Texas.
Bell &amp; Howell, based in Skokie, Ill., accepted an offer of $64 a share, or $647 million, from the Bass group, which also included several Bell &amp; Howell executives.


Green Urged to Oppose School Board Plan
LEAD: A group of opponents to the appointment of the new Schools Chancellor, Richard R. Green, urged Dr.
Green yesterday to oppose proposals to give Mayor Koch more control of nominations to the city's Board of Education.


Microwave Cooking
LEAD: NOTHING is better for you or shows off a microwave oven to better advantage than vegetables, particularly winter vegetables.


Icahn Gives Court Plan On Texaco
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn, the Wall Street financier who is the largest Texaco shareholder, has made good his promise to offer an alternative to the company's plan to emerge from Federal bankruptcy protection.


Ex-Illinois Governor in Prison
LEAD: Daniel Walker, a former Democratic Governor of Illinois, began a seven-year sentence Monday for bank fraud and perjury at a minimum-security Federal prison.


Jazz: Rashied Ali Quartet
LEAD: RASHIED ALI became John Coltrane's drummer in the late 1960's, when the saxophonist had broken into free jazz.
But for its first set Monday at the Knitting Factory, Mr.
Ali's quartet harked back to the late 1950's, when Coltrane was on the cusp of hard-bop and modal jazz.
With Arthur Rhames on alto saxophone, Antoine Roney on tenor saxophone and Greg Murphy on a rather soupy-sounding electric piano, the quartet played a modal blues, a hard-bop tune and a breakneck version of '


GRETZKY SIDELINED
LEAD: The sprained right knee that originally was expected to keep Wayne Gretzky out of action for a game or two will sideline him for at least three weeks. ''He's undergoing daily treatment but he's definitely not ready to skate,'' Dr.
Gordon Cameron, the Edmonton Oilers' team physician, said.
Cameron said Gretzky suffered a ''substantial wrench to the knee, and nature dictates that it'll take time to heal.


Contra Demand on Peace Talks Is Rejected
LEAD: Guatemala has rejected a request by Nicaraguan rebels that they meet there with the chief mediator before continuing talks on a cease-fire, United States officials said today.


Wrong Even When Right
LEAD: It is bad enough that Congress openly stuffs favors into appropriations bills - a project here for a Congressman's home district, a grant there to soothe a senator.
But doing it in the dark subverts honest government.
That's just what Congress has done with its secret stuffing of the new omnibus spending bill.


Gluttony Kills 10 Yugoslavs
LEAD: Too much New Year's food and drink killed 10 people in Belgrade, the newspaper Vecernje Novosti reported today.
It quoted doctors as saying the deaths were caused by heart attacks or strokes resulting from overeating or drinking too much alcohol.


SAUDIS CANCEL TAX AFTER COMPLAINTS
LEAD: Saudi Arabia rescinded a sweeping package of income taxes on foreigners today following protests from foreign workers and Saudi businessmen.
The taxes had been instituted by royal decree only a few days ago.


Caribbean Cooking
LEAD: RIGHT now, it's tempting enough just to gaze at the cover of ''Tropic Cooking'' by Joyce LaFray Young (Ten Speed Press, $12.95), with its photograph of a turquoise sea lapping at white sand and a grove of palm trees set against an azure sky.


Navy Awards Pact
LEAD: The Navy has awarded a $644 million contract to the General Dynamics Corporation to build the 15th Trident missile submarine.
The submarine will be built by General Dynamics' Electric Boat division in Groton, Conn., and is scheduled to be completed in July 1994, the Navy said.
The submarines will each carry 24 of the Navy's updated Trident 2 missiles, or D-5, which is undergoing flight tests.


Economic Scene; Changes in Labor By the Year 2000
LEAD: WITH the United States losing share of the world market in manufacturing, mining and agriculture, what is the job outlook for the labor force through the end of the century?


Judge Upsets U.S. Rule on Transit Aid for Disabled
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Philadelphia has overturned regulations set by the United States Department of Transportation that he said deprived disabled people of the right to have access to mass transportation.


Skaters Have No More Time to Dream
LEAD: They sometimes talk about skating in the Olympics as if it were a hazy dream from childhood, a goal once conjured up that seems, even now, so unrealistic, unreachable and presumptuous.


Takeover Bar In Delaware
LEAD: The executive committee of the Delaware Bar Association, as expected, yesterday endorsed a measure that would limit certain unfriendly corporate takeovers.


Marblehead Journal; Jarring Footnote To Historic District
LEAD: Every year thousands of visitors flock to Marblehead, to its historic harbor, its art and craft galleries and antique shops, its purposely quaint Colonial streets and its six yacht clubs.
This winter, a new group of guests are staying unseasonably late: 15 homeless families.


Wine Talk
LEAD: WHAT wine with what food?
Insofar as it's possible to predict anything, it's a pretty safe bet to say that this will be the hot topic in wine books for some time to come.
And why not?
It would be a food book, too.
Two for the price of one, you might say.


Correction
LEAD: An article yesterday about the appointment of New York City's new Schools Chancellor misidentified Peter F. Vallone.
He is the majority leader of the City Council, not its president.


Israel Says Arabs Duped Key British Envoy
LEAD: Israel said today that a top British diplomat had been taken in by Arab propaganda when he criticized as ''an affront to civilized values'' conditions at a Palestinian district that he toured in Gaza.


Business Growth Is Slowing in New York
LEAD: Business expansion in the New York metropolitan region slowed last year, with its economy showing strain even before the stock market collapse on Oct. 19, according to a Government report released yesterday.


Patricia Powers, Writer, 62
LEAD: Patricia Powers, a short-story writer and the wife of Bertram A. Powers, president of New York Typographical Union No. 6, died of a heart attack Monday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
She was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Washington Talk: Congress; Nothing Like Bogus Guidance on Japanese Intent
LEAD: Last spring, Representative Tom McMillen, a freshman Democrat from Maryland, took the floor of the House of Representatives to describe an ''internal, high-level Japanese Government memo'' that he said had recently been brought to his attention.


Sale in West by Soviet Bank Is Called the First of Its Kind
LEAD: Soviet bank said today that it was issuing 100 million Swiss francs ($75 million) of 5 percent bonds, a move bankers said was apparently the first of its kind by an enterprise incorporated in the Soviet Union.


Washington Talk: Campaign Press Secretaries; A Buckley Who Doesn't Exactly Fit the Mold
LEAD: In the nation's capital nearly everybody who is anybody has a press secretary.
Their lot in life is to quash unpleasant rumors, write press releases, schedule interviews with sometimes hostile journalists, fend off attacks from many quarters and, for the most part, entrust their futures to the boss.


Real Estate; Flushing's Main Street Is Thriving
LEAD: MAIN STREET, the downtown of Flushing, was weakened but never felt the sharp decline that hit other Queens commercial centers when regional shopping malls began opening in the borough in the 1960's.
Since the early 1980's Main Street has evolved from a struggling retail street into a thriving shopping center where retailers have squeezed into almost every square inch of space and where the vacancy rate is less than 1 percent.


Rights Group Tells of Oppression Of Children, Citing 18 Countries
LEAD: Amnesty International issued a survey today on children who are victims of political repression around the world, citing 18 countries in which ''the most basic rights'' of children were violated.


Jon Miles Kurtis, Sales Executive, 32
LEAD: Jon Miles Kurtis, foreign sales executive with Manley Productions Inc., New York film producers, died in his sleep Sunday at his home in Woodstock, Vt.
An autopsy is planned to determine the cause of death.
He was 32 years old.


Lenox Hill Nurses Reject Management Offer
LEAD: Nurses picketing yesterday outside Lenox Hill Hospital after contract negotiations broke down.
Negotiations have been underway since October for a new two-year contract.
The union is seeking salary increases, limitations on mandatory overtime and contractual ''quality of care'' assurances that set limits on patient-nurse ratios.


Bush Retaliates for Dole's Criticisms
LEAD: Vice President Bush, who has been repeatedly attacked by his leading Republican rival, Senator Bob Dole, struck back today, scoffing at Mr.
Dole's Senate career and his expertise in foreign policy.


Newsletter Offers Pupils Lessons for Real World
LEAD: Do students actually use what they learn in school?
Some educators say no, and one of them has started a publicaton, called Think, Inc., aimed at helping children bring what they learn in the classroom to the outside world.


What Americans Really Eat; How Do Your Habits Compare?
LEAD: TO discover what Americans eat, 1,870 people nationwide were asked a battery of questions, including the following.
To find out how you measure up, compare your responses with those of the survey respondents.


About New York; A Father and Son And a Shop On Lafayette St.
LEAD: You know how it is in these parts: you step into a shop and all of a sudden the shopkeeper is your newest best friend.
Everybody has a story like that.
Everybody has at least one warm song for every three tunes of rudeness, or should.
In any event, Pasquale Ursitti answered the door.


Jersey Schools Join With Police To Fight Drugs
LEAD: Despite a potential for conflict because of their differing missions, educators and law-enforcement officials said today that they had found a basis for working cooperatively to try to drive drugs out of New Jersey's schools.


Man and Woman Rob Malcolm X's Daughter
LEAD: The 23-year-old daughter of Malcolm X was forced into a car on West 60th Street yesterday afternoon and robbed at gunpoint, the police said.


Sinking-Fund Issue by Berkshire
LEAD: Berkshire Hathaway Inc. is offering $150 million of 10 percent sinking-fund debentures, due in 2018, at a price of 99.25 to yield 10.079 percent through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


New Call to Conserve Water Is Made in Wake of Oil Spill
LEAD: Saying a crisis still existed, Gov.
Robert P. Casey called today for renewed efforts to conserve water in suburban areas in the aftermath of the huge oil spill in the Monongahela River.


TV Review; 'Politics of Food,' on Channel 13
LEAD: ''THE Politics of Food'' examines worldwide hunger and finds it's the fault of the West.
Western creditors and governments, particularly the United States, have joined to choke off world food supplies.
The two-hour documentary, on Channel 13 at 10 o'clock tonight, is provocative, but it doesn't have much breadth.


Topics of The Times; Unicef's Shooting War
LEAD: The world's most benign weapons systems are the salts and shots in the arsenal of the United Nations Children's Fund.
For a pittance, Unicef confounds common and deadly foes of children: diarrheal diseases, measles, tetanus, whooping cough and polio.
A decade ago only 5 percent of the third world's children were vaccinated.


Sutton Returns
LEAD: Don Sutton, a 300-game winner who spent the first 15 years of his major-league career pitching for the Dodgers, has signed a one-year contract with his old team. ''We are extremely happy to have Don Sutton return to the Dodgers' organization,'' Fred Claire, the team's executive vice president, said.


Murder Trial in Bungled Extortion Case Enters Final Stages
LEAD: Closing arguments began here today in the murder trial of two members of a former business and social group that called itself the Billionaire Boys Club.


Northrop Delays Test Of Stealth Bomber
LEAD: The top-secret Stealth bomber being built by the Northrop Corporation, which is already believed to be hampered by problems that have brought more than $200 million in write-offs, is now experiencing new delays and management problems.


Chip Designers Seek Haste Without Waste
LEAD: WHEN the Intel Corporation developed the 80286 microprocessor a few years ago, the chip was jammed with 120,000 transistors and took about three and a half years to create.
Its successor, the 80386, was more than twice as complex - 275,000 transistors - and was finished in a little under three years.


Alan Sweetser, Executive, 59
LEAD: Alan Sweetser, founder and president of Compass Inc., which helped corporate managers who lost their jobs find new ones, died of a heart attack Nov. 16 at St.
Mary's Hospital in Minneapolis.
He was 59 years old and lived in Minneapolis.


Bear, Stearns Acquiring Asiel
LEAD: Bear, Stearns &amp; Company announced Monday that it was acquiring the specialist operations of Asiel &amp; Company, a small brokerage house.


Mexico Swap Endorsed
LEAD: The accounting firm Price Waterhouse &amp; Company said yesterday, as expected, that its clients would not be required to write off the value of their loans to Mexico if they participated in the recently announced exchange of Mexican loans for Mexican bonds.
The firm gave its position in a ''generic accounting letter'' to clients.


Seton Hall Beats Connecticut, 71-58
LEAD: There was no need for inspirational speeches by Coach P. J. Carlesimo when his Seton Hall team played Connecticut tonight.
All the Pirates had to do for motivation was recall last season, when Connecticut, the last-place team in the Big East Conference, defeated them twice.


Where How You Eat Matters, Not What
LEAD: THE main course was braised beef, the wine a hearty Beaujolais and the occasion a drill in table manners.


Tools' Mismatch to Task Hampering Oil Cleanup
LEAD: Despite advances in the last two decades, most of the mechanical and chemical tools for cleaning up large oil spills were designed for use in the open ocean or on and near coastlines, and not for spills in rivers.


New Hunt for Ideal Energy Storage System
LEAD: ENGINEERS have long dreamed of a near-perfect energy storage system in which a huge current of electricity would circulate indefinitely without resistance, always ready for use.
The basis for such power storage would be a superconducting coil, but the cost of the device has prevented its development by utility companies.


The Economic Development Agency Must Go
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pope to Visit Austria in June and Meet Jews
LEAD: Pope John Paul II will make a second visit to Austria in June, the Vatican radio said today.
During the visit he is to meet Jews who protested against his meeting at the Vatican with President Kurt Waldheim last year.


How to Welcome Chancellor Green
LEAD: In introducing himself to New York, Richard Green revealed a confident, adroit public figure and passionately concerned educator.
To rescue the failing school system, he will need those qualities and more.
He will need substantive help from the central Board of Education, which will formally choose him as Chancellor today, and from City Hall and Albany.


ARCHITECTS BOOKSTORE FINDS A NEW HOME
LEAD: THOUGH now twice as big, it remains small, because it was really, really tiny before.


Can Milken Sell Bonds For Moscow?
LEAD: Is there a market for ruble-denominated junk bonds?
Is the Soviet Union ready for Michael Milken, the head of the junk-bond department at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.?


TV Review; 'Singing Detective,' BBC Series
LEAD: THESE are not the best of times for those of us who are convinced that television has the potential to be something more than a receptacle for slick formula entertainments.
But then, every so often, a production comes along to demonstrate conclusively that the medium can indeed be every bit as challenging and compelling as the very best of film and theater to be found on the contemporary scene.


The State of Children
LEAD: Governor Cuomo, whose eloquent advocacy of the family of New York has won national attention, now focuses on the children.
In his State of the State Message yesterday, he characterized the next 10 years as the Decade of the Child and outlined an ambitious program intended particularly to help the one child in four who grows up in poverty.


A New Voice Of the Young Bursts Forth
LEAD: Governor Cuomo's Decade of the Child began today with what seemed to be the Hour of Terence Zaleski.
While Mr.
Cuomo was delivering his State of the State Message, the 2-year-old son of an Assemblyman was crawling across his father's desk in the Assembly Chamber.


HART SEEKS RULING ON PAYING '84 DEBT
LEAD: The Presidential campaign of Gary Hart, facing continued pressure from angry creditors, took steps today to resolve its debt problems from 1984.


In Japan, Jazz Resurges As a National Passion
LEAD: Motohiko Hino began his musical career when he was 8 years old, tap-dancing in his father's shows at United States military bases.
That was when he first heard jazz and, like many Japanese, fell in love with it.


Advertising; A Doubling of Issues For On the Avenue
LEAD: Judith Price, who presides over the publishing success story known as Avenue magazine, has now made a major decision affecting another of her publications, On the Avenue, which is more of a slick tabloid.


U.S. Charges 9 In Mexico Death Of a Drug Agent
LEAD: Nine men, including three former Mexican police officials, were indicted today in connection with the torture and murder of a Drug Enforcement Administration agent in Mexico in 1985, the Justice Department announced.


Prosecutors in Myerson Case Accused of Delaying Trial
LEAD: A Federal judge has accused prosecutors of ''a ploy to put off the eventual trial'' of Bess Myerson on charges that she improperly tried to influence a state judge.


ORACLE SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORACLE SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
60,306,000
28,352,000
Net inc
7,653,000
3,045,000
Share earns
.12
.05
Shares outst
66,482,000
61,512,000
6mo rev
101,580,000
45,963,000
Net inc
10,814,000
3,172,000
Share earns
.16
.05
Shares outst
66,396,000
61,412,000


A Law That's Failed
LEAD: During Ronald Reagan's Presidency, U.S. military forces have been engaged, without a declaration of war but sometimes with heavy loss of life, in Lebanon, Grenada, Libya and the Persian Gulf.
Congress has not used the so-called War Powers Resolution to prevent or terminate any of these exercises in Presidential muscle-flexing - or, in the 1970's, President Ford's use of the military in retaking the Mayaguez, or President Carter's in the


THAI-LAOS CLASHES ON BORDER GROW
LEAD: A border dispute between Laos and Thailand is growing into a wider diplomatic controversy while both Vietnam and the Soviet Union are trying to improve relations with non-Communist Southeast Asian nations.


'87 Spending Law Contained Benefit for Sugar Producers
LEAD: Buried in the 1,000-page catch-all spending bill signed into law late last year is a $100 million favor from Congress to sugar producers in the Caribbean and the Philippines and sugar refiners in the United States.


LIVE ON STAGE AT BATTERY PARK CITY
LEAD: SINCE the beginning of December, on Tuesdays and Wednesdays people going down the elevators or across the pedestrian bridge to the north buildings of the World Financial Center at Battery Park City have chanced onto Bobby Short at the piano, the Boys Choir of Harlem, the Danny Buraczeski Dance Company and others performing in the cavernous new Winter Garden.


Learning a New Career: Paperhanging
LEAD: DALE C. EPPEL has worked in accounting for 14 years.


James Walker, 80, Former Steel Executive
LEAD: James H. Walker, a former vice president of the Bethlehem Steel Corporation, died of cancer Dec. 31 in Hobe Sound, Fla.
He was 80 years old and lived in Hawley, Pa.


WOR to Start Program Changes Next Week
LEAD: WOR-AM, caught between its long tradition as the leading talk-radio station in the New York market and the desire to attract a younger audience, next week begins a new program schedule that has already prompted loud cries of protest from some in the station's audience.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: Best Foods Affiliates Group, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., a unit of CPC International Inc., appointed Raymond B. Rudy president.


Digital, Wang Halt Bids
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation and Wang Laboratories Inc. said yesterday that they had withdrawn from the bidding for a $4.5 billion contract to supply the Air Force with more than 20,000 minicomputers.


Sanofi Head Optimistic on Robins Bid
LEAD: The A. H. Robins Company may not fall quietly into Sanofi of France's arms, but Jean-Francois Dehecq, the chief executive of the large French drug company, was in New York this week talking confidently about the ultimate outcome of his company's campaign to outbid two American rivals for the Richmond-based pharmaceuticals maker.


ROMAN MONUMENTS REBUILT
LEAD: Tourists and Romans today got a glimpse of five well-known monuments from ancient Rome, most of them restored for the first time since they were erected in the first centuries after the birth of Christ.


UNITED STATIONERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED STATIONERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
210,898,000
177,100,000
Net inc
5,805,000
4,410,000
Share earns
.38
.29


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD:  Atlas Corp., Princeton, N.J., said its board had rejected the recapitalization plan proposed in December by Blasius Industries.
BankAmerica Corporation, said it had reached an agreement under which mutual funds, life insurance and annuitites would be sold in its California branches.
Dee Corporation, the London-based parent of Herman's Sporting Goods, has dismissed Citicorp and its units as its investment banker and financial adviser.


Meat and Livestock Prices Rise on Cold-Weather Fear
LEAD: The prices of livestock and meat futures rose sharply yesterday, and analysts predicted further increases in the next few days as a result of an Agriculture Department report.


LAIDLAW TRANSPORTATION LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAIDLAW TRANSPORTATION LTD
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
376,379,000
280,476,000
Net inc
44,247,000
26,206,000
Share earns
.23
.16
Shares outst
175,940,000
150,542,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


TOLL BROTHERS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOLL BROTHERS (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
47,628,000
40,991,000
Net inc
5,772,000
4,737,000
Share earns
.19
.16
Yr rev
137,192,000
126,627,000
Net inc
17,173,000
11,861,000
Share earns
.57
.42


GULF &amp; WESTERN INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GULF &amp; WESTERN INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,453,400,000
1,010,800,000
Net inc
131,500,000
b105,400,000
Share earns
2.13
1.69
Yr rev
4,681,100,000
3,781,100,000
Net inc
356,100,000
b267,400,000
Share earns
5.76
4.28
Shares outst
61,700,000
62,300,000


CITY BALLET: 'ALLEGRO BRILLANTE'
LEAD: REPERTORY has made a glorious comeback at the New York State Theater.


Bird Leads Celtics Past Knicks, 117-108
LEAD: Johnny Newman, in his second pro season, drew a tough assignment for the Knicks tonight: guarding Larry Bird.
Kenny Walker, Gerald Wilkins, Louis Orr and Pat Cummings also tried.
But Bird was not be stopped in the first half, when he scored 32 of his 41 points.
As it turned out, the Celtics needed every one of them.


For New Food Products, Entry Fee Is High
LEAD: With the ever-growing number of new food products, supermarkets are finding their shelf space increasingly valuable - so valuable that they are charging food companies hundreds of millions of dollars a year for the chance to have their products displayed.


For Newest Candy Striper, Hospital Stocks Up on Batteries
LEAD: In about six months a three-foot-tall prototype robot named Roscoe is scheduled to begin taking over some of the drudge work from nurses at Danbury Hospital, hauling meal trays and handling similar chores.


BIO-LOGIC SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIO-LOGIC SYSTEMS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,340,433
1,730,713
Net inc
242,203
104,156
Share earns
.09
.04
9mo rev
6,123,835
5,326,071
Net inc
537,514
648,506
Share earns
.19
.22


Intervention: Simple but Secret
LEAD: The process by which governments intervene in the currency markets - these days in vigorous support of the dollar - is procedurally straightforward but typically veiled in secrecy.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article yesterday, about the Presidential campaigns in Iowa misstated the margin of sampling error in a poll conducted by the Gallup Organization.
It was plus or minus five percentage points, not three.


New Chief Is Chosen At Burson-Marsteller
LEAD: Burson-Marsteller, whose revenues make it the largest public relations firm in the world, announced a top management change yesterday.
James H. Dowling became the second chief executive in the company's 35-year history, succeeding Harold Burson, a co-founder.


Bethlehem Steel's Debt Rating Lifted
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation's senior debt rating was raised to B from CCC+, Standard &amp; Poor's announced yesterday.
The steelmaker's subordinated debt was raised to CCC+ from CCC-.


TYCO LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TYCO LABORATORIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
415,890,000
271,217,000
Net inc
15,585,000
b10,152,000
Share earns
.45
.29
6mo rev
720,672,000
530,360,000
Net inc
28,659,000
b20,784,000
Share earns
.82
.60


CONCORD FABRICS INC reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONCORD FABRICS INC (AMEX)
13wks to Nov 29
1987
1986
Sales
35,752,900
31,667,212
Net loss
b2,282,674
c538,969
Share earns
-
.30
b-After a tax credit of $2,089,000.
c-Net income


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: House &amp; Garden magazine to Della Femina, Udell, a division of Della Femina, Travisano &amp; Partners.


Ford's Theater to Offer 'Elmer Gantry' Musical
LEAD: Ford's Theater said today that it would start its 20th season since its reopening with a new musical based on the Sinclair Lewis novel ''Elmer Gantry.''


New York Judges Feel Pressure To Forge Out-of-Court Accords
LEAD: Acting Justice Harold Tompkins of State Supreme Court in the Bronx is a settler and proud of it.
He thinks judges in civil cases should try to avoid jury trials because justice is better served by out-of-court settlements that leave ''both parties a little happy and a little unhappy.''


U.S. Said to Set Korea Deadline
LEAD: The United States has given South Korea three weeks to open its markets to more than 100 American agricultural products, according to a Korean news report.


Metro Matters; Bleak Outlook For a Lost Block Of 59th Street
LEAD: The continuing debate over the Columbus Circle project has centered on such weighty matters as price, process, tax abatements and the prospective marring of Central Park by architecturally produced shadows.


Gaza City-State Could Be Singapore of Mideast
LEAD: To the Editor:


Homeless Plight Protested in 3 Cities
LEAD: Not far from a public housing complex here that has hundreds of vacant units, 50-year-old Joe Thomas wanders the streets in the sub-zero wind. ''This weather could kill a man,'' Mr.
Thomas, wearing a dirty, tattered scarf, said as he rummaged through a garbage can. ''But where's a guy gonna go?''


Rebuilding Techniques Promise Broad Gains In Periodontal Fight
LEAD: New technologies and procedures are beginning to dramatically alter the treatment of periodontal diseases, the chief cause of tooth loss in Americans over the age of 35.


Letting The Service Come to You. . . At Home
LEAD: IT is the stuff of fantasy.
A woman is delayed at work and arrives home with only an hour to dress for a party.
Her daughter needs help with her homework; so much for bath time.
She jumps in and out of the shower and wraps her hair in a towel.
Thirty minutes to go.
Is she frantic?
No.
A personal shopper has made sure she has the right earrings, stockings and shoes to go with her dress.


Fourth-Best Year for Vehicle Sales
LEAD: Sales of new cars and trucks in the United States totaled about 15.1 million units in 1987, well below 1986's record of 16.3 million but enough to rank as the fourth-best year ever.


Messiaen Hears Himself, Though Long Ago
LEAD: When it was new in 1947, the ''Turangalila-Symphonie'' of Olivier Messiaen divided opinion immediately, and it still does.
In this enormous, lush, orgiastic 10-movement symphony, which Zubin Mehta is to conduct tonight in the first of four performances with the New York Philharmonic, some heard the final excess of overloaded symphonic post


Nelson Has Surgery
LEAD: Karl Nelson, the Giants' offensive tackle who missed the 1987 season while being treated for cancer, underwent surgery today to strengthen his left shoulder.


Washington Talk: Capital Reading; A Judge's View of Society's 'Losers'
LEAD: David L. Bazelon, who retired in 1986 after serving 35 years on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, including 16 years as Chief Judge, has written a book, ''Questioning Authority - Justice and Criminal Law,'' in which he deals with what he calls ''the losers'' of contemporary American society.


Washington Talk; Look, No U.S. Funds!
LEAD: Demonstrating what historians can do - without Federal financing - on a subject as profound as the country's basic law, the American Historical Association devoted much of its annual convention to aspects of the Constitution.


Robeson and Gilpin
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Gardeners, Snow Is Welcome News
LEAD: January brings on the snow.
But gardeners can take heart.
Snow is nature's blanket, the best thing that can happen to plants, at least when it is light and fluffy.
Plants snuggle underneath, bulbs and shrubs push their roots down deeply and grass is safe from harm.


Chile's Inflation Rate
LEAD: Chile's cost of living rose by three-tenths of 1 percent in December, bringing the increase for the year to 21.5 percent, the Government reported on Tuesday.


Water Crisis Easing in Pittsburgh Area
LEAD: As diesel fuel from last week's spill flowed down the Ohio River, the water crisis here eased somewhat today and attention turned to why a storage tank burst.


Europe Alters Steel Quotas
LEAD: The European Community formally approved a change in steel output quotas today.
Less than 50 percent of the trade bloc's steel will be produced under the quotas, compared with almost 85 percent at the end of 1985.


Sports People; Molitor Signs
LEAD: Paul Molitor, who had a 39-game hitting streak last season before becoming a free agent, signed a two-year contract with the Milwaukee Brewers yesterday.
Molitor, who is 31 years old, will earn a guaranteed $1.4 million each year and could earn an additional $450,000 each year in bonuses based on the number of games played and plate appearances.


Sports of The Times; Clark a Big Deal, for Mets
LEAD: IN signing Jack Clark, the Yankees might or might not have helped themselves but, most of all, the Yankees helped the Mets.


David C. Sutherland, Shipping Executive, 63
LEAD: David C. Sutherland, vice president of Home Line Cruises Inc., died of pneumonia Saturday at St.
Barnabas Hospital in Livingston, N.J.
He was 63 years old and lived in West Orange, N.J.


Sports People; Champions Saluted
LEAD: The first national indoor track and field championships were held in 1888 in an early Madison Square Garden.
This year, the nationals, now known as the USA/Mobil championships, will be held Feb. 26 at the current Garden.
To celebrate the 100th anniversary of the meet, seven former champions who won a combined 68 individual national titles were honored yesterday at the Garden.


HUNTER-MELNOR INC reports earnings for Year to Nov 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUNTER-MELNOR INC (OTC)
Year to Nov 1
1987
1986
Revenue
136,987,000
111,683,000
Net inc
1,991,000
238,000
Share earns
.59
.07
The results are on a pro-forma basis.


TECHNODYNE INC reports earnings for Year to Aug 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TECHNODYNE INC (AMEX)
Year to Aug 1
1987
1986
Sales
105,309,000
3,194,000
Net inc
b1,031,000
c6,677,000
Share earns
.51
-
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $223,000 and a tax credit of $525,000.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis


DOLE, IN HOSPITAL VISIT, RETURNS TO PAST
LEAD: For Bob Dole, it was a return to the past.


Ex-Syracuse Mayor Pleads Guilty in Extortion Case
LEAD: Lee Alexander leaving court yesterday in Binghamton, N.Y., after pleading guilTy to charges in a $1.2 million extortion scheme.
Page B1. (NYT/Matthew J. Mendelsohn)


Dollar's Fall Seems About Over, Experts Say
LEAD: The fits-and-starts decline of the dollar that began last fall appears about over, growing numbers of economists and financial market experts say.
Few see the dollar keeping all of its new-found strength, but few see it going down much either, although there are caveats.


INTERCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
923,966,000
837,183,000
Net inc
b43,449,000
35,641,000
Share earns
1.05
.82
9mo sales
2,548,296,000
2,196,132,000
Net inc
b108,392,000
85,403,000
Share earns
2.57
1.97


New X-Ray Machines Minimize Radiation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''We would like the year 1988 to be the last year of the presence of Soviet troops in your country.''  - Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union, interviewed by an Afghan press agency.  [ A1:6. ]


INSIDE
LEAD:  Daring Medical Technique


GROUP LIVING FOR THE ELDERLY
LEAD: THEY were once alone: elderly people who had retired from jobs or housekeeping.
Their children were busy, and sometimes far away.
Perhaps they had trouble seeing, or were just frail.
The old neighborhood was changing and it was hard to find an affordable apartment.
They were a little fearful, anyway, of being on their own.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the snow, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE RISE AND FALL OF THE GREAT POWERS.
Economic Change and Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000.
By Paul Kennedy.
Illustrated with maps, tables and charts. 677 pages.
Random House. $24.95.


Sterling Chairman Reprimands Bank
LEAD: The chairman of Sterling Drug Inc. wrote an angry letter to the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company because the bank, of which Sterling is a client, is acting as financial adviser for a company that is trying to take it over. ''I am shocked and dismayed by what I consider to be Morgan bank's unethical conduct in aiding and abetting a surprise raid on one of its longtime clients,'' John M.


Korean Car Output Up
LEAD: The South Korean automobile industry produced 957,394 vehicles in 1987, up 63.3 percent from the previous year, according to a report issued today.
Nearly a third of the vehicles were exported.
Yonhap, the South Korean press agency, quoted unidentified industry sources as saying that auto exports totaled 304,471 vehicles, up 78.3 percent from 1986 levels.


Theater: 'The Chosen,' as a Musical
LEAD: ELEMENTS that made the Chaim Potok novel ''The Chosen'' popular help to turn the new musical adaptation into a ponderous evening. ''The Chosen'' - the movie as well as the book - is a dense, atmospheric study of a rigorous religious and generational conflict among Orthodox Jews in Brooklyn in the 1940's.


Subpoenas Said to Aim At Drexel
LEAD: The United States Attorney's office in Manhattan has sent out a new series of subpoenas focusing on several takeover transactions involving Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., according to several people with knowledge of the Government's investigation.


Medical Groups Reach Compromise On Frequency of Giving Pap Tests
LEAD: After years of conflicting advice on when women should have a Pap smear to test for cervical cancer, the American Cancer Society and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists have reached a compromise recommendation on how often women should have the test for cervical cancer.


G.&amp;W. Net Up by 24.8%
LEAD: The Gulf and Western Corporation reported yesterday that its earnings in the fourth quarter of its fiscal year ended Oct. 31 climbed 24.8 percent on a 43.6 percent jump in revenues.


Advertising; Wide Range Of Efforts by Geer, DuBois
LEAD: DIVERSITY of interests is a quality that generally sets advertising people's workday apart from that of run-of-the-mill business types.


Advertising; A Shuffle at the Top Of McCaffrey &amp; McCall
LEAD: Robert H. Cherins, the 47-year-old chief executive of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's McCaffrey &amp; McCall, is stepping up to chairman, as the founder, David B. McCall, shifts to chairman of the executive committee.
That leaves the president's title void but only for a trice, for into it leaps the former vice chairman, Gary D.


Sabres Overtake Montreal
LEAD: The Buffalo Sabres scored two goals in the final 58 seconds tonight to stun the Montreal Canadiens, 6-5.


Baby Dropped; Charge Is Murder
LEAD: A Staten Island man has been charged with killing his infant son by twice dropping the child onto the floor while playing with him after drinking, the police reported yesterday.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: THE first few times you hear your child say that he doesn't want you, but wants his other parent, it can be crushing.
What have you done so wrong that he has rejected you many years before you can blame it on the churning hormones of puberty?
Where are the adoring looks, the tiny arms flung around your leg as you return home?


The Significance Of Becoming 50
LEAD: When I was in my 30's, a 50-year-old friend told me that you don't know anything until you are 50.
I reach 50, and what does he tell me? ''You really don't know anything until you are 60.''


Ohio Pays Off Bank Bonds
LEAD: Gov.
Richard F. Celeste said the state had completed the early payoff of its obligation on bonds issued after the collapse of the Home State Savings Bank.


Talking Deals; Alaska a Test Site For Bank Rescues
LEAD: THE number of bank failures in the United States reached a record 184 last year, and it is expected that there will be about as many in 1988.
As a result, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is under pressure to find creative ways of rescuing failing banks and keeping depositors whole at the least possible cost to itself.


Cab Calloway, at 80, Is Still Doing the Old Hi-De-Ho
LEAD: Cab Calloway, age 80, leaned back in his chair, smiled broadly and held out his hands as if he were a priest signaling the congregation to rise.


Advertising; MONY Financial Unit Chooses Korey, Kay
LEAD: MONY Financial Services, which began an agency search last summer, ended it yesterday with the announcement that it had selected Korey, Kay &amp; Partners.
The former agency was Lowe Marschalk, one of the Interpublic Group of Companies.


Nets Collapse in Second Half
LEAD: The Nets held the Denver Nuggets, the league's highest-scoring team, below 100 points tonight.
They made all 22 of their foul shots in the first half.
They even led by as many as 19 points.
But somehow the Nets lost again, 98-93.


A.T.&amp;T. to Buy Stake IN Sun Microsystems
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said today that it would acquire up to 20 percent of Sun Microsystems Inc., a fast-growing manufacturer of computer work stations for engineers and scientists.


Search Resumes for Heiress Missing for 10 Years
LEAD: The state police say a newly cooperative convict has led them to resume the search for the body of Helen Vorhees Brach, a wealthy widow who disappeared in 1977.


Farm Accord With Tokyo
LEAD: Japan and the United States have struck a deal over Japanese import quotas on 10 minor farm products but remain deadlocked in their dispute over trade in computer chips, Tokyo officials said today.


Citicorp Unit to Cut 400 Jobs
LEAD: Citicorp said yesterday that it would eliminate 400 of the 2,500 jobs at its North American investment bank within two months.
The decision follows an announcement in November that about 1,000 jobs would be cut by the end of 1988 in its retail banking operations because of a centralization process.


Schwab to Market Lotus Service
LEAD: The Charles Schwab Corporation, the nation's largest discount stock brokerage, said that it would market a Lotus Development Corporation service that provides real-time stock quotes to investors.


On Call To Fight Oppression
LEAD: ON a recent afternoon, Colleen Harrison, 8 years old, tottered downstairs in aqua spike heels and one of her grandmother's old cocktail dresses, and entered the United States headquarters of Amnesty International's urgent-action network.


Sports People; McCracken Honored
LEAD: Herb McCracken, the former coach at Allegheny and Lafayette, received the American Football Coaches Association's Amos Alonzo Stagg Award yesterday for his contributions to college football.
McCracken, 88 years old, compiled a record of 75-48-7 in 3 years at Allegheny (1921-23) and 12 at Lafayette (1924-35).


Nofziger Trial to Hear Meese
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d will be called as a prosecution witness in the conflict of interest trial of Lyn C. Nofziger that begins next week, the prosecutor disclosed today.


Officer Is Shot and Robbery Suspect Is Killed
LEAD: A New York City police officer who interrupted a robbery at a house in Brooklyn early yesterday was shot in the stomach and seriously wounded in an exchange of gunfire that left one of the suspected thieves dead, the police said.


Nominee to Federal Bench in Colorado Withdraws
LEAD: The United States Attorney in Colorado has asked President Reagan to withdraw his nomination to the Federal bench after a dispute over the accuracy of the prosecutor's disclosure statements.


Bathtub for a General
LEAD: To the Editor:


Neoax Makes An Offer for IU
LEAD: Neoax Inc., a company that grew from the ashes of the old White Motor Corporation, has initiated a surprise tender offer of $17.50 a share, or about $480 million, for the IU International Corporation, a bid that IU is expected to fight.


HERS
LEAD: ''SEE that squirrel?'' my friend said, pointing.
To me the squirrel looked like any other, except for its tail, which was not a curve but a right angle. ''So?'' I said.  ''If your farm were any closer to this park,'' my friend continued, ''that squirrel would have found you.''


3 Divers Survive 16 Hours in Water
LEAD: Bruce Avery carrying a scuba suit and coat yesterday in New London, Conn., that he wore when a boat he was aboard capsized Monday night in Long Island Sound.
Mr.
Avery and two other divers were salvaging gear from a sunken barge off Fishers Island.
They spent 16 hours clinging to capsized boat before being picked up by Coast Guard.


Garry Shandling Show Moving to Fox Network
LEAD: The Fox Broadcasting Company has said that the comedy series ''It's Garry Shandling's Show'' will make its debut on the network in March.


Plan to Help Youngsters: Health Care and Schools
LEAD: In declaring the next 10 years the Decade of the Child, Governor Cuomo asked lawmakers today to approve new programs ranging from improved prenatal care to broader health insurance to increased financial aid for college students from low-income families.


REAGAN SIGNS A BILL TO RESCUE TROUBLED FARM CREDIT SYSTEM
LEAD: President Reagan signed legislation today rescuing the indebted Farm Credit System, saying the bill should help alleviate farmers' financial troubles.





Valley Federal In Merger Talks
LEAD: Valley Federal Savings and Loan Association, a 47-office thrift institution with assets of $3.1 billion, said it was holding merger talks with an unspecified California-based thrift unit.
Gerald Haims, an analyst with Seidler Amdec Securities Inc. in Los Angeles, said that Home Federal Savings and Loan Association of San Diego is the probable suitor.


Newark Moves to Test for AIDS Virus
LEAD: Prostitutes and their customers who are arrested and convicted in Newark would have to submit to tests for the AIDS antibody, under an ordinance passed today by the City Council.


Washington Talk: Briefing; One in 100,000?
LEAD: As James F. Smith, a Texas economist tells it, little did he know that he would lose his own job as a result of his candor when he predicted that more than 100,000 Texans could lose their jobs if the trade bill now before Congress was enacted.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.96
7.34
6.20
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.87
5.93
5.42
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.36
6.34
5.47
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.69
8.59
6.88
30-YR.


Yields Are Mixed Again
LEAD: Yields of certificates of deposit, money market mutual funds and bank money market accounts remained mixed in the week ended yesterday.


In Winter's Icy Grip
LEAD: A wrapped and muffled vendor outside Grand Central Terminal stood close to the hot pretzels she was selling as the temperature in the city dropped into the single digits.
The weather was frigid in much of the nation yesterday and was especially hard felt by the homeless.
In Oklahoma City, left, a man bundled in rags made his way through a snowstorm.


VLSI Names A President
LEAD: VLSI Technology Inc., a semiconductor manufacturer based in San Jose, Calif., said today that James R. Fiebiger had been named president and chief operating officer, effective Feb. 1.
He succeeds Henri Jarrat, who announced his resignation last month.
Experienced in the semiconductor industry, Mr.


Tenneco Arranges Credit Agreement
LEAD: Tenneco Inc. announced yesterday that it had arranged a $3.6 billion three-year bank credit agreement with a group of 48 American and foreign banks.
Morgan Guaranty administer the loan for the bank group.


Elf Extends Bid For Tricentrol
LEAD: France's state-controlled oil group, Elf Aquitaine, extended its hostile offer of $:134.7 million, or about $245.2 million, for the British oil exploration company Tricentrol P.L.C. until Jan. 26, after securing only three-tenths of a percent of Tricentrol's capital in the first round, the closing date of which was


COSTCO WHOLESALE reports earnings for 12wks to Nov 22
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COSTCO WHOLESALE (OTC)
12wks to Nov 22
1987
1986
Revenue
415,674,000
235,913,000
Net inc
b2,488,000
c373,000
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
25,363,000
24,203,000
b-Includes a $1,160,000 gain on retirement of debentures, a tax credit of $771,000, and a pre-tax capital loss of $1,540,000 related to the sale of marketable securities.


Cabaret: Margaret Whiting
LEAD: WHEN Margaret Whiting appeared for the first time last year at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel (59 West 44th Street), the centerpiece of her show was a medley of songs inspired by the hotel and its famous occupants over the years.
On Tuesday, Miss Whiting, accompanied by her regular pianist, Tex Arnold, returned to the room for a six-week engagement with a new program that is much less historically slanted.


BIG BEAR CO reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIG BEAR CO (OTC)
13wks to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
225,671,000
218,063,000
Net inc
4,183,000
3,180,000
Share earns
.53
.41


First Bond Rally of 1988 Fizzles
LEAD: The first bond market rally of 1988 fizzled yesterday as long-term Treasury issues fell as much as 1 1/2 points, completely erasing the gains of the previous two days.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article yesterday about hazards of radon gas in houses gave an incorrect telephone number for New York State residents desiring information about radon.
They can call the state health department at (800) 458-1158 or the state energy office at (800) 342-3722.


Chico Journal; If It's Exile, at Least It's Not Siberia
LEAD: ''Welcome to Chico-slovakia,'' the man with the full gray, Old Testament beard says to a visitor arriving in this Northern California town, famed as the almond capital of the world.


Accord on New Ferry Service
LEAD: New York City officials announced yesterday an agreement with a company to replace canceled commuter ferry service between Brooklyn and Manhattan.
The company, Manhattan Express, will offer three runs between Fulton Landing and Wall Street each rush hour, starting Monday, and will expand service later this month to include the 69th Street pier in Bay Ridge.


The Jordan Option
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reporting Matters of the Heart in Nigeria
LEAD: ''MERCHANT Bank Lawyer Orders Wife Out.''


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. I am using a veneered hardwood plywood to panel a wall.
My problem is covering up the nail holes after I nail the panels in place.
No matter what kind of filler or putty I use, the holes are still noticeable.
Can you suggest an easy solution?
A.
An old cabinetmaker's trick should work.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: EVEN among professionals, rollers replaced brushes long ago for painting the major portions of interior walls and ceilings.
But a brush is still necessary to reach areas where a roller will not fit.
Knowing how to use a paintbrush skillfully makes working with one much easier and less messy, and it gives better-looking results.


Martell Bid Raised By Grand Met
LEAD: Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. raised its offer for the French concern Martell &amp; Compagnie to $508 a share, from its previous offer of $481.
Grand Metropolitan, the British drinks and hotel concern, is involved in a takeover battle with the Seagram Company of Canada, which has offered $449.60 a share for


Boy Accidentally Kills His Brother With Gun
LEAD: A 9-year-old boy accidentally shot to death his infant brother today with a pistol he found in the house, the police said.


Sports People; Toney's Problems
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers announced yesterday that the suspension of Andrew Toney would be lifted Saturday and that the would not be paid for three games he missed during the five-day penalty.
Bob Wright, Toney's agent, responded by threatening to file suit for the lost pay and said he would seek damages for what he called ''embarrassment and all the things that go with a wrongful suspension.


The Making of a 'Literary' Film
LEAD: A few years ago, James L. Brooks, the writer and director of ''Broadcast News'' - a critical favorite that opened last month and is now making a surprisingly strong showing at the box office - attended a screenwriting seminar in San Francisco.
In a discussion with several other screenwriters and members of the audience, Mr.


Bilzerian's Singer Bid Aided by Pickens Loan
LEAD: A $1 billion hostile takeover of the Singer Company seemed assured yesterday as Paul A. Bilzerian, the Florida investor who has offered to buy it for $50 a share, announced that T. Boone Pickens, the Texas oilman, had agreed to provide the last $150 million needed to finance the deal.


Market Place; Brighter Outlook For Natural Gas
LEAD: COLD weather, increased demand and a subtle shift in buying habits are shaping a better outlook for natural gas companies, according to Wall Street analysts.


Pistons Repay Hawks, 90-87
LEAD: Isiah Thomas scored 6 of his 18 points in the final 4 minutes 32 seconds tonight as the Detroit Pistons snapped Atlanta's six-game winning streak with a 90-87 victory over the Hawks.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Concern for Farmers
LEAD: Is W. Allen Wallis, the No. 3 man at the State Department intruding on the Agriculture Department's turf?
Directories around the State Department have added to Mr.
Wallis's title, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, the phrase ''and Agriculture.''


Carlucci, in Gulf, Reaffirms U.S. Role
LEAD: Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci said today that he was reviewing how many Navy ships were needed in the Persian Gulf region, but reaffirmed the American intention to continue escorting commercial vessels.


Murdoch Laughs
LEAD: The New Year has started with a welcome bit of hilarity in our national life.
Rupert Murdoch is solemnly complaining that Congress did not play by the rules in passing legislation that may crimp his style as a press tycoon.


Georgetown Sends Pitt to First Defeat
LEAD: Charles Smith scored 13 of his 20 points in the second half tonight as Georgetown beat previously unbeaten Pittsburgh, 62-57, in a fight-marred Big East Conference basketball game.


Concert: 4 Composers' New Works
LEAD: ALL music lovers know how often and radically one's impression of a piece can change between a first and subsequent hearings; this is true for almost any kind of music, but most of all for difficult, dense contemporary works, which sometimes yield up little at first and much later.
The most one can ask of a new piece is some enticement to probe further - to play the record again, or look out for a repeat performance.


B.P.'s American Subsidiary Offers $250 Million of Notes
LEAD: BP America Inc., a unit of the British Petroleum Company, offered $250 million of 9 1/2 percent notes yesterday.
Due in 1998, they were priced at 99.30 to yield 9.61 percent through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


SIMON OUTLINING PLANS ON REVENUE
LEAD: Marching ever more proudly as his party's traditional Democrat, Senator Paul Simon of Illinois has begun the final stretch of his Iowa campaign by promising to tax the affluent, if new taxes are necessary, while reaffirming his commitment to more Federal aid for education, the elderly and the unemployed.


Alan Sweetser, Executive, 59
LEAD: Alan Sweetser, founder and president of Compass Inc., which helped corporate managers who lost their jobs find new ones, died of a heart attack Nov. 16 at St.
Mary's Hospital in Minneapolis.
He was 59 years old and lived in Minneapolis.


DRESSER INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DRESSER INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
865,100,000
896,800,000
Net inc
38,400,000
b31,300,000
Share earns
.51
-
Shares outst
73,700,000
76,600,000
Yr rev
3,119,700,000
3,661,300,000
Net inc
48,900,000
9,600,000
Share earns
.65
.12
Shares outst
75,300,000
76,600,000


ICH to Raise Stake In First Executive
LEAD: The ICH Corporation, already a leading shareholder in the First Executive Corporation, said it intended to make a cash tender offer of $12 a share, or $134.4 million, for 11.2 million more shares of the Los Angeles-based life insurer.
ICH, an insurance holding concern based in Louisville, Ky., must seek regulatory approval and the consent of certain lenders before making the purchase.


Ex-Mayor of Syracuse Pleads Guilty in $1.2 Million Extortion
LEAD: Lee Alexander, the longtime Mayor of Syracuse and former president of the United States Conference of Mayors, pleaded guilty today to Federal charges that he turned the Syracuse City Hall into a racketeering enterprise that extorted at least $1.2 million over 16 years from city contractors.


Bruce J. Bergman, Librarian, 55
LEAD: Bruce J. Bergman, a former library director at Pace University, died last Sunday at the Yale-New Haven Medical Center.
He was 55 years old and lived in New Haven.


Harold M. Lane, Executive, 96
LEAD: Harold M. Lane, former chairman of the Lerner Stores Corporation, died of a stroke Friday at his country home in Byram, Conn.
He was 96 years and lived in Manhattan.


AUTOSPA CORP reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUTOSPA CORP (OTC)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,138,595
3,139,508
Net inc
b931,907
40,697
Share earns
.08
-
Shares outst
11,851,166
10,866,804
b-Includes a $467,750, or 4 cents a share, extraordinary tax credit.


Mexico City Journal; Forget the Alamo! Look at the Sins of the Yankees
LEAD: At the entrance stands Uncle Sam, his ax raised triumphantly over a prostrate Mexico.
But inside the National Museum of Intervention, the tables are turned, and it is the United States that comes under unrelenting attack.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in some editions of Business Day yesterday about the new law firm of Myerson &amp; Kuhn incorrectly described the financial status of Booth, Marcus &amp; Pierce, a law firm whose partners joined the new firm.
Booth, Marcus &amp; Pierce specialized in bankruptcy law; it was not bankrupt.


Judge Blocks Owens's Acquisition of Brockway
LEAD: A Federal judge in Washington yesterday temporarily blocked the $750 million proposed acquisition of Brockway Inc. by Owens-Illinois Inc., as the Federal Trade Commission had requested.


Farm Credit Unit Cancels Offering
LEAD: The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation has canceled an offering of intermediate-term bonds that was expected later this month, it announced yesterday.


Despite Bitter Cold, Many of Homeless Shun Shelters
LEAD: As temperatures plunged to 8 degrees yesterday morning, New York City officials proclaimed that there was shelter for all.
But hundreds of homeless people preferred to brave the bitter weather on their own, saying they were safer, and in some cases more welcome, on the streets and in subway and bus stations.


Why Cardinal Bars Condom Instruction
LEAD: To the Editor:


CVN COS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CVN COS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
144,922,000
38,545,000
Net inc
6,415,000
b6,428,000
Share earns
.30
-
Shares outst
18,006,000
15,673,000
b-Net loss and includes a pre-tax charge of $8 million relating to the restructuring of retail operations, and included an equity loss of $1.8 million from Cable Value Network, which was, at that time, a joint venture of the company.


Hunger Strike by Iran Dissidents Entangles Chirac Over Expulsions
LEAD: The deteriorating medical condition of several Iranian dissidents on a nearly month-old hunger strike to protest France's dealings with Iran is presenting Prime Minister Jacques Chirac's Government with new political difficulties.


Washington Talk: Endowment for Humanities; Another Historian Is Up in Arms
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is being accused of exercising conservative bias on historical projects through the National Endowment for the Humanities.


MATRIX SCIENCE CORP reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MATRIX SCIENCE CORP (OTC)
Year to June 30
1987
1986
Revenue
71,070,000
74,677,000
Net inc
1,884,000
7,853,000
Share earns
.24
1.00
The share earnings for 1986 reflect the 2-for-1 stock split declared in April 1987.


Human Service Workers Deserve a Living Wage
LEAD: To the Editor:


Boitano Leads in U.S. Skating
LEAD: It all looks so silly, skaters making large circles on the ice with one foot, then retracing them with the other.
These are the actual figures in figure skating, even though the general public is more familiar with the graceful dancing and tricky jumps of the short program and freestyle elements in a competition.


FLOWERS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for 12wks to Dec 12
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLOWERS INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
12wks to Dec 12
1987
1986
Sales
167,366,000
179,525,000
Net inc
8,582,000
5,638,000
Share earns
.24
.16
Shares outst
35,367,554
35,169,939
24wk sales
334,286,000
351,551,000
Net inc
16,655,000
11,534,000
Share earns
.47
.33
Shares outst
35,369,564
35,168,124


S.E.C. Sets Canada Pact
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission and Canadian securities regulators plan to sign a joint agreement Thursday that will expand the cooperation between the two countries in securities fraud cases, the S.E.C. announced today.


Jail Term in Mummy Case
LEAD: An amateur archaeologist has been sentenced to 60 days in jail and three years' probation for trying to sell a 1,350-year-old mummy of an Indian infant to an undercover Federal agent for $35,000.
The 54-year-old archaeologist, Ralph L. Cortiana, was sentenced Monday in Maricopa County Superior Court after being convicted by a jury on felony charges of trafficking in archeological resources and possession of stolen property taken from Federal land.


HAITI'S NEIGHBORS OPPOSE SANCTIONS
LEAD: Leaders of seven Caribbean nations accused Haiti's military-led junta today of violating democratic principles, but after a day of talks they refused to impose diplomatic or economic sanctions.


Good Deeds on the Ski Slopes
LEAD: AMERICANS have been called the world's most generous people, but few charitable events enable people to combine a favorite sport with a donation to a worthy cause.
Skiing for charity, a growing phenomenon over the past few years, has changed that.


New York's School Chief: The View in Minneapolis
LEAD: In his eight years as schools superintendent, Dr.
Richard R. Green gained a national reputation as an innovator by dismembering his district, planning in the minutest detail for its future and then putting it back together in an entirely new configuration.


Taking Out The Trash In Style
LEAD: WHILE most people may think taking out the trash has to be a dirty job, the founder of Good Taste Waste says that's rubbish.


ON-LINE SOFTWARE INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ON-LINE SOFTWARE INTERNATIONAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,977,000
12,704,000
Net inc
1,717,000
1,018,000
Share earns
.26
.17
Shares outst
6,722,000
5,934,000
6mo rev
39,512,000
22,365,000
Net inc
2,737,000
1,753,000
Share earns
.41
.29
Shares outst
6,730,000
6,178,000


TULTEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TULTEX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 27
1987
1986
Sales
126,886,000
115,249,000
Net inc
13,237,000
8,608,000
Share earns
.48
.31
Yr sales
348,692,000
326,075,000
Net inc
28,805,000
24,140,000
Share earns
1.05
.88


MOSCOW DECLARES ITS AIM IS TO LEAVE AFGHANISTAN IN '88
LEAD: Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze said today in Afghanistan that the Soviet Union hoped to remove its troops from Afghanistan by the end of the year, and indicated that the withdrawal would not depend on creation of an acceptable transition government.


Mark J. Rozance, Transit Official
LEAD: Mark J. Rozance, deputy director of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, died of leukemia Tuesday at the New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 36 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Nestle Unit Under Watch
LEAD: The Peruvian Government today took over supervision of a local milk processing operation owned by the Swiss-based food company Nestle S.A., which has been accused of speculative hoarding of evaporated milk.


Yanks Sign Clark, Shaking Up Free-Agent Market
LEAD: The Yankees shattered the two-year calm in baseball's free-agent market yesterday when they signed Jack Clark, the power-hitting first baseman for the St.
Louis Cardinals and one of the premier sluggers in the big leagues.


Jazz: Tom McKinley Group
LEAD: TONIGHT at Carnegie Hall, the American Symphony Orchestra will perform music by William Thomas McKinley, who teaches at the New England Conservatory.
On Tuesday, however, Mr.
McKinley was at the piano leading the Tom McKinley Group, a quartet with Richard Stoltzman on clarinet, opening a two-night stand playing jazz at Fat Tuesday's.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  ATLANTA (NL) - Signed Buddy Biancalana, shortstop, to a one-year contract with Richmond of the International League.
DETROIT (AL) - Named Joe Klein special assignment scout.
METS (NL) - Named Greg Pavlick bullpen coach and Vern Hoscheit minor-league catching instructor.


Hunts Hail Silver Ruling
LEAD: The Hunt brothers announced a major victory after a recent order by a Federal judge reduced their potential liability against a Peruvian company's contentions that the Hunts had manipulated the silver market in 1980.


U.S. to Increase Inspections Of Travelers From Colombia
LEAD: The State Department, retaliating for Colombia's release of a reputed cocaine smuggler. said today that all travelers from Colombia are now subject to closer inspection on arrival in the United States.


NONPROFIT ARTS ACTIVITY HELPS BOSTON ECONOMY
LEAD: Nonprofit cultural activities contributed $500 million to the Boston economy in 1986, and the arts industry was the third-largest private employer in the city, according to a study.


Advertising; Philadelphia Agency Publishes Its Prices
LEAD: In an unusual move, a small Philadelphia agency has announced that it has published a price list of its services.
Harris-Edward Communications is 12 years old, bills about $11.5 million and serves both business-to-business and consumer accounts.


Copters in Ulster Receiving Anti-Missile Gear
LEAD: In response to warnings of stepped-up violence by the Irish Republican Army, British military helicopters in Northern Ireland are being equipped with machine guns and with infrared systems designed to protect aircraft against surface-to-air missiles, military authorities say.


Fixing Antique Clocks
LEAD: WHEN he was a child in Pittsburgh, Joe Fanelli had no intention of going into the clock-repair business.
But to keep him out of trouble, his father made him work after school twice a week with a local clockmaker.
As he got older, he repaired friends' clocks for fun.


Nimby and the Horror Hotels
LEAD: The word of the year in 1987 was probably Nimby, biting shorthand for Not In My Back Yard.
It may be the word of 1988, too.
The New York City Board of Estimate has rejected Mayor Koch's plan for transitional housing at Lexington Avenue and 106th Street.
That condemns 48 homeless families to lives of continued squalor in the Mayfair


Human Gene in Mice Producing Blood Substance
LEAD: Scientists have transplanted a human gene into mice so that the animals produced a key human blood substance, an advance that may hasten the day when gene transplantation can be used to cure serious human blood diseases.


Ahold Purchase
LEAD: Ahold N.V., a leading Dutch food retailer, said it had bought an 80 percent stake in First National Supermarkets, a chain of 122 supermarkets across the United States, for an undisclosed amount of cash.
The Dutch company, which also owns the BI-LO and Giant Food Store chains in the United States, said the present management would continue to direct First National, which is based in Cleveland.


No. 1 Supporter Is Key to Hart's Bid
LEAD: Her husband calls her ''babe'' and often puts his arm around her.
At a drugstore here he helped her put some batteries in the small travel alarm clock he bought her for Christmas.
They are always side by side, tall and smiling, framed in the dozens of camera lenses that follow everywhere.


People
LEAD:  Alain Zutter and Charles Rutman named senior vice presidents, group media director, at Backer Spielvogel Bates.
Joseph L. Pedone has been named senior vice president at Saatchi &amp; Saachi DFS Compton.
Sheffield Halsy has joined North Castle Partners, Greenwich, Conn., as a senior vice president and management supervisor and Robert Pallotta has been promoted to senior vice president there.


Calendar: Gardens Around the World
LEAD:  Horticultural Talks


Koch, in Washington, Criticizes Civil Libertarians Over Homeless
LEAD: Mayor Koch sharply attacked civil libertarians and some advocates for the homeless today, asserting that their actions were doing more harm than good.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JANUARY 7, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-13


THE STATE OF THE STATE ON DISPLAY
LEAD: THE two architectural figures may seem safely captive within the large atrium of the Great Hall at the University of the Arts in Philadelphia, at Broad and Pine Streets, where they will stand through Jan. 14.
But if you walk down the stairs to the bottom level, the 27-foot-tall structures take on a menacing aspect.


Henri Filion Rebuts Race-Fix Charge
LEAD: Henri Filion, the harness driver accused by a colleague of trying to fix a November race at Yonkers Raceway, denied the charge yesterday and said he had never exchanged more than casual greetings with his accuser.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The ITT Financial Corporation is offering $100 million of 9 1/2 percent senior subordinated notes due in 1995 at a price of 99.75 to yield 9.55 percent through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Brothers.


Cuomo Agenda Greeted With Cheers and Jeers
LEAD: To lawmakers, lobbyists and state commissioners, listening to Governor Cuomo's State of the State Message is like reading the cut list for the high school basketball team.


Ease Up on Babies
LEAD: To The Home Section:


DCNY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DCNY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
22,083,557
1,052,686
Per share
2.74
.13
Yr net inc
30,105,048
24,613,233
Per share
3.74
3.07
The company said all of the per share results reflect the 2-for-1 stock split effective May 13, 1987.


Critic's Notebook; Can Background Music Move Up Front?
LEAD: I HAVE been reading Parents magazine, and report the following exchange from an advice column in December's issue.


Texas City Picked by Chip Group
LEAD: A consortium of 14 companies at the forefront of the nation's computer chip industry said today that it would locate an ambitious, cooperative research effort here in the capital of Texas.


On-Time Performance of Airlines Fell in November
LEAD: The on-time performance of domestic airlines in the United States declined markedly in November, the Department of Transportation said today, and the airline industry attributed the poor showing to unexpectedly bad weather.


Advertising; Heineken to Go To Warwick
LEAD: After April 1 Heineken Beer, as well as Amstel Light Bier and Grizzly Canadian Lager, will have their advertising done by Warwick Advertising.


Dell'Olio's Swimsuits: No Camouflage
LEAD: WINTER, particularly when snow is on the ground, is the best time to appreciate swimsuits.
They conjure memories of warm pools and sunny beaches, and are a sign that benign temperatures will eventually return.
So there was a disposition, earlier this week in numbing weather, to applaud Louis Dell'Olio's showing of his first collection of swimsuit fashions.


Britain's Woman of the Century
LEAD: Cliches flock around Margaret Thatcher as thickly as sparrows in London's East End.
She is indeed forceful, divisive, gritty, a quick study, thinks fast on her feet.
So are other politicians, yet none in modern Britain have equaled Mrs.
Thatcher's longevity.
She has served longer than any previous Prime Minister in this century - 3,167 days as of last weekend - and has a fair chance of winning a fourth straight election.


Senator Defends Plan to Aid Jews in France
LEAD: Senator Daniel K. Inouye has defended his role in persuading Congress to approve $8 million to build schools in France for Jews who emigrated from North Africa.


HEALTHPersonal Health
LEAD: The holidays are finally over.
You're exhausted, relieved and wondering whether it was worth all the time, energy and money you put into the event, which each year seems to be longer, more complicated, more stressful and less satisfying.


Air Controllers Blamed For a Midair Collision
LEAD: Errors by air traffic controllers were to blame for the collision of a skywriting plane and another small aircraft near Orlando, Fla., last May in which all four people aboard the planes were killed, Federal investigators said Tuesday.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about a speech by Vice President Bush at the National Press Club in Washington misidentified the club president.
He is Andy Mollison.


Ingenuity Counts If 500 Square Feet Is The Space
LEAD: WILLIAM KOPELK and Olga Hirshhorn both live alone in triplexes that measure about 500 square feet. ''To live in a space this small,'' Mrs.
Hirshhorn said, ''you have to think as you would on a boat.''


Green Is Approved Unanimously by School Board
LEAD: In a switch from its original 4-to-3 vote, the New York City Board of Education yesterday formally and unanimously named Dr.
Richard R. Green Schools Chancellor.


Washington Talk; Capital Cold Snap Is the Stuff of Postcards
LEAD: Visitors to the snow-covered grounds of the Washington Monument were bundled against the cold yesterday despite the brilliant sunshine and blue skies.
A blustery wind, while generating a wind-chill factor of about 10 degrees below zero, kept the flags at a picture-perfect tautness. (AP)


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Phoenix Suns said they would activate Armon Gilliam from the injured list and make him available to play tonight in a home game against the Dallas Mavericks.
The 6-foot-9-inch, 248-pound rookie forward from Nevada-Las Vegas, who was the second choice in the college draft after David Robinson of Navy, suffered a broken bone in his left big toe in the season-opener at Portland.


Masada Mentality
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cabaret: Helen Schneider
LEAD: HELEN SCHNEIDER'S appearances in New York cabarets, which have been widely spaced over the past dozen years, have shown her in constantly changing lights.
She has been a blues singer drawing on Muddy Waters and Willie Dixon, a jazz singer leaning on Billie Holiday and Ella Fitzgerald, a singer of rock nostalgia and - after an absence of nine years during which she became a rock star in West Germany and an actress in films and theater - she returned to New York almost two years ago singing pop songs of the 20's in a one-woman revue, ''A Flapper's Folly,'' at the


Patrick Dolan Is Dead; Retired Ad Executive
LEAD: Patrick Dolan, a retired international advertising executive, died Dec. 31 as a result of a stroke at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Baltimore, Md.
He was 76 years old and had residences in Manhattan and Much Hadham, England.


Bridge: 1930 Article Gives a Writer A Good Claim to Seniority
LEAD: It seems improbable that anyone now alive wrote about bridge in any newspaper in the 1920's.
Seniority in this area probably belongs to George Copeland, who wrote about the game in The New York Times in 1930.
He received varying answers when he asked the experts, for a Times article, whether married couples who played bridge as partners were excessively likely to have fights and, consequently, divorces.


E-Z-EM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*E-Z-EM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
14,418,000
12,113,000
Net inc
1,941,000
1,207,000
Share earns
.24
.15
6mo sales
27,821,000
23,143,000
Net inc
3,498,000
2,390,000
Share earns
.44
.30


College Basketball; Rams Give Tar Heels a Scare
LEAD: J. R. Reid had 23 points, and Scott Williams scored the first 5 points in overtime tonight as North Carolina defeated Fordham, 76-67.


Reagan Says Diplomat's Son Would Be Safe in Zimbabwe
LEAD: After investigating the matter, President Reagan has determined that the 9-year-old son of a Zimbabwean diplomat would be adequately protected if he were sent home, despite accusations that the boy was beaten by his father, White House officials said today.


Man Says He Killed Friend's Mother
LEAD: In a matter-of-fact voice, a 19-year-old from Glastonbury described today how he had strangled the mother of his 16-year-old girlfriend after the girl had repeatedly begged him to commit the murder.


5 Anti-Apartheid Journals Are Warned by Pretoria
LEAD: Four months after adopting emergency powers enabling it to censor or close publications it deems subversive, the South African Government has warned that it may use the powers against five of the country's most forthright anti-apartheid journals.


Bush to Answer Queries on Iran-Contra Affair
LEAD: Vice President Bush said today that he would answer any questions put to him by the independent prosecutor investigating the Iran-contra affair.


Clever Approach Is Browns' Style
LEAD: The gray-haired gentleman in the middle of the Cleveland Browns' huddle at practice the other day was not an aging quarterback.
It was Art Modell, the owner.


Appeal Funds Sought In Howard Beach Case
LEAD: Friends of the three white teen-agers convicted of manslaughter in the Howard Beach trial are discussing ways to raise funds for the teen-agers' appeals, their lawyers say.


Renault Executive Quits
LEAD: Jose Dedeurwaerder, a top Renault executive who once headed the American Motors Corporation, has resigned after 30 years with the French auto maker, officials said.
Renault refused to comment about his departure, but industry sources said this week that Mr.
Dedeurwaerder had differences over the direction of the company.


3 Divers Cling to Overturned Boat For 16 Hours in Frigid L.I.
LEAD: Three divers from Connecticut spent 16 hours clinging to the keel of a small capsized boat in Long Island Sound Monday night as 8-foot-high seas washed over them and 40-mile-an-hour winds left their bodies coated with ice.


PRICE CO LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRICE CO LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 20
1987
1986
Sales
1,283,140,000
1,032,190,000
Net inc
30,870,000
22,760,000
Share earns
.63
.47


Worry Chic
LEAD: Don't relax.
There's always something to worry about.
Herpes, crack and nuclear holocaust have not gone away but have become passe worries.
A trendy era obeys fashion even in its fretting.
Here are some worries that have already infected 1988.


Rangers Extend Unbeaten Streak to 7
LEAD: The Rangers, initially taken aback by the fiesty, forechecking Vancouver Canucks, scored three rapid goals in the second period and held on for a 4-2 decision before 16,814 fans at Madison Square Garden last night.


Palestinian Consecrated as Jerusalem Patriarch
LEAD: Pope John Paul II consecrating Michel Sabbah as a bishop.
The Vatican ceremony for the first Palestinian appointed Roman Catholic Patriarch of Jerusalem was attended by many Middle East envoys, including representatives of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization. (AP)


MILLER, HERMAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MILLER, HERMAN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
183,728,000
139,705,000
Net inc
11,755,000
8,469,000
Share earns
.48
.34
6mo sales
344,364,000
271,636,000
Net inc
21,814,000
16,873,000
Share earns
.89
.68


GTECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GTECH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Revenue
40,606,000
60,374,000
Net inc
2,509,000
7,566,000
Share earns
.26
.80
Shares outst
9,607,085
9,510,281
9mo rev
100,462,000
104,579,000
Net inc
4,898,000
6,901,000
Share earns
.51
.73
Shares outst
9,588,909
9,440,391


SUMMAGRAPHICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUMMAGRAPHICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,736,861
6,432,609
Net inc
b927,767
c259,723
Share earns
.29
.12
Shares outst
3,249,000
2,246,000
6mo sales
16,862,835
12,401,946
Net inc
b1,533,525
c342,587
Share earns
.53
.15
Shares outst
2,892,000
2,247,000


Gas Leak Delays the L.I.R.R. at Hicksville
LEAD: Service on the main line of the Long Island Rail Road was halted for about an hour last night because of a leak in an 8-inch gas main near the railroad station in Hicksville, L.I., officials said.


INSIDER CHIC: 'WALL STREET' INTERIORS
LEAD: THE offices and houses in the film ''Wall Street'' are conspicuously hung with the best contemporary art money can buy.
With the sets of Stephen Hendrickson, the production designer, the movie makes a point of illustrating how the stock market fuels the New York art market.
A Rosenquist and a block of airline stock are each treated as commodities.


CUOMO ISSUES CALL TO HELP CHILDREN
LEAD: Calling for a Decade of the Child, Governor Cuomo opened the 1988 session of the New York State Legislature today with a plan for increased health and education programs for children.


College Hockey Notebook; Holidays Highlighted by Longest Game
LEAD: Holiday highlights in college hockey included the longest game in the sport's intercollegiate history, a sold-out tournament in Detroit that attracted almost 40,000 spectators, one on Long Island that was a well-kept secret, and Maine's winning a tournament in Alaska but then losing the final of its own event in


Kennedy and Paper Battle in Boston
LEAD: A high-stakes feud has erupted here between The Boston Herald, a scrappy tabloid owned by Rupert Murdoch, and the state's senior United States Senator, Edward M. Kennedy.


BREZHNEV'S NAME DROPPED FROM CITY
LEAD: The Soviet authorities dropped the name of Leonid I. Brezhnev from a city, town squares and a Moscow neighborhood today, reflecting their low regard for the late leader, who is now blamed for bureaucracy and stagnation.


'89 REAGAN BUDGET SEEKS $1.1 TRILLION
LEAD: President Reagan's budget director said today that Mr.
Reagan had tentatively approved a $1.1 trillion budget request for the next fiscal year, including a substantial increase in spending for space programs.


SUDBURY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUDBURY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
128,827,000
75,693,000
Net inc
3,384,000
2,423,000
Share earns
.27
.27
Shares outst
12,377,000
8,568,000
6mo sales
234,239,000
135,896,000
Net inc
6,011,000
5,041,000
Share earns
.48
.58
Shares outst
11,911,000
8,541,000


German Court Shuts Center For Surrogate Motherhood
LEAD: A West German court today ordered the immediate closing of a Frankfurt surrogate motherhood center, declaring that it was contrary to the country's adoption laws and to basic moral principles.


Rorer Backed In Robins Bid
LEAD: Michael H. Steinhardt, the New York investor who is the largest outside shareholder in the A. H. Robins Company, said yesterday in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that he favored the Rorer Group Inc. over two rivals that submitted takeover plans to Robins last week.


AERO SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AERO SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,350,502
6,305,627
Net inc
284,751
177,296
Share earns
.03
.02
9mo sales
22,328,958
22,499,394
Net inc
482,208
630,184
Share earns
.06
.08


Man Accused in Death Retains Child Custody
LEAD: A Manhattan man charged with murdering his wife was allowed to retain temporary custody of the couple's two children yesterday, after a third day of hearings failed to resolve a custody dispute.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Prosecutor No Quitter
LEAD: The special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair, Lawrence E. Walsh, is in for the long haul.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, JANUARY 7, 1988
LEAD:  The Dollar


Excerpts From Cuomo Address: Preparing for the 21st Century
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Governor Cuomo's State of the State Address to the Legislature yesterday, as transcribed by The New York Times through the facilities of Channel 13.


A LITTLE SHOP OF CRAFTS
LEAD: FOUR months ago the American Craft Museum quietly opened a small shop on the upper level of its galleries at 40 West 53d Street.
And for a very small store, it has a surprisingly high concentration of things you didn't know you needed.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in some copies yesterday about regulations on mass transit for the disabled misstated the provision turned down by a Federal judge.
The provision was that a mass transit agency could comply with the regulations by spending 3 percent of its budget on transportation for the disabled, but it did not prohibit an agency from spending more.


Midseason Report; Improved Devils Not Content
LEAD: Moderation, which he had lost along with his composure two days before, returned to Doug Carpenter's voice.
Perspective, too, was slowly replacing the angry tunnel vision that had overtaken the coach of the Devils.
After watching his team's sorry 6-3 surrender Monday night to the Los Angeles Kings,


DOLLAR UP 3D DAY, EVEN WITHOUT AID OF CENTRAL BANKS
LEAD: The dollar's value rose for a third straight day in hectic trading yesterday, reaching levels not seen in a month or more against the West German mark and the yen.


UNIVAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVAR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
284,307,000
173,464,000
Net inc
2,254,000
1,040,000
Share earns
.26
.16
Shares outst
8,768,203
6,698,633
9mo sales
844,626,000
441,542,000
Net inc
8,634,000
1,741,000
Share earns
.99
.29
Shares outst
8,766,232
6,009,769


Implanted Fetal Tissue Aids Parkinson's Patients
LEAD: Doctors here have transplanted tissue from a spontaneously aborted fetus into the brains of two patients suffering from Parkinson's disease, the leader of the group that performed the operations said today.


ISRAELIS UNHAPPY AT U.S. VOTE IN U.N.
LEAD: Israel expressed ''regret and disappointment'' today that the United States had voted for a United Nations Security Council resolution urging Israel not to deport Palestinians from the occupied territories.


Debt
LEAD:  Columbus Southern Power Co. filed a shelf offering of up to $200 million of first mortgage bonds.
First Executive Corp. announced a private placement of $235 milllion in short-term notes, with proceeds to be mainly invested in its Executive Life Insurance Company.
Merrill Lynch Realty signed a $330 million credit agreement with 12 international banks led by the New York branch of Algemene Bank Nederland.


Korean Opposition Chief Gets Party Backing
LEAD: Kim Young Sam, the South Korean opposition leader, won an overwhelming vote of confidence from his party today after saying he would step down to take responsibility for his defeat in last month's presidential election.


Suit Challenges Auditing Plan
LEAD: A group of small and mid-sized accounting firms filed suit jointly in New York State Supreme Court yesterday seeking to block the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants from counting the votes on a member referendum that would introduce sweeping changes in the accounting profession.
The judge postponed a ruling until Jan.


Illinois Imposes a Tax on Illegal Drug Dealers
LEAD: Illinois has imposed a tax on marijuana, cocaine and other illegal drugs but expects most of the revenue from the new law to come from stamp collectors.


CBS News Employees Give to Neediest
LEAD: A group of CBS News employees has joined forces and sent a donation of more than $1,200 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The contribution came from more than 200 employees, including maintenance workers, security guards and mailroom employees, as well as newsroom personnel.


MANOR CARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANOR CARE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
133,968,000
127,451,000
Net inc
b8,921,000
10,420,000
Share earns
.23
.26
6mo rev
266,967,000
254,315,000
Net inc
20,050,000
c18,081,000
Share earns
.51
.45


Washington Talk: Briefing; Talking of Eloquence
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., traveling in Europe, has conferred this week with Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany and President Francois Mitterand of France.
He is scheduled to meet Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in London next week.
His main subject: The United States-Soviet treaty banning intermediate missiles in Europe.


NATIONS' WARNINGS LIFT DOLLAR MORE
LEAD: Central bankers, who acted dramatically to bolster the dollar's value earlier this week, backed up those deeds with strong words yesterday, and nervous currency traders responded by pushing the dollar higher for the fourth straight day.


New York City Needs A Volunteers Exchange
LEAD: To the Editor:


Surprise Teams Hope to Take Another Super Step
LEAD: Three largely unheralded teams remain alive in the National Football League playoffs this weekend.
But if the Minnesota Vikings, the Indianapolis Colts and the Houston Oilers are the underdogs, the Chicago Bears, the San Francisco 49ers, the Washington Redskins, the Denver Broncos and the Cleveland Browns are recognizable big names.


McFarlane Lawyers Dispute Iran Allegations
LEAD: Lawyers for Robert C. McFarlane, the former national security adviser, have sharply disputed allegations of wrongdoing leveled against their client in the Congressional Iran-contra report.


Oil Slick From Tank Collapse Reaches City in West Virginia
LEAD: A 20-mile oil slick caused by the collapse of a huge oil tank in Pennsylvania on Saturday reached this city on the Ohio River at midnight, prompting officials to start the process of closing the city's water treatment plant.


Woman Killed By Gunman In IRT Station
LEAD: A woman was shot and killed, and her sister was seriously wounded, when the dead woman's ex-boyfriend approached them on a crowded platform at the Grand Central subway station in the rush hour last night and fired a shotgun before disappearing into the crowd, the police said.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  FOCUS ON A PRODUCER


Boitano Closes In on National Title
LEAD: Brian Boitano performing his short program last night at the United States Figure Skating Championships in Denver.
He earned eigh perfect marks of 6.0 for composition and style, virtually assuring himself of a fourth straight national title.
Page B13. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


Gaetti Signs
LEAD: Yesterday, less than 24 hours after Gary Gaetti had said that there was ''a real good chance'' he would reject a contract offer from Minnesota and seek a better deal, and slightly more than 24 hours before he would lose the chance to return to the Twins until May 1, the free-agent third baseman signed a three-year Twins contract worth $4.3 million.


A Path to Modernism: Mondrian at the Janis
LEAD: FOR those deeply attracted to modern and contemporary art, the greatest story ever told remains the invention, early in this century, of abstraction.
A heroic epic played out on many fronts, both esthetic and geographic, its countless chapters seem to sustain endless scrutiny.
As with much of the past, these chapters are in perpetual motion, being continually revised and elaborated upon by succeeding generations of art historians, critics, curators and, in their own way, artists.


Early-Music Ensemble
LEAD: Vineyardmusik, an early music ensemble, is to present ''Gulliver's Travels'' set to music by Telemann and performed on 18th-century instruments tomorrow at 10 A.M. and noon at the Vineyard Theater, 309 East 26th Street.
The performances are intended for children.
Tickets are $6.
Information: 683-0696.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Flyers 6, Blues 4: Rich Tocchet and Brian Propp each scored two goals last night as Philadelphia defeated visiting St.
Louis, extending its unbeaten streak against the Blues to 34 games at the Spectrum.
The Flyers are 31-0-3 at the Spectrum since Jan. 6, 1972, when the Blues won, 3-2, for their last victory in Philadelphia.


Refugee Report Burned Over Data on Germany
LEAD: All 138,000 copies of a United Nations report on refugees were ordered burned by the United Nations High Commissioner because he thought it unfairly represented West Germany's policy toward asylum-seekers.


Topics of The Times; Mixed Message for Whistle Blowers
LEAD: The Koch administration says it's serious about protecting New York City workers who blow the whistle on waste, fraud and corruption.
But consider the case of Samuel Adams, formerly a $263-a-week Health Department janitor.
After a month on the job, Mr.
Adams reported to the department's Inspector General that his supervisor was turning back the time clock to protect tardy co-workers.


81% Found to Support U.S. On Backing AIDS Research
LEAD: Three of four adult Americans now know that the AIDS virus can be transmitted through sexual contact, and 81 percent support federally financed research to find a cure for the deadly disease, a new poll shows.
In 1986 this fact about transmission of the disease was known by 61 percent.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 413 money market mutual funds increased $5.64 billion, to $263.88 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 112 institutional funds increased $4.32 billion, to $75.31 billion.
Assets of the 206 general purpose funds were down $117.0 million, to $79.27 billion.


Second Graders Jump Rope To Raise Money for Neediest
LEAD: A group of second graders at Public School 54 on Staten Island held a Jump-a-Thon the other day to raise money for the homeless of New York City.


Ex-Contra Looks Back, Finding Much to Regret
LEAD: The seaside condominium where Arturo Cruz now lives in exile is set in a gentle landscape of marinas and country clubs quite unlike his native Nicaragua.
But the comfort that surrounds him has done nothing to ease his regrets.


Comedy: Dennis Miller
LEAD: DENNIS MILLER is one of the youngest and brightest standup comedians to belong to the tradition of urbane scattershot commentary that extends from Bob Hope to Johnny Carson to Chevy Chase.
Mr.
Miller, who maintains an air of sarcastic deadpan geniality in his role of anchorman for the ''Weekend Update'' segments on ''Saturday Night Live,'' is more vivacious and irreverent in his club act than on television.


Moynihan Says He'll Offer Law To Help Murdoch Keep The Post
LEAD: Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said yesterday that he would propose legislation that might allow Rupert Murdoch to continue to own both The New York Post and a New York City television station, at least temporarily.


Jersey Passes Bill Banning Sale of Irradiated Foods
LEAD: A bill banning the sale and distribution of irradiated foods was passed by the Assembly today by a 62-to-3 vote and sent to Governor Kean.


The Law; A Tenure Dispute at CUNY
LEAD: The law school of the City University of New York, a much-lauded experiment in devising a nontraditional curriculum and in preparing law graduates for public service careers, is embroiled in a dispute over tenure.


Moscow Speeds Plans for Afghan Pullout Even if it Risks Collapse of Kabul Regime
LEAD: Having failed to find a safe exit from Afghanistan, the Soviet Union may now be bracing itself to settle for a quick exit - even one that leaves the possibility of continued civil warfare on this country's southern border.


49ers Fined
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers will not appeal the National Football League's $50,000 fine for offering playoff bonuses to their players, Coach Bill Walsh said yesterday.
Commissioner Pete Rozelle notified the team yesterday that, although he would not rescind the bonuses promised by the 49ers' owner, Edward J.


Anti-Smoking Rules Get Koch's Signature
LEAD: Mayor Koch signed into law yesterday a bill that will greatly restrict smoking in public places in New York City.


U.S. Accuses Airline in Buffalo Of Operating After Losing License
LEAD: A Buffalo charter airline formed by a Continental Airlines pilot was charged by Federal authorities yesterday with operating illegally for seven months after its airline license had been revoked.


Consumer Credit Increase Slowed to 4.4% in November
LEAD: Americans took out about $2.22 billion more in installment credit than they paid off in November, as the growth in consumer borrowing slowed in the first full month after the October stock market plunge, the Government said today.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Saints and Presidents
LEAD: The renewed Presidential campaign of Gary Hart has received thousands of small contributions from adiring supporters.
Some checks were accompanied by notes to Mr.
Hart's wife, Lee, praising her for standing by her husband after disclosures about the weekend he spent with a Miami model.


Drug Group to Offer Free Needles To Combat AIDS in New York City
LEAD: In an attempt to force the issue of giving addicts clean needles to help prevent AIDS infection, a private drug abuse agency has decided to defy New York State law by distributing free needles and syringes in New York City.


S.E.C. Details Canada Accord
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission and its Canadian counterparts today set up a framework for close cooperation in an effort to stem a broad range of cross-border violations of securities laws.


Economic Scene; Policy on Dollar: A Puzzle to Solve
LEAD: WITH the financial markets pursuing the dollar down, up and sideways, the big question remains: What is United States policy on the dollar?


A Witness Tells Of Finding Body In Park Slaying
LEAD: The first witness in the murder trial of Robert E. Chambers Jr. described yesterday finding the body of Jennifer Levin, almost nude and sprawled with her arms and legs askew in Central Park, and seeing a tall man in khaki pants lingering under the trees in the background.


Beacon Theater Organ
LEAD: A program of show tunes, soul, jazz and gospel music is to be played on Sunday on the vintage organ at the Beacon Theater, Broadway and 74th Street.
James Paulin, who was the organist at Radio City Music Hall during the early 1970's, is to play the theater's 1928 Wurlitzer.
The concert is sponsored by the New York Theater Organ Society.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Islanders have assigned the 27-year-old defenseman Ken Leiter to Springfield of the American Hockey League for conditioning.
Leiter, who has played in only 18 of the team's 38 games because of chronic abdominal and groin strain, had missed seven of the team's last eight games. 26. . . .
Dick MacPherson of Syracuse was honored last night in Atlanta by the 5,500 members of the American Football Coaches Association as this season's major-college coach of the year.


Wedtech Prosecutor Said to Scan Some Meese Stock Dealing
LEAD: The Justice Department has sent additional information about investments by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d to the independent prosecutor investigating Mr.
Meese in connection with the financially troubled Wedtech Corporation.


Market Place; Funds Outpace S.&amp;P. in Quarter
LEAD: THE stock market's October tumble dealt a harsh blow to general equity mutual funds, but an odd thing happened along the way.
In the final quarter, these funds managed to outperform the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index for the first time since the second quarter of 1983.


New U.S. Investigation Looks at Esposito
LEAD: Meade H. Esposito, the 81-year-old former Brooklyn Democratic leader who was convicted last September of giving an illegal gratuity to Representative Mario Biaggi, is under investigation again by a Federal grand jury in Brooklyn.


Lehman Joins Paine Webber
LEAD: Paine Webber Inc. announced yesterday that John F. Lehman Jr., the former Secretary of the Navy, had joined its investment banking division as a managing director.


Selling Out Tibet
LEAD: Traveling about India, or suddenly during conversations here in the capital, I find my mind wandering off to a street in a distant town in the Himalayas.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Adelphia Communications Corp., Coudersport, Pa., said it had entered into an agreement with Harte-Hanks Communications Inc. to acquire Ultracom Inc. for $78 million.


Hit or Miss to Mullen
LEAD: Hit or Miss Shops of Stoughton, Mass., a division of the Zayre Corporation, has assigned its advertising account to Mullen Advertising of Wenham, Mass.
The budget is $4 million.
Hit or Miss operates more than 450 off-price women's apparel shops.


Bridge: The Right Defensive Signals Can Thwart Declarer's Plan
LEAD: Facing a partner who is knowledgeable and skillful is just as important in defensive signaling as it is in bidding.
It is frustrating to send signals that your partner does not read, or look for signals that are not sent.


Life Magazine to Lift Circulation Base Again
LEAD: Life magazine, which raised its circulation rate base by 100,000, to 1.6 million, with its November issue, is now going to increase it another 100,000 with the March issue, Elizabeth P. Valk, its publisher for the last year, has announced.


Foster Care Can Be Found for AIDS Infants
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rates Drop on Mortgages
LEAD: Interest rates on fixed- and adjustable-rate home mortgages fell for the second consecutive month, and although rates on fixed-rate mortgages declined at a faster pace, the share of adjustables continued to rise, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board reported yesterday.


Hart's Rivals Soften Attacks on Him
LEAD: At first they excoriated him, but now the other contenders for the Democratic Presidential nomination have stifled their attacks on Gary Hart because they found they were only hurting themselves and helping his resurrected campaign.


Gunnar Engellau, Headed Volvo
LEAD: Gunnar Engellau, the Swedish industrialist who built the Volvo company into a major international automobile maker, died Tuesday in a nursing home in Goteborg, where he lived.
He was 80 years old.


Spacecraft Flaw Seen as Less Serious
LEAD: An investigation of the nozzle failure on the space shuttle booster rocket has determined that a key component probably did not fall off in the test firing but immediately after, and so the problem is not considered to be as serious as first thought, industry and space agency officials said yesterday.


A Jumbo Pick-Six for the Price of Five at Hialeah
LEAD: A betting frenzy surrounding the largest Pick-Six pool in Florida racing history made for a memorable closing afternoon at Hialeah Park today.


Fledgling Plays Take First Flight, Ready or Not
LEAD: WHEN most theater-, concert- or museumgoers come in contact with a creative work, they expect the play, composition or painting to be a finished, polished product.
They may pause to reflect on the arduous and perhaps mysterious process that led from the first spark of an idea, through many creative twists and turns, to a completed work with which the artist presumably was more or less satisfied.


Mack Lobell Horse of Year
LEAD: Mack Lobell, winner of 13 of 16 starts last year, was a landslide choice for Horse of the Year and top trotter of 1987 in balloting conducted by the United States Trotting Association and the United States Harness Writers Association.


Court Permits Effort to Send Boy, 49, Back to Zimbabwe
LEAD: A Federal appeals court issued a brief order yesterday allowing the State Department to resume efforts to return a diplomat's 9-year-old son to Zimbabwe in a dispute growing out of accusations that the boy had been beaten by his father.


Bernard Krauss, Publisher, 58
LEAD: Bernard Krauss, former president of Esquire Inc., an educational and music publisher, died of cancer Jan. 4 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 58 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.


The Law; At the Bar
LEAD: In these days of fierce competition for legal talent, a law firm in Grand Rapids, Mich., recently came up with a proposal that would have pleased the satirist Jonathan Swift.


Guarneri Strings
LEAD: The Guarneri String Quartet is to perform an all-Beethoven program tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Grace Rainey Rodgers Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Tickets are $16.
Information: 570-3949.


The Big East Race Begins in Earnest
LEAD: While the Big East season began a month ago, the bitter battles that distinguish conference play began when Georgetown and Pittsburgh squared off Wednesday night in the season's first true heavyweight bout.


PILLSBURY RESTAURANT CUTBACKS SET
LEAD: The Pillsbury Company said yesterday that it planned to sell or close about 103 of its fast-food and full-service restaurants to improve sagging corporate profits.


Dance: City Ballet in 'Piano Pieces'
LEAD: ONE of the pleasures of frequent ballet-going is the chance it gives to see dancers step into new roles.
On Wednesday, the New York City Ballet offered such an opportunity in a performance at the New York State Theater that boasted four role debuts in Jerome Robbins's ''Piano Pieces.''


Devils Lose Again As Slump Goes On
LEAD: There was slightly less than seven minutes left in the third period when Aaron Broten, having been assessed a misconduct penalty, was done for the night.


Suria Saint-Denis, Theater Teacher, 85
LEAD: Suria Saint-Denis, consultant director of the drama division of the Juilliard School, died Dec. 29 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
She was 85 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Cold, Fat City
LEAD: When the wind howls and the Hudson freezes and the clouds hang heavy in the sky, a funny thing happens to New York.
It turns into Fat City.


Robertson Battles Image of TV Minister
LEAD: Pat Robertson, seeking to broaden his support, stumped through western New Hampshire earlier this week, urging voters to judge him on the issues and not on his personal religious beliefs.


Advertising; A Travel Weekly to Hit Newsstands
LEAD: WITH support from one TV commercial for men, one TV commercial for women and one radio commercial that is sexually ambiguous, Fairchild Publications on Monday will be offering its new weekly consumer publication Travel Today to the East Coast reading public.


Arizona Gets Rolling Again
LEAD: Sean Elliott scored 23 points, and Tom Tolbert had 20 as third-ranked Arizona, which held California to 12 first-half points, cruised to an 80-51 Pacific-10 Conference victory tonight.


A. Hawley Peterson, Stockbroker, 83
LEAD: A. Hawley Peterson, a retired New York investment counselor and stockbroker, died Monday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 83 years old.


Trio to Perform
LEAD: As part of the Washington Square Contemporary Music Series, a trio -Rolf Schulte, violinist, William Purvis, french hornist and Alan Feinberg, pianist - is to perform works by George Edwards, Robert Helps, Babbitt and Stockhausen on Sunday at 3 P.M. in Merkin Concert Hall (129 West 67th Street).
Tickets are $8.


British Car Sales Record
LEAD: New-car sales in Britain last year exceeded two million for the first time, the industry said today.
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders said that December sales of 91,000 vehicles, the best since 1971, raised the year's total to 2,013,693.
The group's provisional figures show that British plants made just under 1.2 million cars last year, up from about a million in 1986.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JANUARY 8, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-11


Dining Out Guide: Sunday Night
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
CAFE GRECO, 1390 Second Avenue, near 71st Street (737-4300) -


DOW IS UP BY 14.09, TO 2,051.89
LEAD: As the dollar strengthened and bond prices recovered, stock prices rose yesterday for the fourth session in a row.


Our Towns; An Ex-Senator Finds a Welcome On the Airwaves
LEAD: Ex-State Senator Joseph R. Pisani has been out of prison less than a year and he already has his own radio talk show. ''My name is Joe Pisani and welcome to 'Let's Talk with Joe Pisani,' '' he said yesterday as he signed on at WVOX, New Rochelle, for the first time.


143 Nations Sign To Go to Seoul
LEAD: The International Olympic Committee said today that a record 143 countries have signed for the 1988 Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea.


Koch Agrees to a Cut in Limit On Spending for Campaigns
LEAD: The Koch administration and the City Council leadership have reached agreement on a key provision that had threatened the Mayor's proposal for public financing of election campaigns, city officials said yesterday.


Bond Prices Post a Moderate Rise
LEAD: Treasury bond prices rose modestly yesterday, as many market participants waited for the dollar to stop gyrating and for more economic data to provide clues on interest rates.


SHULTZ URGES END OF SOVIET ARMS AID IN AFGHAN PULLOUT
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that an agreement on Afghanistan should include not only a withdrawal of Soviet troops and a halt in American arms to Afghan rebels, but also an end to Soviet military aid to the Afghan Army.


ON STAGE
LEAD:  Errol and Beverly in Love


Salvadoran, in Jail Talk, Tells of Assassination
LEAD: Sitting alone in a bare prison cell, a man accused of being a guerrilla gunman spent an hour this morning quietly recounting how, he says, he helped kill a human rights official here 10 weeks ago.


Syria Is Seeking to Mediate in Iran-Arab Tension
LEAD: Syria has begun a diplomatic offensive, proposing to be host for a meeting of the Arab countries of the Persian Gulf and Iran, with which they are at odds.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  British 'American Way'


Robins Seeks Support for Merger
LEAD: The A. H. Robins Company, which has operated under a bankruptcy court's protection since August 1985, yesterday began an uphill battle to win support for a plan to clear its debts and reorganize itself as a subsidiary of Sanofi, a big French drug company.


Sihanouk 'Determined' to Gain Cambodia Accord
LEAD: Prince Norodom Sihanouk intends to negotiate a political settlement with the Vietnamese-backed Government in Cambodia with or without the backing of his coalition partners or foreign allies, the Prince's son and spokesman said today.


DiFranza Williamson Acquired by Ketchum
LEAD: DiFranza Williamson Inc., a 32-year-old New York sales promotion agency, has been acquired by Ketchum Communications, a Pittsburgh-based advertising and public relations company.


Let's Stop Deporting Haitians Who Flee
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hanover Bank Sells Investment Unit
LEAD: The Manufacturers Hanover Corporation said yesterday that it would withdraw from the institutional money management business, making it one of the few large banks to abandon that field.


People
LEAD: *
Hans Hansberg and Ann T. O'Hara have been promoted to senior vice presidents at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton.


The Eyes Speak for Her
LEAD: IN her latest film, Emmanuelle Beart goes a very long way on very short speeches.


Sledding Accident Kills Boy
LEAD: A 12-year-old boy was fatally injured Tuesday when he hit a tree while sledding at a park near his home here.
The boy, Maximillian Schuberthan, of 447 Park Hill Avenue, died Wednesday at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, the county medical examiner's office said.
He was sledding at Pelton Field at about 5 P.M.


Not Computer's Fault
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Trevor Howard Dies at 71


William C. Brennan, Advertising Executive, 75
LEAD: William C. Brennan, a former advertising executive, died of cancer of the colon and liver Tuesday at Fairview Hospital in Great Barrington, Mass.
He was 75 years old and lived in Great Barrington.


Bout for Duran
LEAD: Roberto Duran, the 36-year-old former champion, will challenge the Continental Americas middleweight champion, Ricky Stackhouse, Feb. 5 as part of a pay-per-view cable-television tripleheader in Atlantic City.
The other bouts, previously announced, include a title defense by Marlon Starling, the World Boxing Association welterweight champion, against Fujio Ozaki, and a welterwieght fight matching Mark Breland and Juan Alonzo Villa.


Will TV's and Stereos Cost More?
LEAD: Consumers long accustomed to a deluge of sophisticated electronic products that have continually declined in price might be in for a rude awakening this year.
For the first time in years, prices of televisions, stereos, compact disk players and video cassette recorders appear to be going up.


90 Jobs Cut By C.B.O.E.
LEAD: The Chicago Board Options Exchange said today that it would cut 90 jobs, or nearly 10 percent of its work force, in response to the steep decline in trading volume since the October market collapse.


Texas Burglar Who Shot a Woman to Death for Her $1 Is Executed
LEAD: Robert Streetman, a high school dropout who murdered a woman in a $1 burglary, was put to death by injection early today.
The execution was delayed three hours by confused state officials.


Israel's Survival Issue
LEAD: Survival has always been the first issue for Israel, but it has changed dimension over several periods.
In the aftermath of the Holocaust, the goal was creation of the state.


BIG-CHILL PERILS, HOT-HOUSE TEAMS
LEAD: WHEN thrust into the cold, hot-house plants quickly wither.


Clark's Signing: Impact Assessed
LEAD: Baseball and union officials yesterday debated the impact the Yankees had made on the game by signing Jack Clark, the free-agent slugger from the St.
Louis Cardinals.


New Try to Get Pacific Railroad
LEAD: Kansas City Southern Industries said today that it would continue to press its bid for the Southern Pacific Transportation Company despite an agreement by the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation to sell the railroad to another line.
Santa Fe said last week that it would sell Southern Pacific to Rio Grande Industries for $1.8 billion, including the assumption of $800 million in Southern Pacific debt.


Washington Talk: Army and Navy Club; Quiet Place for Cards And Shaping History
LEAD: War strategies were plotted and top secrets discussed in its rooms; journalists gathered scoops here and Presidents lost at bridge.


Dyncorp Approves $246 Million Deal
LEAD: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7 -


Washington Talk: Briefing; Musical Chairs
LEAD: After three months on the job, Commerce Secretary C. William Verity Jr. is preparing to make some major changes in the hierarchy of his department.


FMC Turkish Deal
LEAD: The FMC Corporation's Defense Systems Group and a Turkish partner, Nurol Defense Industry, will receive a $1 billion contract from the Turkish Government to build armored combat vehicles, it was announced today.
A spokesman for the FMC Defense Systems Group, which is based here and has a manufacturing plant in nearby San Jose, said the deal called for about 1,700 armored vehicles to be made over the next eight years.


Will Soviet 'Psychiatry' Go Straight?
LEAD: Under Stalin, much as in czarist times, a dissenter in the Soviet Union might have been shot in the back of the neck.
Under Yuri Andropov's tenure at the K.G.B., the dissenter might instead have been confined to a psychiatric hospital and tortured with psychotropic drugs.


Frankenmuth Journal; Christmas Shopping, All Year Round
LEAD: For many Americans who are just now storing their holiday decorations, plastic angels and stocking stuffers may not be at the top of their shopping list.
But on a 45-acre site in this community of 3,000 some 80 miles north of Detroit, the selling of seasonal cheer is a year-round business.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the snow, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


CANDIDATES FACING SERIES OF DEBATES
LEAD: While political specialists continue discussing how many debates are too many debates, the second round of the prolonged 1988 Presidential debating competition will start Friday in Des Moines.


Corrections
LEAD: Articles about the publisher Rupert Murdoch yesterday and on Jan. 1 misstated the circulation of The Boston Herald.
It had an average daily circulation of 355,000 and Sunday circulation of 265,000 in the six-month period ended Sept. 30, 1987.


Reagan Picks a Moderate to Lead National Labor Relations Board
LEAD: President Reagan today named James M. Stephens to succeed Donald L. Dotson as chairman of the National Labor Relations Board.


FCB/Leber Establishes A Specialized Division
LEAD: FCB/Leber Katz Partners has set up the Targeted Communications Group at 101 Park Avenue with Jon Adams as its president, a staff of 80, and $60 million in billings.


Odetta To Speak At Forum on Dr. King
LEAD: The folk singer Odetta will be among the speakers tomorrow during a three-day forum for educators and community leaders on the life of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, 515 Lenox Avenue, at 135th Street.


Chiat/Day Terminates Its Rockport Business
LEAD: Chiat/Day, New York, announced yesterday that by mutual agreement with its client, the Rockport Company, the two are splitting.


ART PEOPLE
LEAD:  New Sculpture Garden


Jackson Says No
LEAD: Bo Jackson, already a professional baseball and football player, has rejected an opportunity from pro basketball.
Offered a chance to sign a contract with the Orange County (Calif.) Crush of the new International Basketball Association for players 6 feet 4 inches or shorter, the former Heisman Trophy winner from Auburn said no thanks yesterday and went home to Bessemer, Ala., to pursue hunting, a sport for which he receives no pay.


Stage: 'Searching Satyrs,' Sophocles at Nat Horne
LEAD: SOPHOCLES' comedy ''The Searching Satyrs,'' we are notified in the program at the Nat Horne Theater, was ''performed once in 440 B.C. and lost for 2,500 years.'' That should give us a reprieve until 2060, but here it is, as if early confirmation were required that Aristophanes was Greece's great comic poet.


Retail Sales Higher for December
LEAD: December sales at the nation's top retailers were generally, in some cases surprisingly, improved over the figures from December 1986.


Merc Exchange Is Withdrawing From a Project
LEAD: Citing an uncertain investment climate and a soft market for office space in the financial district, the New York Mercantile Exchange announced yesterday that it was withdrawing from a project that would have created the world's largest commodity exchange.
The withdrawal appeared to doom the project.


On Campuses, Too, Prohibition Fails
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bern Dibner Dies at 90; Historian and Engineer
LEAD: Dr.
Bern Dibner, a science historian and founder of the Burndy Corporation, manufacturer of electrical and electronic equipment, died in his sleep Tuesday night at his home in Wilton, Conn.
He was 90 years old.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JANUARY 8, 1988
LEAD:  Markets


BOOKS: Recalling Papa
LEAD:  THE TRUE GEN: An Intimate Portrait of Hemingway by Those Who Knew Him.
By Denis Brian. 356 pages.
Illustrated.
Grove Press. $19.95.


Cooper Stake Up
LEAD: A New York family that increased its stake to 7.6 percent of the Cooper Companies' 23 million shares outstanding said it might seek representation on the board of the eye-care concern, based in Palo Alto, Calif.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Bruce, Howard and Wayne Sturman of Mount Vernon said they might present a restructuring proposal to Cooper management that ''could include the sale or disposition of one or more of the company's principal business segments and a restructuring or liquidation of the company.





SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Philly Connection


Cold Sends Oil Contracts Up Despite Late Profit Taking
LEAD: Severe winter weather over much of the nation bolstered heating and crude oil futures yesterday.
Despite a late burst of profit taking, the spot February heating oil contract closed up 0.31 cent a gallon, at 53.79 cents, after soaring to an intraday high of 54.40 cents.


Trevor Howard, Actor in Over 70 Films, Dies at 71
LEAD: Trevor Howard, the gravelly-voiced actor who made a career of playing English officers and gentlemen in his more than 70 motion pictures, died yesterday.
He was 71 years old.


TEXACO HOLDERS SEEK TO STOP 'POISON PILL'
LEAD: A committee of shareholders of Texaco Inc. pressed the company's chairman yesterday to change the board's proposed bankruptcy reorganization to remove bylaws that make unfriendly takeovers difficult.


Chrysler's Sales Fell 8.1% in 1987
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said it had sold 2,012,950 cars and light trucks in the United States in 1987, down 8.1 percent from its own 1986 sales plus those of the American Motors Corporation, which it acquired last year.
Its car sales were down 20.9 percent, to 1,096,385, and its truck sales were up 14.1 percent, to 916,565.


Ford Talks Ended by Bank Board
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Bank Board said today that it had ended its efforts to arrange a sale of the troubled Financial Corporation of America to the Ford Motor Company.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


JULES-FRANCOIS CRAHAY, DESIGNER
LEAD: Jules-Francois Crahay, a Belgian designer who began working as a couturier in Paris in the early 1950's, died of a heart attack Tuesday in Monte Carlo.
He was 70 years old.
Mr.
Crahay retired in 1984 from the House of Lanvin, where he had worked for 20 years.
Before that, he worked for Nina Ricci from 1952 to 1963.


L.I. Housing Problem Forces SUNY at Stony Brook to Create New Program
LEAD: The housing problems of Long Island came home to Jeff Casey last summer when the 29-year-old assistant business professor moved his family from Boston to take a job at the State University of New York management school.


Views of U.S Public Sought Over Relations With Moscow WASHINGTON, Jan. 7 -
LEAD: Americans in four cities will have a chance to voice their concerns on the future of American-Soviet relations this month as part of a project designed to let Presidential candidates know how Americans feel about the Russians.


East German Leader Visits France
LEAD: Erich Honecker, left, with President Francois Mitterrand yesterday after arriving at Orly Airport.
Mr.
Honecker is the first East German leader to visit any of the three Western powers that have occupied West Berlin since World War II.
French officials say there are no plans for signing agreements, but the talks are seen as a step toward overcoming what Mr.


Evidence to Be Retested In Chicago Rape Case
LEAD: A judge today approved an agreement that will allow new tests of evidence that helped convict Gary Dotson of rape and send him to prison for six years.


Boitano Near-Perfect in Short Program
LEAD: With a stunning performance in his short skating program, earning perfect marks of 6.0 for composition and style from eight of the nine judges, Brian Boitano tonight virtually assured himself of his fourth consecutive national title.


French Music Series Turning to Debussy
LEAD: The Year of French Music, a series of performances sponsored by the New York University Chamber Music Society, continues today at 8 P.M. with a concert of piano music by Debussy at the New York University Theater, 35 West Fourth Street.
Gregory Haimovsky is the pianist for the concert, which is a benefit for the society.


Soviet Bonds Are Success
LEAD: The Soviet Union's first venture into Western bond markets was a resounding success and other issues could follow, according to the West German bank that arranged the trail-blazing deal.


Islanders Caught In Crowded Race To Gain First Place
LEAD: The Islanders, the unanticipated proprietors of first place in their division for the bulk of the season, aren't sure whether they ought to be pleased with themselves or worried.


Courtroom Sketches
LEAD: More than 15 courtroom sketches of those involved in recent trials will be on view through January at the library of the New York Law School, Queens College, Long Island Expressway and Kissena Boulevard.
Subjects of the sketches, done by a variety of artists, include David Berkowitz, Mary Beth Whitehead, Cheryl Pierson, Marla Hanson and Eddie Murphy.


AUCTIONS
LEAD:  Old Masters


Juilliard School to Hold 2 Free String Concerts
LEAD: Eight string quartets that are now taking part in the Juilliard String Quartet Seminar Week are to give two free concerts at the school's Michael C. Paul Recital Hall today at 4 and 8 P.M.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The argument that this is going to encourage drug abuse is ridiculous.
We're one of only 11 states restricting needles, yet we have the highest rate of drug abuse in the world anyway.
And we're not giving needles to anyone who doesn't already have them.''  - Yolanda Serrano, head of a private drug-abuse agency in


Jordan Is Wary of P.L.O.'s Influence
LEAD: Jordan is watching the events in the Israeli-occupied West Bank to see if they might lead to a reopening of Middle East peace talks, but it is wary of a possible resurgence of the Palestine Liberation Organization's influence.


RESTAURANTS
LEAD: LE REGENCE, the opulent, Old World French restaurant in the Hotel Plaza Athenee, has in a sense been a victim of its own success.


Storm Drops a Foot of Snow on Much of the South
LEAD: Snow and strong winds idled much of the South yesterday, stranding travelers and closing schools.
More than a foot of snow fell in parts of Georgia, Tennessee and Mississippi.


Brooklyn Man Seized in Attempted Robbery
LEAD: An 18-year-old Brooklyn man was arrested yesterday and charged in an attempted robbery Wednesday that left a police officer wounded and another suspect dead outside a Brooklyn house, the police said.


Poll Shows Discontent on Reagan Helps Dole Outpace Bush in Iowa
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole of Kansas has capitalized on disaffection with President Reagan among Iowa Republicans to build a substantial lead there over Vice President Bush, a New York Times/ CBS News Poll has found.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary of Harold Matson on Wednesday gave an incorrect date for his death.
Mr.
Matson, a literary agent, died Monday.


U.S. Is Suing Con Edison Over Asbestos
LEAD: The Federal Government filed a lawsuit yesterday charging that the Consolidated Edison Company had removed asbestos from its plants without properly protecting its workers or the public.
Asbestos, when dispersed in the air, can cause cancer or other diseases.


TASK FORCE URGES A MAJOR OVERHAUL OF STOCK TRADING
LEAD: A task force appointed by President Reagan to study the stock market crash will call for radical changes in the way stocks, bonds and other financial instruments are traded.


The Stage: 'Man and Superman'
LEAD: George Bernard Shaw subtitled ''Man and Superman'' ''a comedy and a philosophy.'' Shorn of its third act, ''Don Juan in Hell,'' and without the appended ''Revolutionist's Handbook,'' the play accents the comedy rather than the philosophy - a cascade, sometimes a surfeit, of wit and impertinence at the expense of marriage, morality, wealth and social position.


The Law; The Rise and Fall of the Class-Action Lawsuit
LEAD: The class-action lawsuit, which has its roots in medieval English law, achieved what many consider its finest hour in 1954 when Brown v.
Topeka Board of Education desegregated the nation's schools.
Then, in the 1970's, class actions became the rage of the legal profession.
Now they appear to be dying.


Singer Advisers In Bilzerian Talks
LEAD: The Singer Company said its advisers, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, had entered into talks with representatives of Paul A. Bilzerian, the Florida investor, about his $50-a-share bid for Singer.


Top Specialist Gives Up Role in Morgan Stock
LEAD: In the first of what is expected to be a series of sanctions resulting from the stock market crash, the New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that the largest specialist firm on the exchange was giving up its right to make a market in an important stock, that of J.P.
Morgan &amp; Company.


For Melodies From Weill To Webb, Come To the Cabaret
LEAD: Cabaret, an ever-fragile world perpetually on the verge of flickering out, seems to thrive at the coldest time of the year, its intimacy a buffer against the blast of winter.


After Storms, Help Pours Into Town
LEAD: In a modest frame cottage built on a concrete slab, Willie Mae Porter and Marlin Gingerich looked down at her carpet, ruined by water. ''Tear it out,'' Ms.
Porter said.
Mr.
Gingerich bent to do so.


Pan Am Pilots to Cut Wage $58 Million for Equity Stake
LEAD: The pilots' union at the Pan Am Corporation announced yesterday that it had reached an agreement with the company's board on $58 million in wage concessions in exchange for an equity share in Pan Am.


Rent Control Is Target of Reagan Budget
LEAD: President Reagan's draft budget for the next fiscal year calls for a new policy that would prevent cities with rent control laws from receiving Federal grants for the repair of rental housing, according to confidential budget documents.


You Can'tGet to Mars Without a Space Station; The Human Touch
LEAD: To the Editor:


South African Reports 4 More Blacks Killed
LEAD: The police said today that four blacks had been killed in separate incidents in Pietermaritzburg, where fighting between black political groups has killed 31 people this year.


Study of AIDS And Insects
LEAD: A study of the rapid spread of AIDS in a small Florida town found no evidence that the AIDS virus can be transmitted by mosquitoes, as had been feared by local officials, a research team reported today.


Cards Contact Horner
LEAD: The St.
Louis Cardinals, starting an immediate search for power after the loss of Jack Clark, have held preliminary discussions with Bob Horner. ''At this point, we're talking,'' Horner said last night from his home near Dallas. ''Obviously, there's a fit there.'' Clark signed a free-agent contract with the Yankees Wednesday, leaving the Cardinals without their only proven power hitter.


Bob Eddy, Ex-Editor Of Hartford Courant
LEAD: Bob Eddy, a former editor and publisher of The Hartford Courant, died Monday at his home in Glastonbury, Conn.
He was 70 years old.


2 Fish Dissected in Hunt For Evolutionary Clues
LEAD: Scientists wielding million-dollar medical instruments completed a weeklong operation yesterday, the main feature of which was the carefully choreographed dissection of two dead fish.


Topics of The Times; Serious About Plastic Pollution
LEAD: By halting the purchase of plastic foam cups, plates and other products by New York City agencies, Mayor Koch sets a welcome example.


You Can't Get to Mars Without a Space Station
LEAD: To the Editor:


Indian Group Founder Retires
LEAD: Russell C. Means, a co-founder of the American Indian Movement, announced his retirement from the group today, proclaiming the organization ''has worked itself out of a job.''


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.92
6.94
5.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.79
5.87
5.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.35
6.36
5.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.64
8.69
6.91
30-YR.


Taiwan Trade Record
LEAD: Taiwan had a record trade surplus of $19 billion in 1987, up 22 percent from 1986, the Government reported today.
Exports were $53.5 billion; imports were $34.5 billion.
Taiwan's surplus in trade with the United States grew 18.5 percent, to $16 billion.


Washington Talk: Labor Union Consultants; Big Winner in Teamsters' Return
LEAD: The high-ceilinged corridor of the Fontainebleau Hotel in Miami Beach was crowded with labor leaders, most of whom had suddenly become publicity shy.


Driver Denies Charge
LEAD: One of the seven drivers charged with trying to fix a race at Yonkers Raceway in November said yesterday that he did all he could to win the race but that his horse was outclassed.


Blame for All in Gaza
LEAD: Sanctimony and hypocrisy attend the great tragedy being played out now over the Palestinians of the Gaza Strip.
Any fair look at Gaza, and the West Bank, shows guilt on all sides - Israel, Arab leaders, the United States and the United Nations.
They have all stood by while Palestinians have been stripped of any legitimate political voice, and few have worked to rekindle hope through renewed Arab-Israeli negotiations.


Demand Rising for Insurance That Covers Long-Term Care
LEAD: Thousands of Americans have begun buying a new form of health insurance that pays for nursing homes or care in their own homes for chronic illnesses.


Art: 'Realism Today,' At National Academy
LEAD: ''REALISM TODAY,'' an exhibition at the National Academy of Design, pulls together drawings that can be grouped only in the loosest way under the same artistic banner.
American artists whose pictures incorporate recognizable images of the world, whether or not these were generated by observations of nature, have been allowed to share the academy's walls.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture on Dec. 31 with an article about Sam LeFrak's Newport development in Jersey City was published in error.
The photo - showing waterfront strollers - was made at Pier 17 of the South Street Seaport in Manhattan.


Top S.E.C. Accountant Chosen From Ranks
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday that after a nationwide search, it had selected a new chief accountant from its own ranks, naming Edmund Coulson to the important financial post.


Israelis Wound 7 in Gaza; Peres to See U.N. Envoy
LEAD: Israeli troops wounded at least seven Palestinians today as violent demonstrations broke out again in the occupied Gaza Strip, and there were reports that a 15-year-old youth died of his injuries.


General Is Named to Head Arms Control Agency
LEAD: President Reagan has chosen Maj.
Gen.
William F. Burns as director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the White House announced today.


FRANCE YIELDS ART LINKED TO MARCOS
LEAD: Nine paintings found in France in the custody of Adnan M. Khashoggi, the Saudi arms dealer, may actually belong to former President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines and have been turned over to the Justice Department by the French Government, Federal law-enforcement officials said today.


Bush Queried on Role in Iran Scandal
LEAD: Vice President Bush said today that he knew ''a lot'' about the President Reagan's secret initiative to ship arms to Iran.


DINER'S JOURNAL
LEAD: GAGE &amp; TOLLNER, the 99-year-old Brooklyn landmark restaurant, may be sold soon, and its future as a business is uncertain, the owners say.


POPE LIKELY TO SEE WALDHEIM 3 TIMES
LEAD: Pope John Paul II is likely to meet President Kurt Waldheim as many as three times during a papal visit to Austria this June in keeping with protocol, Roman Catholic officials said today.


Bruce Springsteen Plans To Tour for New Album
LEAD: Bruce Springsteen will begin a United States tour of about 20 cities for his latest album, ''Tunnel of Love,'' in late February, according to Columbia Records.


Former Shell Engineer To Head Sonat Division
LEAD: Donald G. Russell, who has spent much of his career bouncing sound waves beneath the ground as a petroleum engineer for the Shell Oil Company, was named this week to head a small exploration and production company trying to rebuild.


U.S. Aide Urged Panama General To Yield Control, Diplomats Say
LEAD: A senior Defense Department official made a secret trip to Panama last week to urge the country's military leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, to withdraw from politics and allow an elected civilian government to take power, State Department and senior Latin American diplomats said Thursday night.


Topics of The Times; Ticket Buyer's Line
LEAD: New Yorkers, however outraged they may be by $7 movie tickets, like to think they are beyond street shock.
Nothing is so unusual or outrageous, they imagine, that they haven't seen or heard it already.
But a New Yorker visiting Chicago recently found something about which to be surprised.


Art: The Silver of San Gennaro, From Naples
LEAD: WITH the Nancy Graves sculpture retrospective and the display of Rodin bronzes, the third installation on the fifth floor of the Brooklyn Museum is easy to overlook.
It doesn't help that its title, ''The Treasure of San Gennaro: Baroque Silver From Naples,'' suggests luxury items, religious relics and little else.


Investors Keep B.P. Shares
LEAD: A Government offer to buy back stock in the British Petroleum Company closed this week with most investors apparently hanging on to their shares, according to official figures released today.


Jamaican Says Election In Haiti Is 'on Course'
LEAD: Prime Minister Edward P. G. Seaga of Jamaica said today that the pledge by the army-dominated Government of Haiti to hand over power after a presidential election scheduled for Jan. 17 ''seems to be on course.''


Emancipation Proclamation on Display
LEAD: The original manuscript of the Emancipation Proclamation, in the handwriting of President Abraham Lincoln, will go on exhibit tomorrow and Sunday at the State Museum in the Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller Empire State Plaza in Albany.


A 'Dido and Aeneas' Precursor
LEAD: To most concertgoers, the early English Baroque and the music of Henry Purcell are synonymous, and it is Purcell's ''Dido and Aeneas'' of 1689 that remains the best-known example of English opera from this period.
That piece makes its way onto New York stages every so often, but the work from which it may have drawn inspiration has so far not been staged in New York


A Fair December for Retailers
LEAD: A late Christmas shopping surge and strong after-Christmas buying helped lift December sales for some big retailers.
Page D1.


New Hunt Set For Fed Choice
LEAD: The White House is casting about for a new candidate to fill a vacant seat on the Federal Reserve Board because of a powerful Senator's opposition to the front-runner, Leif H. Olsen, according to officials.


A Nonwhite Gets a Finger on the Levers of Power
LEAD: Of all the South African political figures likely to pose serious problems for President P. W. Botha, the Rev.
Allan Hendrickse has never figured very prominently.


Toscanini Documentary and a British Soap Opera
LEAD: ARTURO TOSCANINI.
More than 30 years after his death, at the age of 89, the maestro's name remains synonymous with excellence and uncompromising dedication.
The reasons are made clear in the documentary ''Toscanini: The Maestro,'' a ''Great Performances'' presentation on Channel 13 at 9 this evening.


Washington Talk: Congress; Raised Eyebrows Over Dole Request
LEAD: It is not only what you say that counts in Washington, it is where and when you say it.


Of Flashcards and Cuomo-Watching
LEAD: State Senator James H. Donovan, a powerful Republican from Chadwicks and chairman of the Senate Education Committee, uses flashcards.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  A WOMAN RUN MAD. By John L'Heureux. 258 pages. Viking. $17.95.


Commissions for Composers
LEAD: The Library of Congress has announced the award of commissions totaling $91,500 to 10 composers to write works under auspices of the Serge Koussevitzky Music Foundation.


With the Tide
LEAD: Homer Smith, an outstanding running back for Princeton in the early 1950's and head football coach at Army from 1974 through 1978, was named offensive coordinator yesterday for the University of Alabama football team by Coach Bill Curry.
Smith, 56, spent 28 years coaching at the college level before serving with the Kansas City Chiefs as offensive coordinator last season.


AIDS Testing Without Consent Reported
LEAD: Almost half the tests for the AIDS virus given at a major United States medical center over a 15-month period were administered without a sound medical reason or the patients' consent, researchers reported today.


LONG HOURS, FAST PACE FOR PANEL'S STAFF 42
LEAD: The report issued today by the Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms was largely the product of a 42-member staff drawn from universities and Wall Street.


Correction
LEAD: Thursday's editorial on Margaret Thatcher erred in asserting that the Prime Minister's Conservatives failed in the June 1987 election to capture any Scottish seats.
Her party holds 10 of 72 seats from Scotland.


U.S. May Back Private Venture For Space Base
LEAD: A senior White House policy group has agreed in principle that the Government should back a private plan for construction of a small, inexpensive space station that would fly into orbit years ahead of NASA's multibillion-dollar space outpost, Federal officials said yesterday.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 16.


'EDUCATION FOR WHAT?'
LEAD: Dr.
Vartan Gregorian, president of the New York Public Library, will give a talk on ''Education for What?'' on Wednesday at Alice Tully Hall as part of the ''Lincoln Center Off Stage'' lecture series.
The program is to begin with a reception at 5:30 P.M.; wine and cheese will be served and guests will have a chance to talk with Dr.


Escaped Rapist Is Captured
LEAD: An inmate who escaped last April from a Virginia state prison where he was serving a 135-year term for rape and sodomy was captured here Thursday night, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation said today.
The inmate, Rafael Rogel Acosta, was four years into his sentence when he walked out of the prison dressed as a corrections officer.


Devils Recall Forwards
LEAD: The Devils called up three forwards, Anders Carlsson, Chris Cichocki and Al Stewart from Utica of the American Hockey League yesterday.
They are expected to be in the lineup when the Devils play the North Stars in Minnesota tonight.
Carlsson, 27 years old, is being recalled for the third time this season.


A Bit Late, Town Approves Constitution
LEAD: The stoic Yankees who live in the small towns nestled in the Litchfield Hills are renowned for their sense of tradition and their resistance to new ideas.


Virginia Haviland Author, 76
LEAD: Virginia Haviland, an author and retired director of the Children's Literature Center at the Library of Congress, died of a stroke at her home in Washington on Wednesday.
She was 76 years old.


The Gentle Tasaday Are Merely a Persistent Hoax
LEAD: To the Editor:


With Cut Flowers
LEAD: Spring is just a few steps away, as close as the cut flowers at the nearest greengrocer or neighborhood florist.


40-1 Winner At Gulfstream
LEAD: Cook's Brown Rice, the longest shot in a field of eight at 40-1, just lasted to nose out Evening Kris and win the $59,135 Spectacular Bid Stakes today as Gulfstream Park opened its winter meeting.


Dharmsala Journal; In Tibet's Dark Hour, Dalai Lama Is Their Refuge
LEAD: Hours after the first anti-Chinese riots broke out last fall in Lhasa, the distant capital of Tibet, this normally quiet community of Tibetan refugees in the Himalayan foothills of India came to life.


Brown Tops East In Japan Bowl
LEAD: Tim Brown of Notre Dame, the Heisman Trophy winner, and Don McPherson of Syracuse, the runner-up, will be teamed on the East squad Sunday for the Japan Bowl, an annual college All-Star game to be played at Yokohama.


In Filipino Town, Local Politics Kills
LEAD: When a bullet hit Ceferino Lumanlan in the forehead Wednesday night, it looked as if a sudden gust of wind was blowing back his hair.


BONDS DROP SHARPLY ON JOBLESS DIP
LEAD: Prices of Government securities fell sharply yesterday after the release of a better-than-expected report on the nationwide unemployment rate.


Reality of Hell's Kitchen Is Playwright's Material
LEAD: Robert Moresco sits in Jimmy Armstrong's, one of those old Irish saloons on the West Side of Manhattan, and talks about a play he has written, and the reality on which it might or might not be based.


Suspect Seized In IRT Shooting That Killed One
LEAD: A 38-year-old man wanted in the shotgun killing of his former companion Thursday on a crowded platform in the Grand Central subway station was arrested yesterday outside his brother's home in New Jersey, the police said.


Salvador Judge Refuses Amnesty To Killers of 4 U.S. Churchwomen
LEAD: A judge refused today to grant amnesty to five national guardsmen convicted of murdering four American churchwomen in 1980, a court official said.


Light in the Khyber Pass?
LEAD: Logic and interest argue powerfully for a Soviet withdrawal in 1988 of its 115,000 troops in Afghanistan.
But it can't be done without military and political cost.
Is Mikhail Gorbachev wise and strong enough to pull out anyway?


Going for the Championship
LEAD: Debi Thomas performing in the women's short program at the U.S. figure skating championships in Denver.
She is leading going into the freestyle program today.
Page 51. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


Dan J. Bradley, 47, Dies of AIDS; Ex-Head of Legal Services Agency
LEAD: Dan J. Bradley, a former president of the Legal Services Corporation who later became a leading advocate for gay rights, died of AIDS today at Doctors Hospital in Coral Gables, Fla., He was 47 years old and lived in Miami.


Trustee Is Urged For Sharon Steel
LEAD: The Sharon Steel Corporation's creditors have asked a Federal bankruptcy judge to appoint a trustee to run the company since the chairman, Victor Posner, has failed to agree on restructuring the board of directors.
The creditors on Thursday asked United States Bankruptcy Judge Warren Bentz to appoint a trustee to supplant the directors now controlled by Mr.


Y.M.C.A. Resident Is Slain in Dispute
LEAD: A dispute between roommates at a midtown Y.M.C.A. ended yesterday with a fatal stabbing, the police said.


U.S. Studies New Curbs On General in Panama
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is considering whether to impose new punitive measures against Panama if Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega moves to consolidate his position as the power behind the scenes, senior Administration officials said today.


PANEL'S CONCERN: POWER, NOT PANIC
LEAD: The idea that less than 10 large financial institutions could bring the financial system to its knees through their unrelenting selling of stocks and financial instruments that set off the selling of stocks is a terrifying prospect.
But that in essence is what the Presidential commission on the stock collapse concluded.


Buyout Rejected By Holly Sugar
LEAD: The Holly Sugar Corporation rejected a last-ditch, $92.50-a-share buyout proposal from Plum Associates and paid the New York-based investor group a $900,000 fee for calling off the deal in favor of an offer from the Imperial Sugar Company.


Girl Will Stand Trial In Mother's Slaying
LEAD: A 16-year-old girl whose former boyfriend admitted strangling her mother will stand trial as an accessory to the killing, a judge ruled yesterday.


Eagle Cripples Ethiopian Jet
LEAD: An eagle crashed into the cockpit of an Ethiopian Airlines jetliner Tuesday, breaking the co-pilot's leg and forcing the plane to make an emergency landing in Khartoum, an airline spokesman said Thursday.


Future Is Now on Trial for Colts
LEAD: On Saturday, the country will get a peek at what might be the National Football League's new era.


Cardinals Near Move?
LEAD: Gov.
John Ashcroft of Missouri and local leaders met with the owner of the St.
Louis Cardinals yesterday in a last-ditch attempt to keep him from moving the National Football League franchise out of town.
William Bidwill, the team's owner, reportedly was ''leaning heavily'' toward moving his team to the Phoenix-Tempe area in Arizona.


South Africa Helps U.S. Film Makers In Namibia With Troops and Trucks
LEAD: South Africa provided tanks, trucks, troops, jeeps and mortars for the filming of an American adventure movie scheduled for release next summer, South-West African publications have reported.


BOITANO PEAKS AT RIGHT TIME
LEAD: Long after Suzanne Semanick and Scott Gregory had won the dance title at the United States figure skating championships late Thursday night, the afterglow of Brian Boitano's remarkable effort in the men's short program was still illuminating McNichols Sports Arena.


Tandon in Pact On Holders' Suits
LEAD: The Tandon Corporation, a disk drive maker in Chatsworth, Calif., said it had agreed in principle to the settlement of class action suits filed last July by shareholders charging Tandon had violated Federal securities and state laws in statements and public reports made in 1983 and 1984.


'The Chosen' to Close
LEAD: ''The Chosen,'' a musical adaptation by Chaim Potok of his novel, with music by Phillip Springer and lyrics by Mitchell Bernard, will close after the evening performance on Sunday at the Second Avenue Theater.
The play, directed by Mitchell Maxwell and starring George Hearn, will have run for six regular performances and 52 previews.


Adaline Frelinghuysen Is Married to Sculptor
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York Adaline Havemeyer Frelinghuysen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter H. B. Frelinghuysen of Morristown, N.J., was married yesterday to Gerald Ogilvie-Laing, the son of the late Maj. and Mrs.
Gerald Ogilvie-Laing of Newcastle-on-Tyne, England.
The Rev.


Norway Names Head of Statoil
LEAD: Harald Norvik, an economist in private industry since 1981 and a Socialist Government official for 10 years before that, will be the next managing director of Statoil, the state-owned company announced Thursday.


Mullin Due Back Soon
LEAD: Chris Mullin is expected to be released as early as Monday from the California hospital where he is undergoing treatment for alcohol dependency, a source close to the Mullin family said yesterday.
The source said that after his release, Mullin plans to continue therapy and will rejoin the Warriors when he thinks he is ready to play again.


The Ice Hockey Follies, With Qaddafi Starring
LEAD: Striding languidly into the large, brightly colored Bedouin tent with his flowing brown cape swept over his arm, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi declared to the two dozen West German sportswriters that he had watched an ice hockey game on videotape and approved of it.
It is not a violent game, he declared, but a mass sport that people like.


Warrant for Ciccarelli
LEAD: The police have issued a warrant for the arrest of Dino Ciccarelli, the Minnesota North Star right wing, on a charge of assault from a stick-swinging incident during a game here last Wednesday, officials said today.


ISRAEL JAILS ARABS WITHOUT A TRIAL
LEAD: Israeli officials said today that dozens of Palestinians had been jailed in the last few days under a procedure allowing them to be held without trial for up to six months.


Jazz: Clifford Jordan, On the Tenor Saxophone
LEAD: For the last decade, Clifford Jordan has quietly and consistently been making brilliant music with his tenor saxophone.
At 56, with 30-odd years of professional experience behind him, Mr.
Jordan's profound mastery allows him to wrap each note of his solos in its own texture.
In the midst of his unhurried improvisations, he'll convert a low note into a crying moan, slide it up through a silky blue haze to a new pitch and end the phrase with a gently swaying vibrato.


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, JANUARY 9, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/2-5


TRANSACTIONS
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Options Exchange Weighs Changes in Operation
LEAD: The Chicago Board Options Exchange said today that it was studying a wide range of changes in its operations and regulatory role in response to the October market collapse.


Wynn Halts Sale
LEAD: Wynn's International Inc., an automotive products supplier, said that it was abandoning a two-month effort to find a buyer.
The company had received an unsolicited $27.25-a-share, $109 million buyout proposal from a unit of the Security Pacific Corporation in September.
That offer was dropped on Oct.


About New York; How Ms. Mastri Opens Minds With Blue Skies
LEAD: Middle of an arctic January morning in second grade in Barbara Mastri's class in Public School 97 on Houston Street at the East River:


O'NEILL DOES NOT HAVE CANCER, DOCTORS SAY AFTER REMOVING POLYP
LEAD: One of three polyps removed from Gov.
William A. O'Neill's colon this week contained a cluster of cancer cells, his doctors said today.
But because the polyp has been taken out, he faces no risk of recurrence, they said.


U.S. IS DENOUNCED ON ACID RAIN STUDY
LEAD: The Canadian Government has denounced a major United States report that concluded acid rain caused little if any damage to American crops, forests and lakes and was unlikely to do so.


Duties Ended On Potash
LEAD: The Commerce Department has withdrawn temporary duties on Canadian potash after Canada agreed to stop selling the fertilizer in the United States for less than cost, the Canadian Embassy said today.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the snow, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


MAIL SWEEPSTAKES: CHANCES TO WIN ARE SLIM TO NONE
LEAD: January usually brings a post-holiday lull and, without fail, post-holiday bills.
Just when there seems to be no escape, the mailbox swells with sweepstakes letters.
The timing is no coincidence, according to direct-mail marketers, who say they get the best response at this time of year.


Chinese Accord on Toshiba
LEAD: China agreed today to accept substitutes for some products of the Toshiba Machine Company, partly resolving an eight-month dispute over Japan's decision to bar Toshiba from exporting to Communist states.


Jazz: John Campbell, Pianist, In Solo Appearance at Zinno
LEAD: The confident, polished jazz piano playing of John Campbell, who winds up a brief engagement tonight at Zinno, 126 West 13th Street, with Michael Moore on bass, suggests that he is an experienced, well-established musician.
Mr.
Campbell is experienced: He


Australian Seedings
LEAD: Pat Cash of Australia, who last year defeated Ivan Lendl in the semifinal round of the Australian Open and in the final at Wimbledon, has been seeded fourth in the draw for this year's Australian championships and would meet top-seeded Lendl in the semifinal round again, if both players get that far.


Economist Installed as Princeton's 18th President
LEAD: Harold T. Shapiro took office as Princeton University's 18th president today and appealed to American higher education to be more mindful of the moral and spiritual needs of college students.


Computervision Bars A Takeover Proposal
LEAD: The Computervision Corporation said yesterday that its board had rejected a $390 million takeover proposal from one of its leading rivals, Prime Computer Inc.


Jews for Jesus Ad Poses Painful Choices
LEAD: To the Editor:


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 53.


French Film Noir
LEAD: ''Le Doulous'' (''The Informer''), a 1962 French film noir written and directed by Jean-Pierre Melville, is being shown through Thursday at Film Forum 2, 57 Watts Street.
The film, based on a detective novel, features Jean-Paul Belmondo in the leading role.
Screenings this weekend are at 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 P.M.


Cold Comfort From Siberia
LEAD: Literature celebrates the equalizing aspect of the weather: John Huston's film of ''The Dead'' ends with James Joyce's mesmerizing report that snow ''was general all over Ireland''; it was ''falling upon all the living and the dead.''


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Is this the equivalent of Oct. 16?
Are we going to be down 500 points on Monday?
I don't think we're into that.
But they did some major damage today.''
- Edward Collins, a
securities executive
in New York.  [ 1:5. ]


Reaction to Needles-for-Addicts Plan
LEAD: A drug counseling group's proposal to give addicts clean needles to help prevent the spread of AIDS drew strong reactions yesterday from Governor Cuomo and Mayor Koch, and the group itself moderated its position.


Officer Cites Wounds on Levin's Neck
LEAD: A police sergeant testified yesterday that sometime near or after her death in Central Park, Jennifer Levin's clothing was pushed up until it completely covered her neck, which was found to have ''multiple horizontal red wounds'' across it.


Interview at S.M.U.
LEAD: Doug Single, the athletic director at Southern Methodist University, is continuing to interview candidates for the job of head football coach, and the latest one is Bill McCartney, the coach at the University of Colorado. ''I visited with the proper authorities at S.M.U. and was able to get an idea of the direction their program will take and the facilities that are available there,'' McCartney told The Dallas Times Herald.


Texas A&amp;M Head Resigning
LEAD: Frank E. Vandiver, the president of Texas A&amp;M University, said Thursday that he would resign his post to establish a national defense research organization at the university.
Mr.
Vandiver, a military historian, said he hoped to relinquish the presidency Sept. 1 but would stay until his successor was named.


HISTORY CONVENTION REFLECTS CHANGE FROM TRADITIONAL TO 'GENDER' STUDIES
LEAD: These are the spiritual descendants of Gibbon and Michelet, two of the world's greatest historians, one chronicling the end of the Roman Empire and the other the history of France.


Oral Roberts to Cut Back TV Outlets
LEAD: Oral Roberts, the evangelist, has decided to remove ministry programs from scores of television stations across the country because of sagging donations and a decision by many stations to drop religious programming.


GULLICKSON LEAVES YANKS TO PLAY IN JAPAN
LEAD: Two days after they signed a major hitter, the Yankees lost a major pitcher last night when Bill Gullickson said no to their final offer and headed for Japan, where he is expected to sign a two-year contract Monday for $3.3 million with the Tokyo Giants.


Investigation Of Index Data
LEAD: Representative John D. Dingell, a Michigan Democrat who plays a powerful role in overseeing the securities industry, said today that he had begun an investigation into charges that the Commodity Futures Trading Commission used unreliable data in its study of possible manipulative trading involving the Major Market


9 Palestinians Who Face Deportation by the Israelis
LEAD: On Sunday, Israel ordered nine Palestinians expelled from the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, saying they had incited anti-Israeli violence in the occupied territories.
These are the nine Palestinians and the charges against them:


NETS HANDED ONE AS KNICKS COLLAPSE
LEAD: For the Nets, tonight's game began to resemble the temperature: cold, dropping fast, looking as if it would get worse before it got better.


Music: Mehta Conducts Messiaen's 'Turangalila'
LEAD: Olivier Messiaen's ''Turangalila'' Symphony is only 40 years old, but it belongs to an age other than ours.
Its vastness contradicts modern science's assertions that man is small and the universe infinite.
Extravagance such as this bespeaks a confidence in our powers ultimately to control the world around us.


Power Agency To Seek Ruling
LEAD: The Bonneville Power Administration said this week that it intended to file a lawsuit in Federal District Court to determine whether it can terminate two partly constructed nuclear power plants without defaulting on the plants' $3.7 billion in bonds.


New Method to Detect AIDS May Be Tool to Test Drugs
LEAD: A new biological method that can detect tiny amounts of the AIDS virus may be a powerful tool for testing the effectiveness of experimental drugs against the disease, researchers say.


Letter: On Yachting; Cut America's Cup Rules to Waterline
LEAD: To the Editor:


ARIZONA GOVERNOR INDICTED BY STATE ON CAMPAIGN LOAN
LEAD: Gov.
Evan Mecham, already facing a possible recall from office, was indicted today by a state grand jury on six felony counts including perjury and concealing a $350,000 campaign loan.


Executives Shifted at William Morrow and Little, Brown
LEAD: James D. Landis, who heads his own imprint at William Morrow &amp; Company, was named publisher and editor in chief of Morrow yesterday.
He replaces Sherry W. Arden, who was named head of a new Morrow imprint, Silver Arrow Books.


WNYC Plans Tribute To Simone de Beauvoir
LEAD: Simone de Beauvoir, the French writer and scholar, is being honored today with a daylong program of readings and interviews on WNYC radio, 830 AM and 93.9 FM.
The tribute, beginning at 10 A.M., falls on the 80th anniversary of her birth; Miss de Beauvoir, author her birth; Miss de Beauvoir, author of ''The Second Sex,'' among other works, died in 1986.


Hijacker Kills Himself
LEAD: A man arrested for hijacking an Aeromexico jet with 119 people aboard hanged himself today, the federal Attorney General's office said.
The man, Marcos Ganem, a 37-year-old Mexican, committed suicide in the hospital of the Monterrey federal prison, a spokeswoman said.
He was arrested Tuesday in Monterrey, where the DC-9 had landed for refueling.


Kidnapped Baby of Murdered Couple Found in Delaware
LEAD: Joyce L. Lynch and her husband, Richard, in the custody of state police officers in Hazletville after they were arrested in connection with the Christmas Eve murder of a Delaware couple and the abduction of their nine-day-old son.
Joseph and Beverly Gibson were found shot to death early Christmas Day in their home near Wyoming, Del.; their two older children were unhurt, having slept through the shooting.


Citibank Acquires 95.1% of Vickers
LEAD: Citibank, a subsidiary of Citicorp, has acquired the 95.1 percent of the brokerage house Vickers Da Costa Securities Holdings Inc. that it did not already own for undisclosed terms, a Citicorp spokesman said.
Citicorp had acquired 4.9 percent of the New York stock brokerage of Vickers Da Costa Securities in 1984 at the same time that it bought a 29.9 percent stake in Vickers's London operation and a controlling interest in the firm's Tokyo unit.


Sterling Drug Bid
LEAD: F. Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company said that it had again requested a meeting with Sterling Drug Inc. to discuss its $4.2 billion takeover offer for the American company.
Hoffmann-La Roche's chairman, Fritz Gerber, wrote in a letter to Sterling's chairman, John M. Pietruski, ''I remain convinced that we can, together, structure a transaction that best serves the vital interests of everyone concerned.


Foreign Cars Gain in Japan
LEAD: The cash-rich Japanese bought a record number of foreign cars last year, particularly luxury models from West Germany.


Single-Premium Policies a Target
LEAD: ONE of the fastest-growing ''investment'' products available is single-premium whole life insurance.
Its appeal comes primarily from the tax advantages it retained after the Tax Reform Act of 1986 took effect last Jan. 1.


CUOMO TO SEEK KEY CHANGES IN RENT RULES
LEAD: The Cuomo administration plans to propose major changes in housing regulations, including making leases permanent in rent-stabilized apartments and ending the need for their renewals.
It would also eliminate rent surcharges for fuel costs and stiffen some penalties against landlords who do not properly maintain apartments.


Storm Hits East Coast After Burying South in Snow
LEAD: Winter raided the East Coast yesterday with heavy snow and freezing winds that disrupted transportation, government, business and education and recast the landscape into snowbound shapes from the Carolinas to the New York metropolitan area.


INSIDE
LEAD:  U.S. Gloom on Haiti
Washington now appears powerless as its efforts to lead the military Government away from dictatorship seem to be exhausted.
Page 2.
Bush and Iran Affair
Vice President Bush, in a campaign debate, was on the defensive over the Iran-contra affair.
He is expected to be interviewed under oath about the affair on Monday.


Lawyers' Feud Over Bar Association Endorsements Leads to a Suit
LEAD: A feud within the City Bar Association in New York over who has the authority to speak for it on the qualifications of United States Supreme Court nominees has spilled over into the courts.


ONCE AGAIN, PAYTON ADJUSTS
LEAD: Two days from the possible end of his 13th and final season with the Chicago Bears - or three weeks from the completion he would prefer, in Super Bowl XXII -the football career of Walter Payton has room for one last fantasy.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  College Basketball  Fifth-Ranked Wyoming Loses: In El Paso last night, Tim Hardaway scored 18 points and Chris Sandle added 16 as Texas-El Paso (12-2) rallied for a 68-62 victory over fifth-ranked Wyoming (11-1) in the Western Athletic Conference opener for both teams.
Sandle, who covered Fennis Dembo for much of the night, held the Wyoming star to 9 points.


Concert: McKinley Pieces By American Symphony
LEAD: While William Thomas McKinley cannot strictly be called a Minimalist, the four concertos by the composer that the American Symphony Orchestra performed Thursday evening in Carnegie Hall showed him to rival certain members of that school in his capacity to write seemingly endless stretches of unvaried, uninteresting music.


Task Force Ties Market Collapse To Big Investors' Program Trades
LEAD: A handful of the nation's largest money management firms, using two types of computerized trading, were mostly responsible for the October stock market collapse, a Presidential task force said in a report today.


RANGERS' STREAK ENDED BY CAPITALS
LEAD: Painful as it is to experience, there is something cathartic about being humbled.
Somehow, the vulnerability it exposes leaves its victims more easily introspective, certainly more engagingly candid.


Excerpt From Summary Of Brady Stock Report
LEAD: Following is an excerpt from a summary prepared by the President's Task Force on Market Mechanisms of its report on the October stock market collapse, as released today by the White House:  THE MARKET BREAK


2-Week Hiatus for 'Tamara'
LEAD: ''Tamara,'' a play by John Krizanc at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 66th Street, will suspend performances for two weeks, beginning Jan. 18, to make room for the Winter Antique Show.
The play will resume on Feb. 2.


Shareholder Unit Delays Decision on Robins Plan
LEAD: A committee representing the outside shareholders of the A.H.
Robins Company yesterday put off a decision on whether to oppose Robins's plan to become a subsidiary of Sanofi, the French drug company.


Ruth Wright Theater Owner, 75
LEAD: Ruth Wright, a retired theater owner, died of cancer Dec. 31 at her home in Great Neck, L.I.
She was 75 years old.


Books of The Times; Quips, Not Literature
LEAD: DOROTHY PARKER: What Fresh Hell Is This?
By Marion Meade.
Illustrated. 459 pages.
Villard Books. $22.50.


Taiwan Investment Up
LEAD: Foreign investment in Taiwan soared 84.4 percent, to a record $1.42 billion in 1987, from $770 million in 1986, the Investment Commission said today.
Investment in other countries by Taiwan businesses surged 80.8 percent, to a record $103 million, from $57 million.
Investment in Taiwan from the United States totaled $414 million in 1987; from Japan, $399 million; from Europe, $224 million, and from Hong Kong, $181 million.


Canada Jobless Rate Off
LEAD: Canada's unemployment rate fell to 8.1 percent in December, the lowest level in more than six years, the Government agency Statistics Canada said today.
The November rate had been 8.2 percent.
The average unemployment rate for 1987 was 8.9 percent, down from 9.4 percent in the previous year.


THE BASIC SPEECH: Albert Gore Jr.; Southerner Stresses Strong Military
LEAD: Candidates seeking the Presidential nomination make dozens of speeches in their campaigns.
Some address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
But more often the candidate uses a ''basic speech.'' It summarizes, with little variation from one occasion to the next, how the candidate wants to present himself to the voters.


G.M. Job Cuts May Be Eased
LEAD: Slow sales of Pontiac Firebirds and Chevrolet Camaros have prompted the General Motors Corporation to elminate 1,900 jobs at a California assembly plant, but a new plan may save workers from permanent layoff, the nation's largest auto maker said today.


Bridge Open and Women's Teams To Be Picked the Same Way
LEAD: For the first time, the American Contract Bridge League will this year use the same formula for selecting the two United States squads.


Landlord Is Arrested For Heatless Building
LEAD: A West Orange surgeon, called a slumlord by Mayor Sharpe James, has been charged with 11 counts of contempt of court for leaving 62 tenants without heat, hot water and other services, the police said yesterday.


Bush Is Target of Foes at Iowa Debate
LEAD: Vice President Bush, on the defensive over his role in the Iran-contra affair, insisted in a debate here tonight that he had answered every question, save one, about his role in the Iran-contra affair.


VIKINGS' WILSON TO START AGAINST 49ERS
LEAD: All week, Coach Jerry Burns of the Minnesota Vikings had declined to say whether Tommy Kramer or Wade Wilson would be his starting quarterback in the National Football League playoff game here Saturday against the 49ers.
Most people close to the Vikings thought it would be Kramer, but today Burns named


3,000 Boneless Hams Recalled by Processor
LEAD: A Pennsylvania meat processor has has expanded a voluntary recall of products to include about 3,000 boneless prosciutto hams suspected of being contaminated by salmonella, the Agriculture Department has reported.


Bush May Give Sworn Testimony On Iran-Contra Affair on Monday
LEAD: Vice President Bush is expected to be placed under oath Monday during an interview with representatives of the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair, Reagan Administration officials said today.


David Puttnam to Get 1988 Eastman Award
LEAD: David Puttnam, the film producer whose credits include the Oscar winners ''Midnight Express,'' ''Chariots of Fire,'' ''The Killing Fields'' and ''The Mission,'' will receive the 1988 Eastman Second Century Award.


The New Way to Get to Broadway
LEAD: It was a Monday night, when most Broadway theaters are dark, but Bill Mernit sat at a piano on a stage playing the songs he has been working on for three years.


Los Angeles Gets $2 Billion Plan To Provide Housing for Homeless
LEAD: Mayor Tom Bradley today proposed a plan to spend more than $2 billion over the next 20 years to build more low-income housing and provide more services for the city's fast-growing homeless population.


Former Banker Gets Jail Term
LEAD: A former banking executive found guilty of defrauding one of his company's subsidiary banks was sentenced today to three years in prison and fined $5,000.
United States District Judge


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 9, 1988
LEAD:  Markets


Yonkers Said to Propose An Accord on Bias Suit
LEAD: Yonkers officials were reported today to have offered to settle at least part of the city's seven-year-old desegregation suit by proposing to build 10 units of public housing on each of 20 sites in white neighborhoods.


BOY'S CASE IN SUPREME COURT
LEAD: A United States Supreme Court Justice was asked today to block the State Department's planned return to Zimbabwe of a 9-year-old diplomat's son who was said to have been beaten by his father.


For Whom the Bill Tolls
LEAD: The onset of the $7 movie ticket seems to have aroused some anger in New York, if not much resistance at the box office.
This may puzzle an out-of-towner buying tickets for a Broadway show.


Michael N. Taylor Educator, 47
LEAD: Michael N. Taylor, director of Indian education programs for the Association of American Indian Affairs, died of pnuemonia Tuesday at the Washington Adventist Hospital in Tacoma, Md.
He was 47 years old and lived on Staten Island.


Robert U. Redpath Jr. Executive, 81
LEAD: Robert U. Redpath Jr., an advisor to corporations for pension and estate planning, died Dec. 28 at his home in South Orange, N.J., after a long illness.
He was 81 years old.
Mr.
Redpath graduated from Yale College and was associated with several life-insurance companies.


Trevi Fountain in Rome Is Due for Refurbishing
LEAD: The Trevi Fountain, one of Rome's most famous landmarks, is to receive a waterproof basin as part of an $830,000 restoration scheduled to begin next spring.


TEXACO PLANS TO TAKE $4.9 BILLION IN CHARGES
LEAD: Texaco Inc. will take charges of $4.9 billion against its fourth-quarter after-tax earnings in order to finance its bankruptcy reorganization, the company said yesterday.
The charges are among the largest ever taken by an American company.


Nichols Is Convicted On Drug Charges
LEAD: A man described as one of the city's major drug dealers was convicted yesterday on charges that will put him in jail at least 15 years, officials said.
A jury that deliberated more than A jury that deliberated more than two days found Lorenzo (Fat Cat) Nichols, 29 years old, guilty of three counts of criminal possession of a controlled substance, criminal possession of marijuana, criminal use of drug paraphernalia and six counts of criminal possession of a weapon.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Bill Rodgers, the 40-year-old world-class marathoner who had earlier announced he would not compete in the Phoenix City Marathon today because of a mild Achilles' tendon injury to his right foot, has changed his mind and plans to attempt to break Barry Brown's American Masters marathon record of 2 hours 15 minutes 15 seconds.


Conductors' Conference To Honor Max Rudolf
LEAD: This year's National Conference for Conductors will interrupt classes and meetings at Columbia University today to give its Theodore Thomas Award to Max Rudolf, a man whose Central European training and professionalism has had a strong influence on American symphonic life over the last half-century.


Making a Christmas Eve Visit to Rikers Island
LEAD: To the Editor:


William L. Ryan Dies; Ex-A.P. Correspondent
LEAD: William L. Ryan, a retired special correspondent for The Associated Press, died yesterday after heart surgery at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 77 years old and lived in Greenwich.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.79
6.92
5.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.86
5.79
5.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.43
6.35
5.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.82
8.64
6.85
30-YR.


How to Insure Fairness on the Air
LEAD: The Fairness Doctrine is dead but won't stay buried.
President Reagan vetoed an attempt to make it statutory law in June and the Federal Communications Commission struck it from its regulations in August.


Terminal: Home for Hundreds
LEAD: When the temperature drops outside, Charlene Turner, a resident of the Port Authority Bus Terminal, south wing lower level, wraps a matted blanket around her thin shoulders, and turns up the latest episode of her favorite soap opera on her five-inch television set.


Tale of Two Presidents And One Wall
LEAD: To the Editor:


DOLLAR FALLS AS STOCKS PLUMMET
LEAD: The dollar fell yesterday, ending a tumultuous week on an uncertain note.


Commercial Rents
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japan to Pay More of U.S. Bases' Cost
LEAD: Government and ruling party leaders agreed today to seek legal changes that would enable Japan to absorb a larger share of the costs of stationing United States troops here.


U.S. JOBLESS RATE DECLINES TO 5.7%, LOWEST SINCE 1979
LEAD: The economy continued to create jobs at a rapid pace last month, the Labor Department reported today.
The unemployment rate fell one-tenth of a percentage point, to 5.7 percent, the lowest level since mid-1979.


Japan Curbs On Insiders
LEAD: Japan's Finance Ministry is seeking tighter controls on insider trading in securities and hopes to present a draft to amend the current law before Parliament next month, a senior ministry official said today.


TANDEM PLUNGES ON SALES NEWS
LEAD: Tandem Computer Inc.'s shares lost a quarter of their value yesterday after the company, which makes business computer systems, said revenues for the quarter just ended would not meet its expectations.


Head of Federal Agency Says Age Bias Cases Were Ignored
LEAD: A Federal employment rights commission ignored 900 grievances concerning age discrimination for more than two years, preventing most people who filed the complaints from taking legal action, the agency's chief said Thursday.


Ministers Won't Invite Koch To Observance for Dr. King
LEAD: A group of black Baptist ministers voted this week not to invite Mayor Koch to its annual memorial service for the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Leaders of the group, the Baptist Ministers Conference of Greater New York and Vicinity, voted 16 to 13 against asking Mr.
Koch to attend its Jan. 18 service at the Convent Avenue Baptist Church in


Robert Barrios Editor, 33
LEAD: Robert Barrios, a copy editor for The New York Times and former Foreign Service officer, died Thursday at the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 33 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Robertson Is Rejected in Bid To Delay Libel Case He Filed
LEAD: Pat Robertson has lost a bid to postpone the trial of his libel suit against a former Congressman who questioned the Republican Presidential candidate's Korean War record.


Kuwait-B.P. Link
LEAD: Kuwait has told Britain that it does not plan to use its big stake in the British Petroleum Company to control the oil giant.
In a short statement, the British Treasury said, ''The Kuwaiti authorities have assured us that they have no ambitions to control British Petroleum, nor any interest in any management role, and that the Kuwait Investment Office holding in the company is intended as a long-term investment.


Nissan Recalls 75,000 Cars
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Corporation is recalling 75,000 four-wheel-drive vehicles for repairs to pollution-control devices and fuel lines.
The fuel line problem, involving the potential for leaks, is limited to 1987 and 1988 Pulsar NX models.
Nissan said in a statement that it had received no reports of engine fires.


Unemployment in New York Area Falls to Lowest Level Since 70's
LEAD: Unemployment in the New York region fell last year to its lowest level since the early 1970's, the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics said yesterday, attributing the decline to an economy that expanded through most of the year.


BITTERSWEET HOLIDAY JOURNEY PROMPTS GIFTS TO THE NEEDIEST
LEAD: ''Sorry I am late,'' Sophie Gluck of Brooklyn wrote in a note, along with her gift of $15 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
She requested that her contribution go to a needy older person.


Auto Sales Climb in Italy
LEAD: Sales of new cars in Italy rose 8.3 percent last year, to a a record 1,976,541, the Italian Association of Auto Makers reported today.
Fiat accounted for 43.7 percent of the total.


Mexico's Inflation Rate
LEAD: Consumer prices in Mexico soared by a record 159.2 percent last year, the Bank of Mexico announced.
The bank said on Thursday that consumer prices rose by 14.8 percent in December alone, the highest one-month increase since the Government began collecting such statistics in 1968.
Consumer prices rose 105.7 percent in 1986, which had been the previous record level.


TOKYO'S PRICE LIMITATIONS
LEAD: Prices fell less on the Tokyo Stock Exchange than in other major markets of the world when stocks collapsed in October.
Some analysts, trying to explain why, have cited Tokyo's curbs on price movements.


Frederick H. Kelley Jr. Accountant, 69
LEAD: Frederick Hammond Kelley Jr., a retired partner in the accounting firm of Peat Marwick Main &amp; Company, died of emphysema Wednesday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Savannah, Ga.
He was 69 years old and lived in Hilton Head, S.C.


Dance: Works by Anna Sokolow
LEAD: Anna Sokolow's Players' Project offered two suites of choreographic images and a little sketch of a dance on Thursday night in Buttenwieser Hall of the 92d Street Y. Because of the fragmentary nature of the proceedings, watching Ms.
Sokolow's choreography was like browsing through someone's scrapbook.


General Mills Resignation
LEAD: David R. Waters, president of the specialty store operations of General Mills Inc., resigned yesterday after the company announced on Thursday that it would seek to sell its Talbots and Eddie Bauer retail chains.


ISLANDERS FALL TO THE FLAMES
LEAD: Brett Hull scored twice and assisted on two other goals tonight as the Calgary Flames defeated the Islanders, 7-4.


Snow Shuts Race Tracks
LEAD: The snowfall that hit New York yesterday wiped out thoroughbred and harness-racing programs at three tracks in the region and postponed basketball and hockey games in West Point, N.Y.


263 Movies From 1987 Are in Race for Oscars
LEAD: A near-record number of feature-length films from 1987 qualified for Academy Awards consideration, missing the 1974 mark by a single entry, academy officials said today.


BOAT SHOW POINTS WAY OUT OF WINTER
LEAD: A display of more than 1,000 new boats and marine accessories has turned the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan into a winter monument to summer days.


Bank Loan Given Rating
LEAD: Duff &amp; Phelps Inc., a Chicago-based credit-rating agency, said this week that it had released the first public long-term credit rating of a commercial bank loan.


Washington Is Losing Hope For a Fair Election in Haiti
LEAD: After successfully nurturing movements toward democracy in the Philippines and South Korea, the Reagan Administration now appears to have been overcome with a sense of powerlessness as it faces the prospect of failure in Haiti.


Hart Finds Strength In Woes
LEAD: Gary Hart says he lost his confidence for a while after ''the business last May,'' as he calls the episode with a Miami model that detoured his Presidential campaign.
But now he says he may be stronger personally and politically because of it.


Early Black Dolls
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: An obituary of Jascha Heifetz on Dec. 12 confused him at one point with another person similarly named.


Mentally Disabled May Gain Thousands in Back Benefits
LEAD: Mental health and social workers are looking for thousands of mentally disabled people in New York City, many of them homeless, who may be due Social Security benefits that were cut off several years ago in what the courts said was an illegal policy.
Some people may get tens of thousands of dollars.


Celtics Sign Gilmore
LEAD: The Boston Celtics answered their need for a backup center yesterday by signing the 7-foot-2-inch Artis Gilmore, a 17-year veteran who was released by the Chicago Bulls last month at the age of 38.
Gilmore, who averaged at least 11 points and seven rebounds a game in each of his pro seasons, averaged 15.5 minutes, 4.2 points and 2.6 rebounds with the Bulls this season.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD:


Petitions of Dole and Haig In Texas Reported Faulty
LEAD: Republican officials in Texas asked Federal agencies today to investigate charges that petitions filed for the state's Presidential primary by two Republican candidates, Senator Bob Dole and Alexander M. Haig Jr., contained numerous forgeries.


Choosing Batteries
LEAD: If you're thinking about winter travel, it's time to check batteries for the appliances you may need.
Manufacturers usually specify the size, from AAA to D, but there are different types to choose from.
Zinc carbon batteries: Least expensive; most cost effective when used in gadgets that require little power.


Variations on a Theme
LEAD: IN Chicago years ago, there was a coach from my high school named Ralph Margolis, a barrel-chested fellow and a storyteller of wide repute.
He once told of playing baseball for the University of Illinois, where, he said, he beat out Red Grange for right field.


New York State's Presidential Primary Folly
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cooper Lasersonics
LEAD: Cooper Lasersonics Inc. said that because of the difficulty it had encountered in turning around its laser business, it was no longer considering a spinoff of the business.
Cooper had said in June that it would spin off the business as a separate public company by this month.
The company said it was considering other divestitures to maximize shareholder values.


One for Mother
LEAD: Diego Maradona, the Argentine soccer star who has played in Naples since 1984, said yesterday in an television interview in Milan that when his contract with Napoli (which he recently extended by four years) expires in 1993, he will return to Argentina. ''After nine years in Naples, I will return home and join Boca Juniors to fulfill my mother's dream that I and my brothers, Hugo and Lalo, would play together for at least one year,'' he said.


Fears of a Freeze in Florida Bolster Orange Juice Prices
LEAD: Orange juice futures soared the limit for daily trading on the Cotton Exchange in New York yesterday as fears of a freeze in the Florida citrus region spurred a buying binge.


SOARING METAL PRICES' RIPPLE EFFECT
LEAD: While economists debate whether another bout of inflation is on the way, Louis R. Cooper, the manager and part owner of Cooper Plumbing and Heating in Ottsville, Pa., thinks it has already arrived.


Geese, Sheep and Chemists Vie to Keep Us Warm
LEAD: Is there warmth without down?
After years as the unrivaled cold weather insulator, down is facing growing competition from dozens of new synthetic insulators.


Alfred J. Barabas, Star Halfback In Columbia's Rose Bowl Victory
LEAD: Al Barabas, the Columbia halfback who scored the game's only touchdown in the famous 7-0 upset of Stanford in the 1934 Rose Bowl, died of cancer Thursday at his home in Rockville, Md.
He was 77 years old.
He made other runs, he scored other touchdowns, and he later became one of Columbia's most successful fund-raisers, but nothing could match the acclaim he received for the single play in the second quarter of the


France Criticizes East German Chief on Arms
LEAD: On his first visit to a Western country responsible for the security of Berlin, Erich Honecker, the East German leader, met polite but firm disagreement here today on human rights and arms control.


Opera: 'Macbeth,' at the Metropolitan
LEAD: The Metropolitan Opera's revival of ''Macbeth,'' which opened Thursday evening, has already been in the news as an example of the problems an opera house faces when star singers cancel.
The baritone Renato Bruson pulled out without giving a reason (the falling value of the dollar, Met insiders say); the scheduled participation of the conductor Giuseppe Sinopoli and the soprano Eva Marton then fell like dominoes in response, and the performance was headed instead by Frederick Burchinal and Elizabeth Connell on stage and Kazimierz


German Jobless Rate Up
LEAD: West Germany's unemployment rate rose to 9.2 percent in December from 8.5 percent in November as the number of jobless grew by 175,200, to more than 2 million, the Government reported today.


Taxi Panel Member Assails Agency and Quits
LEAD: A member of the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission has resigned, calling the agency's efforts to register the city's nonmedallion vehicles ineffective.


New Mayor of San Francisco Sworn In
LEAD: Diane Feinstein waving farewell at inauguration ceremony for Art Agnos, center, who succeeded her yesterday as the city's 39th Mayor.
At right was Mr.
Agnos's wife, Sherry.
In his speech, Mr.
Agnos stressed people's rights to decent jobs and affordable housing. (AP)


Reagan Asks Increase for Education in '89 Budget
LEAD: President Reagan proposes increases for the Education Department, the air traffic control system and the Federal crackdown on drug trafficking and white-collar crime as part of his $1.1 trillion budget for 1989, according to confidential budget documents.


Yale Offers Workers 15% Three-Year Pact
LEAD: Yale University today proposed 15 percent pay increases in a three-year contract for 3,600 employees and said that the proposal was its sole economic offering.


Community Seeks End To Redevelopment Ban
LEAD: The Clinton community board has unanimously approved a zoning change to end a ban on redevelopment of local apartment buildings in which tenants have been harassed by landlords.


HOW TO INSTALL A LOCK ON A DOOR
LEAD: THE term ''lockset'' is used to describe collectively all door hardware (except hinges) that permit the door to be opened, closed and locked.
Usually a lockset consists of a lock with keys, a latch bolt, doorknobs and a strike plate, which is installed in the door jamb to receive the end of the latch bolt and hold the door shut.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Hauling the Nothingness  What does a congregation of poets remind you of?
This is Lyubomir Nikolov, a Bulgarian writer, describing ''The Poets of Iowa'' in ''The World Comes to Iowa: Iowa International Anthology'' (Iowa State University), edited by Paul Engle, Rowena Torrevillas and Hualing Nieh


HAZARD UNKOWN: In Spanking-New Industry, A Search for Answers
LEAD: A COMPUTER chip factory appears to be the epitome of cleanliness and safety.
Workers don white ''bunny'' suits, gloves and goggles and pass through an air shower before entering the production area, known as a ''clean room.''


Question Of the Week; Should The Knicks Trade for Mullin?
LEAD: Yes.
The Knicks need a scoring forward like a viper needs fangs.
Without one, their offense is severely limited.
If Mullin can play basketball the way he did with an alcohol problem, imagine what he can do with the problem under control.
TROY WEXLER  Warren, N.J.


THE KING OF KISS AND TELL
LEAD:  CASANOVA  A New Perspective.
By J. Rives Childs.
Illustrated. 346 pp.
New York: A Giniger Book/Paragon House. $24.95.


NEW INVENTIONS FROM THE CORNFIELD
LEAD: OF all the Christmas gifts exchanged on Capitol Hill last month, few attracted more interest than the biodegradable plastic bags Senator Tom Harkin included in the baskets of Iowa farm products that he delivered to colleagues.
The bags, which are designed to decompose after a year or two, are at the head of a growing list of industrial products made with corn, the nation's largest and most important crop.


The Smoky Soup Of Scotland
LEAD: FISH chowder, soupe de poisson, zuppa di pesce, cullen skink. Cullen skink?


2 Die in Plane Crash
LEAD: A jet carrying 1,500 pounds of packages for Federal Express crashed before dawn Friday on its approach to an airport here, apparently killing both pilots.
One pilot's body was found, and divers searched the Ouachita River for the other, a spokesman for the local sheriff said.
The names of the pilots were not immediately released.


ECLECTIC FOOD, DRAMATIC SETTING
LEAD: YOUR PLACE . . .
OR MINE, in Williston Park, is not a yuppie watering hole where the gang can go for buffalo wings.
Nor is it a dark roadhouse rendezvous with dewy-eyed couples holding hands in the corners.
It's a startlingly attractive restaurant serving well-prepared, eclectic food.


U.S. IS DEVELOPING SURVEILLANCE JET THAT ELUDES RADAR
LEAD: The Air Force is secretly developing a long-range reconnaissance aircraft that will incorporate technology designed to permit the plane to evade detection by radar, Defense Department officials say.


Honor for McPherson
LEAD: HE was edged out for the Heisman Trophy, but Don McPherson has been doing just fine in the awards department since then.
After losing to Tim Brown of Notre Dame in the Heisman balloting, McPherson, the quarterback who led Syracuse to an undefeated season and a tie with Auburn in the Sugar Bowl, has won the Maxwell Trophy and the Sugar


The Portman Formula in Miniature
LEAD: JOHN PORTMAN is perhaps the best-known hotel architect in the world.
His Hyatt Regency in Atlanta, completed in 1967, was the first postwar hotel with a central atrium, and it changed the nature of hotels everywhere, replacing the banal boxes of the Hiltons and Sheratons with the Portman trademarks of vast atrium spaces, fountains and glass-enclosed elevators.


STEPHEN BURNHAM PLANS TO BE WED TO KRYSIA BEREDAY
LEAD: The engagement of Cornelia Krystyna Bereday, the daughter of Mary Hale Bereday of New York and the late George Z. F. Bereday, to Stephen Tyler Burnham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Campbell Burnham of Providence, R.I., and Fishers Island, N.Y., has been announced by the future bride's mother.
A June wedding is planned.


WHAT'S NEW IN COMPENSATION
LEAD: IN January, corporations traditionally add the final sweetening to employee compensation packages, signing off on year-end bonuses and incentive awards.
At the same time, personnel administrators re-examine compensation policies, reshaping them to meet changing company needs.


THE UTTER SADNESS OF THE SURVIVOR
LEAD:  THE DROWNED AND THE SAVED  By Primo Levi.
Translated by Raymond Rosenthal. 203 pp.
New York: Summit Books. $17.95.


WOMEN IN SCHOOLS: ROOM FOR IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: Women indeed have cracked the glass ceiling in leadership positions in Long Island school districts  [ ''The Best Man for the Job,'' Opinion Page, Dec. 13 ] .


Albany Notes; Cuomo Plan for Prison Barge Appears Dead
LEAD: A plan to use a decommissioned British troop barge to house 700 New York State prison inmates, announced with fanfare by the Cuomo administration last June, has run into trouble and now appears unlikely to be carried out.


Eisner Replies
LEAD: To the Editor:


MISS THOMPSON TO MARRY IN JUNE
LEAD: Announcement of the engagement of Claudia Rose Thompson to William Jay Iselin has been made by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Thompson of Winchester, Hampshire, England.
Mr.
Iselin is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Jay Iselin of New York, and Vinalhaven, Me.
A June wedding is planned.


Books From The Times
LEAD: RITA REIF'S THE NEW YORK TIMES WORLD GUIDE TO ANTIQUES SHOPPING.
By Rita Reif. (Times Books, Paper, $14.95.) Rita Reif, the author of the New York Times antiques and auctions columns, ranges from African art and agateware to wood carvings and Zuni jewelry in this Baedeker to the four corners of the antiques world.


Dance
LEAD: New dances by five choreographers with live music and commissioned scores are featured on the programs offered by Moving Sound Concert, Thursday through next Sunday nights at St.
Mark's Church (Second Avenue at 10th Street). ''Elliot's Wave,'' choreographed by Michele Elliman to music by Dalton Portella, concerns greed and the stock market.


South Korean Leader Seeks Talks With Rival
LEAD: President Chun Doo Hwan has proposed talks with the opposition leader, Kim Dae Jung, ''for national reconciliation,'' a presidential aide said today.


WHAT SHE DID FOR LOVE
LEAD:  ALL IN A LIFETIME  An Autobiography.
By Ruth K. Westheimer with Ben Yagoda.
Illustrated. 225 pp.
New York: Warner Books. $17.95.


Question Of the Week; Should The Knicks Trade for Mullin?
LEAD: Sure . . . and while they're at it why don't they pick up Bill Wennington, Walter Berry, Shelton Jones, Willie Glass. . . .
F.
C.
GALLAGHER  Princeton, N.J.


BRIDGE PLAYERS HAVE NO KNUCKLES
LEAD: AS a kid, I ate corn mush for breakfast and tomato-soup gravy for dinner, but I learned tough from hard-nosed card games like euchre and pinochle.
These were Midwestern card games that set brother against brother, parent against child.


B.P. AMERICA'S 'HATCHET GENTLEMAN': Robert B. Horton; Cost-Cutter With a Soft Touch
LEAD: JUST about the minute Bob Horton arrived in town two years ago as the new chairman of the Standard Oil Company, he slashed the budget for the big bash the company was planning to celebrate the opening of its new headquarters on Public Square here.
They still had the party, but it was not nearly as much fun.


Condo Doldrums
LEAD: To the Editor:


MS. PLATT TO WED HARLAN H. SIMON
LEAD: The engagement of Eden Michele Platt to Harlan H. Simon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Simon of Pomona, N.Y., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon N. Platt of Scarsdale, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.


PURSUING POWDER ON SLOPE AND TRAIL
LEAD: FOR AVID skiers, downhill or cross-country, there is no such thing as a bad snowstorm.
Oblivious to wind and cold, they pursue their ideal: fresh powder.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  OVERTIME: A Twentieth Century Sports Odyssey.
By Peter Schwed. (Beaufort, $15.95.) Many young sports fans know the joy of settling onto a grandfatherly lap and listening to colorful tales from someone who professes to have seen Babe Ruth swing a bat or experienced the patriotic euphoria created by Jesse Owens in 1936.


In Gaza, Confrontation at Crossroads of History; How Much Force?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Texas
LEAD: To the Editor: I was interested in the feature on Austin, Tex., and the lack of any mention of the Austin Symphony Orchestra under the ''Music'' heading.
Mr.
Lewis should be aware of the symphony.
Symphony Square, which is owned by the symphony, is a fascinating center for music activities, concerts and galas and has a fine restaurant.


BROWNS STOP COLTS: Carter Sets a Record In Easy 36-24 Victory
LEAD: The Minnesota Vikings had the poorest record (8-7) of the 10 teams that started the National Football League playoffs last Sunday.
Now they are one game away from reaching the Super Bowl.


Spielberg at 40: The Man and the Child
LEAD: IN THE FIRST PART OF STEVEN Spielberg's sprawling new epic, ''Empire of the Sun,'' a boy dressed in a party costume discovers a derelict fighter plane in a field near Shanghai.
The adventurer, resembling Aladdin, instantly climbs into the rusted cockpit and gleefully imagines he is stalking enemy aircraft.


By Freighter
LEAD: To the Editor: I read and reread Joseph Disponzio's account of nine days at sea on a freighter.
Since I plan a similar voyage, I should thank Mr.
Disponzio for alerting me to the potential of isolation aboard when no one else speaks English.
He surely learned the hard way about the language barrier.


MARAVICH IS EULOGIZED
LEAD: Hundreds of mourners heard Pete Maravich eulogized today as a man whose evangelical Christian zeal surpassed his love for the sport that made him a star.


U.S. SEES QADDAFI AS BEING WEAKER
LEAD: The Reagan Administration believes the regime of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya has been so weakened by a series of setbacks over the last year that it no longer poses a serious threat to its neighbors in the Mediterranean region, according to White House and State Department officials.


A. R. Gurney Spins a Darker Tale
LEAD: IN 1971 A. R. GURNEY JR.
WROTE ''The Old One-Two,'' a play about a classics professor whose beloved Euripides and Seneca are about to be displaced by timelier courses taught by young teachers yearning to be relevant.


After Chernobyl, Africans Ask if Food Is Hot
LEAD: ''Chernobyl in Banjul?'' read a recent headline in an African magazine.


POSTINGS: Roosevelt Island Tour; 25th Anniversary
LEAD: Howard Goldberg remembers the first tour he led of Roosevelt Island in 1963.
Student firemen leaped from buildings set ablaze as part of their graduation ceremony.
The training center is no longer on the East River island; neither are the almshouse, the prison and the New York City Lunatic Asylum.


MARTHA COX IS MARRIED TO THOMAS FARRELL JR.
LEAD: At St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York, Martha Bancroft Cox, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Cox of London and Nantucket, Mass., was married yesterday to Thomas Vail Farrell Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Farrell of Charlottesville, Va.
The Rev.
Dr.
Hays H. Rockwell, rector of the church, performed the ceremony.


ST. PETER'S TOPS IONA IN 2 OVERTIMES
LEAD: Alex Roberts scored a career-high 33 points and Chuck Veterano had all 6 of his points in the second overtime today as St.
Peter's beat Iona, 81-76, in a Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference game.


Opera: By John Blow, 'Venus and Adonis'
LEAD: ''VENUS AND ADONIS,'' a ''masque for the entertainment of the King'' by John Blow, is an endearing trifle, but the beginnings of English opera were so sparse and tentative that it can plausibly be called a landmark among them.
The king was Charles II; we do not know precisely when he was entertained by this brief retelling, with dance and diversions, of the Greek tale.


HORSE CARRIAGE, ANYONE? PRICELESS COLLECTION IS UP FOR SALE
LEAD: ONE OF the state's most varied and valuable horse-carriage collections is about to be broken up.


CRAFT FOR WATER-SKIING: DESIGN GLIDES BEYOND BASICS
LEAD: UNTIL 20 years ago, water-skiers were content to use a standard powerboat with outboard engine to tow them across a lake or a bay.
The only requirement was that the boat have sufficient horsepower.


KATHERINE H. HELLER, DOCTORAL STUDENT, PLANS TO WED JOHN R. HEWITT, LAWYER
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Blanchfield Heller of Bedford, N.Y., of the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Holland Heller, to John Robert Hewitt, the son of Donald Birch Hewitt of San Diego and the late Edith Marie Hewitt.


THE MEANING OF GLASNOST
LEAD: Alex Goldfarb's moving account of his return to the Soviet Union is also an interesting testimonial to the confusion caused by the Communist Party's opening the door to public expression just a crack (''Testing Glasnost: An Exile Visits His Homeland,'' Dec. 6).
Mr.
Goldfarb and other dissidents know they are hoodwinking themselves about the meaning of glasnost.


Panama Strongman on Visit
LEAD: Panama's military leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, arrived here unexpectedly today and said he was on a private visit.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Influx of Foreign Retailers; Europeans Signing Leases Despite the Weak Dollar
LEAD: EUROPEAN makers of everything from eyeglass frames to kitchen cabinets are continuing to sign leases for new retail outlets in American cities and suburban malls, despite the sagging fortunes of the dollar.


The Accuracy Keeps Improving
LEAD: IT is no secret that forecasts of the economy are fallible.
As a nonexperimental social science, economics cannot achieve the degree of precision that physicists attain in measuring the speed of light or even the lower degree achieved by meteorologists in predicting tomorrow's precipitation.
It is less widely understood that, despite several notable mistakes, economic forecasters have been able to predict some, though not all, important economic variables better than simple rules of thumb and that their accuracy seems to have increased over time.


'UNCLE FLOYD' TAKES NEW TACK
LEAD: FOR Floyd Vivino, laughter makes the world go round, and although he has not taken the career leaps that other New Jersey comedians have, his followers have kept his zany humor alive.


FICTION
LEAD:  THE PIOUS DANCE: The Adventure Story of a Young Man.
By Klaus Mann.
Translated by Laurence Senelick. (PAJ Publications, $15.95.) In this 1925 novel, written when its author (Thomas Mann's son) was 19 years old, everything - carnivals, despair, erotic love, bug bites - is experienced with the solemn rhapsodic intensity of romantic youth, a mood reminiscent of Rimbaud that is skillfully captured in Laurence Senelick's translation.


Steps Urged in Report on Market Are Likely Never to Be Acted On
LEAD: The key recommendations for reordering the regulation of the nation's financial markets included in the report of a Presidential commission are likely to be tied up in Congressional debate and may never be acted on, lawmakers and regulatory experts said today.


Dubcek Sees a Link With Gorbachev Effort
LEAD: Alexander Dubcek, the Czechoslovak leader ousted by Soviet-led troops in 1968, sees a ''profound connection'' between the changes he tried to initiate 20 years ago and those now being undertaken by the Soviet leader, according to a rare interview to be published here Sunday.


THE ODYSSEY OF A SUBMARINE (SANDWICH, THAT IS)
LEAD: MY DAUGHTER, aside from being a connoisseur of feminine attire, also knows a great deal about submarine sandwiches.
You have to admit that this is an unusual duo of interests.


Harold Brayman, 87; Author and Executive
LEAD: Harold Brayman, an author and retired director of public relations at the Du Pont Company, died of heart failure Sunday at his home in Wilmington, Del.
He was 87 years old.


STREETSCAPES: West-Park Presbyterian; An 1890 West Side Church Fighting Landmark Status
LEAD: DESIGNATING religious properties as landmarks is a sensitive subject.
Churches have opposed such designation, fearing a loss of not only religious freedom but the flexibility to deal with property that often is difficult to maintain.


THRILL OF THE SNOWMOBILE POSES PROBLEMS FOR FARMERS
LEAD: THE roar of snowmobiles is being heard across fields and forests, but farm and conservation officials say the recreational vehicles are crushing crops and seedlings under the snow.


New Third World
LEAD: To the Editor:


BRONX IS THE SUBJECT THROUGH EYE OF A RESIDENT REALIST
LEAD: IT is not easy being a Realist these days.
Something - the massive art-education program of the last 30 years, the long shadow that Abstract Expressionism still casts, end-of-the-century blues - has made it very difficult for artists to tackle observable reality without a game plan or without seeming to put their efforts in quotes.


STATE DEPT. GIVEN A BUDGET REPRIEVE
LEAD: Congress has forestalled the State Department budget crisis for at least a year by quietly appropriating additional funding in the final days of its last session.


HOMELESS SHOULD LIVE SUCH A DOG'S LIFE
LEAD: If I were a homeless person in Westchester, I would immediately sign up to be a resident of the proposed Central Westchester Humane Society Shelter, where dogs and cats will live in a brand-new architect-designed $4 million edifice  [ Westchester Journal, Dec. 6 ] .
It's wonderful to know where our priorities are in Westchester County and that many corporations will be solicited and surely donate to the needy animals in our area.


New Delhi Struggles With Haze of Pollution
LEAD: Most days of this sharp, cool winter - as in previous winters - a thick, dirty blue haze settles across much of the Indian capital, causing an increase in sore throats, colds and other respiratory ailments.


RESIDENTIAL RESALES
LEAD: Closings in the week ending Dec.19  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $350,000  155 Perry Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,208-sq.-ft loft condo in a recently renovated prewar factory building; dining area, fireplace, high-ceilings, Jacuzzi in bath; common charge $136, taxes $4,560 (Broker: Debra Kameros)


Bush Raising Questions On Blind Trust for Doles
LEAD: A day after Vice President Bush challenged Senator Bob Dole to make his tax returns public, the Bush campaign began sending reporters copies of an article in a small Kansas newspaper that raised questions about a real estate transaction by a blind trust belonging to the Senator's wife, Elizabeth Hanford


3 ARTISTIC DIRECTORS MOVE INTO SPOTLIGHT
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the state's professional theaters reflect a repertory of extraordinary variety - from the new year's first opening (a Shakespearean tragedy, as interpreted by a leading and much-lauded experimental troupe) to the season's windup (the reworking of a failed, but, for many, a favorite Jerry Herman musical) - it appears that the current attention-getters are three artistic directors.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bayport  $138,000  88 Bayview Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, basement; taxes $3,300.
Bluepoint  $180,000  10 Arthur Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; family room, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.
Floral Park


MISS WEBB PLANS TO MARRY IN JULY
LEAD: The engagement of Heidi-Rachel Webb to Dr.
Andrew Millard Singer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Singer of Stamford, Conn., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Dr.
Gertrude Mikels Webb and J. Chester Webb of Waltham, Mass.
A July wedding is planned.


SYRACUSE HOLDS OFF SETON HALL, 84-82
LEAD: Sherman Douglas scored 11 of his 15 points in the second half tonight and Derrick Coleman had 17 points and 16 rebounds as Syracuse edged Seton Hall, 84-82.


JUST GIVE ME A CHIP OFF THE OLD BACH
LEAD: KICKED A MACHINE lately? Among music lovers, you're not alone.


More Good Things About the Midwest
LEAD: To the Editor:


On Language; Dam That Tinker
LEAD: WHEN GENERAL Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev brushed off charges of human-rights violations in the Soviet Union with the question, ''What about the wetbacks?'', Americans cringed - not at the crude attempt of moral equivalency, but at the use of a term now regarded as a slur.
A wetback - from the condition of a Mexican swimming across the Rio Grande to enter the United States - later become known as an illegal alien, and when that became onerous, the name was changed to undocumented person, now applied to persons of any nationality who enter the country without a visa.


Egypt Says It Arrested Iranian in Terror Plot
LEAD: Egypt said today that it had arrested an Iranian agent who was setting up a sabotage group and attempting to recruit adherents from among Moslem fundamentalists.
The announcement came a few days after Bahrain reported the arrests of members of what it called a terrorist network directed by Iran.


COOKING FOR ONE IS A DULL SITUATION
LEAD: With regard to the article by R. C. Casey, ''Cooking for One, Forever''  [ Opinion page, Nov. 15 ] , I, too, live alone and am a survivor.
My husband also needed a special diet and special enticements while he underwent chemotherapy.


A JUNE WEDDING FOR TRACY JACOBY
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Jacoby of Bronxville, N.Y., of the engagement of Mr.
Jacoby's daughter, Tracy Lynne Jacoby, to John Wells Stevens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George E. Stevens of New Canaan, Conn., and South Londonderry, Vt.


The New American Truck Stop
LEAD: WHEN Larry Puckridge began driving a rig in 1973, ''dirty old truck stops that sold greasy food and fuel'' gave him little incentive to stop while he crisscrossed the country, he said.


A Worrisome Glut in Offices
LEAD: REAL ESTATE brokers are warning that this city, the financial center of the Pacific Northwest, is about to experience a jump in office vacancy rates because the pace of downtown construction shows no signs of slowing.


FRESHENING THE SKILLS OF OLDER DRIVERS
LEAD: DRIVER'S education classes are often filled with young adults eager to hit the road.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I am finishing my attic to add a workroom, so I want to add insulation to the roof (it is now on the attic floor).
I have been told to allow for ventilation above the insulation - between the insulation and the roof sheathing - but am not sure how to do this.
Can you tell me if this is really necessary, and if so where vents should be located?


MELISSA ROSSE TO WED COLM DOBBYN IN JUNE
LEAD: Melissa Thompson Rosse and Colm James Dobbyn, the son of Mrs.
Oliver Dobbyn of Cliffside Park, N.J., and the late Mr.
Dobbyn, plan to marry in June, the future bride's mother, June P. Rosse of Brooklyn, has announced.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''Nothing fundamentally has changed, but you don't find as many bears in the woods as you used to.''


PANTHERS FINALLY DEFEAT REDMEN
LEAD: Pittsburgh, a team that hopes to finally realize its potential this season, cleared an early hurdle this evening by defeating St.
John's, 81-70, in front of a sellout crowd at Fitzgerald Field House.


Clones and Grafts As Ballet Traits
LEAD: BUILDING A BALLET COMPANY demands more than the training of dancers.
It also requires assembling a repertory.
But that is no easy task.
Repertory-building is a challenge shared by the artistic directors of ballet companies everywhere.


'BRIGHT LIGHTS, BIG CITY' -- BIG TROUBLE
LEAD: MICHAEL J. FOX HAS BEEN dragged by the collar, thrashing and yelling, down the length of a fashion-show runway and tossed out the door several times.
Now, resting between takes on the set of ''Bright Lights, Big City,'' he's sitting in the second-floor foyer of the Parsons School of Design in Manhattan, joking with his real-life bodyguard, who plays the fashion-show bouncer on screen, and talking to Jay McInerney.


The Case for Kemp
LEAD: A recent prediction in this space (with the wish admittedly father to the thought) that Representative Jack Kemp would upset conventional wisdom and emerge as the Republican nominee has drawn the expected hoots of derision.


ROUGH AND TOUGH
LEAD:  THE PROFESSIONALS  Starring Burt Lancaster (in photo), Lee Marvin, Robert Ryan, Ralph Bellamy, Jack palance, Woody Strode, Claudia Cardinale. 1966.


Death Turns Attention to the New York Moose
LEAD: One of New York State's rare moose has died, the victim of either a gunshot wound or a collision with a car, according to state wildlife experts.


CATHERINE WICK ENGAGED TO WED
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Wick of Watertown, Conn., of the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Lee Wick, to Robert Michael McLean, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin B. McLean of Potomac, Md., and Rehoboth Beach, Del.
The couple plan to marry in June.


Racism Protest Leaders Assailed by N.A.A.C.P.
LEAD: Leaders of the N.A.A.C.P. in New York yesterday criticized the lawyer Alton H. Maddox Jr. and other black lawyers and clergymen for ''whooping and hollering'' rather than working methodically to fight discrimination and violence against blacks.


HAVE AN URGE FOR A GOOD BOWL OF SOUP?
LEAD: IN winter I could eat soup every day.
For lunch, I like nothing better than a bowl of hot soup and a sandwich.
I also like seasonal winter soups for dinner, thick vegetable soups that are almost like stews, with additions of lentils, beans, pasta, rice or potatoes.
I like to serve them in large deep bowls, along with some fresh


The Kingdom And the Power At Cambridge
LEAD: ''I'M a fellow in English here at Cambridge,'' the young man presiding over our class told us, ''and I shall be the literature half of your course on Tudor kingship.
My history colleague will handle the historical material and we hope our different approaches, intellectual prejudices and convictions will crossfertilize the subject and give you the chance to explore it in considerable depth.


PACKS OF WOLVES? THIS IS RIDICULOUS
LEAD: Martin Brech wrote in the Dec. 13 Westchester letters section that wolves and coyotes might be a solution to the deer problem in Westchester.
This is ridiculous.
Whereas I have never heard of a wolf attack on human, the coyotes have been noted in California for taking a small child in a suburban neighborhood encroaching in the Sierras.


NEW YORK IS WORTH A NOVEL - ARE YOU?
LEAD: THE reviewers agree that Tom Wolfe's ''Bonfire of the Vanities'' is the New York City novel -but not much has been said about what kind of New York City Mr.
Wolfe offers us.
He is generally considered to be a brilliant reporter - yet no one seems to be reading past his headlines, past the scandal.


Texas
LEAD: To the Editor: In his interesting article about Austin, Tex. (Travel, Nov. 8), Peter H. Lewis says that often in the morning the Hill Country is covered with a purple haze.
Those two words, like magic, immediately called to mind pleasant but hitherto long-dormant memories from my teen-age years when I first read one of the many exciting Western novels by Zane Grey, namely, ''Riders of the Purple Sage,'' with the cowboy mystery man, Lassiter, dressed in black.


Tracking Down Lead Poisoning
LEAD: MYSTERIOUSLY, one in every five children was being poisoned by lead in the poorest section of the town of Thompson in northeastern Connecticut.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Girl Scouts Gorge  In Mechanicsburg  IT'S time to sell Girl Scout cookies and so, to honor the tradition and work up some enthusiasm, the scouts of Mechanicsburg, Pa., held a cookie eating contest.


Karachi Chooses Mayor, 28
LEAD: Farooq Sattar, a 28-year-old, was chosen here as Mayor, the youngest in the city's history.
Mr.
Sattar, who graduated from medical school last year, is a member of the Mohajir movement.


Job for Radical Reflects Role of Brooklyn Group
LEAD: Within months of his acquittal on Federal charges of conspiring to organize a prisoner escape and rob armored cars, Roger Wareham, one of a group of black revolutionaries known as the New York Eight, landed a job at the Center for Law and Social Justice, where he helped establish a 24-hour hot line to monitor reports of police brutality.


Miami Schools: Laboratory for Major Changes
LEAD: In an experiment intended to cut through red tape and create a new management model for large urban school districts, the Dade County Public Schools have turned the running of 32 schools over to teams that include teachers and parents.


ROBIN STARR IS ENGAGED TO WED NEAL J. BERMAN
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Starr of Old Westbury, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Robin Starr to Neal Jason Berman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Berman of Needham, Mass.


FICTION
LEAD:  THAI HORSE.
By William Diehl. (Villard, $18.95.) Christian Hatcher is the kind of guy you wouldn't mind having at your side when trouble lurks around the corner.
This ex-naval officer, amateur boxer, cat burglar, linguist, expert lover and former operative for some shadowy government agency is your perfect adventure hero.


Mountains
LEAD: To the Editor: Not to diminish Lesley Hazelton's fine endorsement of mountain ascents, ''Because It's There'' (Travel, Nov. 29), a slight correction is in order.
Mount Monadnock is such an approachable and adoptable peak precisely because it is not above the tree line.
Its summit is artificially bare, devastated by fire.


If You Can't Fight City Hall, Here's a Different Idea: Sell It
LEAD: While Boston's City Hall is certainly bigger than a breadbox, many municipal employees say that it is far less watertight and useful.
And at least one worker there, David Scondras, a City Council member, would like to see the building sold.


NOW PLAYING: THE NEW HOLLYWOOD
LEAD: THINGS CHANGE ALL THE time in Hollywood.
Stars come and stars go.
Raunchy teen-age comedies clogged the theaters like cholesterol in aging arteries for six years, then disappeared overnight, to be replaced in the fall of 1987 by courtroom melodramas and steamy love stories.
Three months ago, the stock market crash put upstart companies at risk, those fragile new movie makers dependent on stock sales and one hit movie.


THE ODD COUPLE - POUND AND YEATS TOGETHER
LEAD: EZRA POUND began publishing ''The Cantos'' in 1917, and when he left the poem unfinished at his death, he had included material ranging from ancient Homeric hymns to Chinese dynastic history.
At the center of the 800-page poem, surrounded by esoterica, occur these lines:


100TH YEAR FOR BANK IN YONKERS
LEAD: UNDERHILL, Belknap, Stillwell and Elliott are all names of Yonkers streets today, but 100 years ago they belonged to a far-sighted group of Yonkers families who organized the Yonkers Building and Loan Association, the first savings and loan association in the county.


About the Show
LEAD: Where and When: The New York National Boat Show is located at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, at 11th and 12th avenues between 34th and 39th streets.
The show is open today through next Sunday.
The show will be open today and next Sunday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Monday through Friday, noon to 10 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M.


ESTIMATE OF SURPLUS DROPS TO $1.3 MILLION
LEAD: SPENDING, not faltering tax revenue, has all but eliminated a budget surplus in the current fiscal year and makes the possibility of tax cuts in the next almost nil, according to the Governor's budget chief.


Afghan Hints at a Soviet Reconciliation Policy
LEAD: Afghanistan's party leader, Najibullah, has suggested in recent speeches in Hanoi and Phnom Penh that the Soviet Union may be moving toward a broad policy for trying to end conflicts bleeding some of its allies in the developing world.


Safety Pins Flap
LEAD: IT was Sigrid Wolf of Austria who had the fastest run in the season's third World Cup super-giant slalom in Lech Am Arlberg, Austria, yesterday, but after investigating complaints from rival coaches the official jury decided there was something a bit too fast about the run - the starting number on


HOW A CHILD ABUSE CASE TOOK ON INTERNATIONAL DIMENSION
LEAD: WHEN school teachers in Queens reported last month that the 9-year-old son of a Zimbabwean diplomat had come to class with suspicious scars and injuries, a complaint of child abuse escalated into an international incident.


THE LURE OF WARM SUNSHINE
LEAD: THIS is the time of year when northern grandmasters peruse travel folders of balmier climes in the effort to align comfort with a reasonable competition to play in.
Since sponsors pick up air tickets and, indeed, the entire stay, it does not matter how long the journey may be.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A review of ''Mexican Churches'' Dec. 20 inadvertently omitted the name of the translator.
The review, by Octavio Paz, was translated by Robert Pegada.


Don't Make Bets on the Predictions
LEAD: THE recent upheaval in the stock market proves once again how unpredictable the world is.
Few forecasters had spotted the timing and extent of the fall; fewer still had foreseen the prolonged rise.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  RAMPAL, FLUTE AND BATON  Jean-Pierre Rampal, the virtuoso flutist, will perform with, as well as conduct, the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra next weekend in Englewood, Red Bank, Trenton and Elizabeth.
On the program will be Weber's Overture to Oberon, Mozart's Flute Concerto No. 2 in D, K. 314, and Tchaikovsky's Symphony No.


Italy Taking Steps Against an Increase in Anti-Semitic Vandalism
LEAD: Police protection of Jewish communities in Italy has been stepped up after an upsurge of anti-Semitic vandalism that coincides with the recent unrest in Israeli-occupied territories.


PHOTOJOURNALISM: A BLEND OF ARTIFICE AND ACTUALITY
LEAD: THE CURRENT ISSUE OF LIFE Magazine, devoted to ''The Year in Pictures'' for 1987, features a remarkable portrait of Lt.
Col.
Oliver L. North.
Taken by the photojournalist Harry Benson, it shows the star of the summer's Iran-contra hearings in full-dress uniform, standing at attention next to an American flag.


Vermont's Top Court Rejects Plea to Dismiss Zaccaro Case
LEAD: The Vermont Supreme Court has rejected a request by lawyers for John A. Zaccaro Jr. to dismiss cocaine charges against him.


IN DEFENSE OF LIBERTY PARK'S MARINA
LEAD: ''CROWN jewel,'' ''treasure,''


Music: Brooklyn Philharmonic Plays Corigliano Piece
LEAD: LISTENING to Friday night's concert by the Brooklyn Philharmonic made one wonder whether music is American by virtue of a special identity or by the lack of same.
Two pieces on the program at the Academy of Music seemed to argue the question in different directions.


ART
LEAD: POPULAR ART OF 2 PERIODS, IN BRIDGEPORT


A BOATER'S CATALOGUE
LEAD: IF there's anything boat owners love more than their boats, it's the gear and the accessories that they bring aboard.
Sailors, fishermen and powerboat operators are all inveterate tinkerers and gadgeteers.
The more space, time and energy that an instrument saves, the likelier that it will find a home aboard a well-found vessel.


SARA GREER IS ENGAGED
LEAD: The engagement of Sara Temple Greer to Magruder Harrison Dent has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
William Hershey Greer Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md.


THE PRIVATE PAIN OF INFERTILITY
LEAD: My recollections as an obstetrics-gynecology practitioner in the early 1970's, at the time the Dalkon Shield was marketed, may be of interest.
Patients who had been on the pill were so persuaded by articles in feminist magazines extolling the virtues of the shield that they would demand the shield and threaten to leave my practice if I did not oblige them.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Rye Weighs Plan to Preserve Waterfront
LEAD: ''IT doesn't take Bernard Baruch to figure it out,'' said Peter Fischbein, part owner of the Nichols Yacht Yards in Rye, which is being sold for development.


Central Albania Earthquake Causes Damage to Buildings
LEAD: A strong earthquake struck central Albania early today, rocking and damaging buildings in and near Tirana, the capital.
Thousands of residents who had been asleep when the earthquake struck at about 2 A.M. fled into the streets in the rain.


A+ FOR ATTENDANCE
LEAD: In the first session of the 100th Congress, most members took part in an overwhelming percentage of House and Senate votes.
Some who were running for President, however, participated in fewer than half the votes.
Here are the 5 northeastern senators and 10 northeastern representatives who had that best voting attendance records in 1987.


Evoking the Amazon
LEAD: BLOWGUNS, FEATHER ORNAMENTS, shrunken heads: artifacts from past and present cultures of Amazonia, the tropical rain forest area of northern South America, are being assembled in the Hall of South American Peoples, which New York's Museum of Natural History is to open in October.
Complementing an exhibit of Andean archeology, the hall's ethnographic display includes 1,000 Amazonian artifacts that were selected, over two years, from more than 15,000 in the museum's collection by Robert L.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Skiing  Zurbriggen Takes First of Season: Pirmin Zurbriggen, after two second-place finishes, won his first World Cup downhill race of the season yesterday at Val d'Isere, France.
Zurbriggen, the Swiss skier who was the overall World Cup winner last year, posted the fastest time ever on the Oreiller-Killy course: 1 minute 57.10 seconds.


A Ukrainian Troupe That Carries a Legacy
LEAD: ONCE UPON A TIME IN THE Ukraine, there were Cossacks and Tartars, tambourines and magic boots, and the kind of impromptu dance competitions that Miroslav Vantukh watched years ago on summer evenings in the villages around Lvov.


OLYMPIC PROFILE: Ingemar Stenmark; STENMARK, AT 31, IS PROVING HE STILL CAN TACKLE SLALOM
LEAD: THREE gates into the morning run Ingemar Stenmark had fallen, catching his outside shoulder on the top of a flag and skidding ingloriously down the icy slope.


WINGED KEEL HITS THE MARKET
LEAD: THE winged-keel concept that in 1983 helped Alan Bond's marauding Australians lift the America's Cup from its longtime resting place at the New York Yacht Club did more than set the world of sailboat racing on its ear.
Once the Australian yacht designer Ben Lexcen had proved the concept on the race course, manufacturers of production sailboats could see the benefits for family cruisers.


ALICE J. LIPTROT IS WED TO DONALD W. BEATON
LEAD: At the Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Georgetown, Conn., Alice Jeanne Liptrot, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Atherton Liptrot of Wilton, Conn., and East Hampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Donald Wilson Beaton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cecil Beaton of Burlingame, Calif.
The Rev.
Luke M


PROGRAM TO AID TROUBLED YOUTHS
LEAD: A wide range of social services will soon be available in 29 New Jersey school districts in what state officials say is the first program in the country intended to deal comprehensively with crippling problems faced by teen-agers.


Excerpt of G.O.P. Debate Involving Bush on Iran Arms
LEAD: Following is an excerpt of the Republican Presidential debate Friday night, as recorded by The New York Times.
It involves questions by the moderator, James Gannon, editor of The Des Moines Register, and responses by Vice President Bush.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Clinton, Conn.  $160,000  41 Willow Court  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, older colonial; backyard screened with evergreens, .5 acre; taxes $1,846.
Ivoryton, Conn.  $214,450  8 Oak Ledge Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new Garrison colonial; 2-car garage, heavily insulated, 1 acre; taxes $2,500.


BRUCE G. ECKERSON IS WED TO ALICE COLEMAN ELSBREE
LEAD: Alice Coleman Elsbree, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Elsbree of Kensington, Md., was married yesterday at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Bethesda, Md., to Bruce Godwin Eckerson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Homer W. Eckerson of Fair Haven, N.J., and Raymond, Me.
The Rev.
David S. Stanton officiated.


KEAN SEEKS TO COUNTER AIDES' LACK OF CANDOR
LEAD: THE state's Department of Education has a growing scandal on its hands in its awarding of $1 million in vocational education contracts, and Governor Kean, for one, found the department's communication skills lacking last week when it came to keeping the public informed about what was going on.


FICTION
LEAD:  BROWNSTONE FACADE.
By Catherine M. Rae. (Joan Kahn/St. Martin's, $13.95.) Catherine M. Rae has concocted a leisurely mystery-romance in her first novel that fairly cries out for a long train ride during which to read it.
She presents New York City in the winter of 1920 through a frame of more recent years: In 1981, a middle-aged man comes upon a disturbing memoir purportedly penned by his late aunt two decades before.


SRI LANKA: A NATION DISINTEGRATES
LEAD: The picture of Tamil fighters looking over the bodies of Indian soldiers vividly portrays the tragedy of conflicts inspired by mistaken ethnic pride (''Sri Lanka: A Nation Disintegrates,'' by Steven R. Weisman, Dec. 13).
The young Tamils stare in disbelief at what they have done.
There is neither joy nor celebration of victory; just plain shock and a pall of gloom descending on the blood bath.


In Gaza, Confrontation at Crossroads of History; Finding a Sponsor
LEAD: To the Editor:


British Government Seeking to Censor 2d Spy Book
LEAD: In a fresh move to guard the increasingly shopworn secrets of its intelligence services, the British Government is trying to suppress yet another book describing the services as riddled with would-be traitors and homosexuals.


A Transient Art Form With Staying Power
LEAD: WITH THE SPEED AND glitz of the art world, the need for the installation as a self-contained work of art, in which visitors can be totally immersed, is not likely to diminish.
Installations are made for a particular place and time.
After their run, they are dismantled.
Most are never reassembled.
At best, they are at the same time immediate and slow.


LAURI KIEN TO MARRY ERIC KOTCHER IN MAY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Julian M. Kien of Manhattan have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lauri Allison Kien, to Eric Kotcher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jules Kotcher of Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.


DATA BANK: January 10, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,835.9
$3,795.3
$3,683.3
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.3
2.5
2.79
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$141.9
$134.5
$130.2


WHAT DID WOMEN WANT?
LEAD:  THE GROUNDING OF MODERN FEMINISM  By Nancy F. Cott.
Illustrated. 372 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $29.95.


Theater
LEAD: If you remember high school - or even if you have forgotten high school - you should enjoy ''Oil City Symphony'' (at Circle-in-the-Square Downtown, 159 Bleecker Street), a grand spoof of old times, good times and those who compulsively return for reunions.
Four musically inclined graduates of Oil City High come together in concert to honor a former teacher, toasting her with a garland of nostalgic and amusing tunes.


For Hair, A Look That's Sleek
LEAD: IN two fashion collections presented last week, models wore their hair pulled back severely from the face, the better to show off earrings and sunglassses. ''The clothes are frilly and feminine, the earrings are elaborate, so the hair must be smooth,'' said Charles Nicholas, who was responsible for the coiffures at the Adolfo spring and summer show.


THIS WAY THE LABYRINTH, THAT WAY THE ABYSS
LEAD:  JOHN CALVIN  A Sixteenth Century Portrait.
By William J. Bouwsma. 310 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $22.95.


Question Of the Week; Should The Knicks Trade for Mullin?
LEAD: Mullin can be had cheap, can blend well with the team and will make his outside shots.
If the Knicks don't try to get Mullin, perhaps they should try to rehire Hubie Brown.
JONATHAN GLICK  New York


Creatures Great and Small Split Rural Town
LEAD: LOUIS CRECHETTI is not your average pig farmer.
He spends his day teaching engineering at the University of Hartford.
But, come dusk, you'll find him in his Granby barn, tending his pigs and sheep.


IN THE MIDDLE: For OSHA, Balance Is Hard to Find
LEAD: FOR most of the Reagan years, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration has been a punching bag.
It was hammered not only by labor unions and other groups seeking safer workplaces, who accused it of internal disarray and lax enforcement, but also by conservatives demanding that it stop stifling American industry with petty rules.


Headliners; Following the Rules
LEAD: ''It's hard to argue with success,'' Dr.
Frank Napier Jr., superintendent of schools in Paterson, N.J., said in 1983, speaking of Joe Clark's first year as principal of Paterson's Eastside High School.
Hard, maybe, but last week the Paterson Board of Education started an argument that could result in Mr.


WHAT'S DOING IN ASPEN
LEAD: The Dec. 27 snowstorm that closed Denver's Stapleton Airport for the first time in four years and dumped several feet of snow in the Colorado Rockies came as a great relief to Aspen residents, who had grown anxious about the season's persistent dryness and its effect on skiers.


Fuel Spill Clogs Wheeling, W.Va.
LEAD: Shops closed and firefighters worried about a water shortage today as the city stopped pumping water from the Ohio River because of a diesel oil spill that has traveled 100 miles in a week.


DIAMOND PITTAS IS WED TO CONSTANCE S. SBILIS
LEAD: At St.
Paul Greek Orthodox Church in Hempstead, L.I., Constance Stavroula Sbilis and Diamond Pittas were married yesterday.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Demetrios Katerlis, the Dean of St.
George Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Philadelphia and an uncle of the bride, and the Rev.
Nicholas Magoulias, the Dean of St.


DEMOCRACY GOES TO THE MOVIES
LEAD:  REEL POLITICS  American Political Movies From ''Birth of a Nation'' to ''Platoon.'' By Terry Christensen.
Illustrated. 244 pp.
New York: Basil Blackwell. $24.95.


Murder Charges Dismissed In Death of Deformed Baby
LEAD: A judge has dismissed murder charges against a father awaiting a third trial for flinging his deformed newborn son to the delivery room floor.


BIG EAST LIGHTS UP, WARMING THE NORTHEAST
LEAD: LONG before Tyson and Holmes could get at each other, the Big East provided the first punches of the new year.
The couple of quick rights were thrown by - surprise, surprise - a Georgetown player who did not like the possessive way a Pitt player snatched away a held ball, and so, tried to punch a few heads.


ON POWER AND HISTORY: WHAT MARGUERITE YOURCENAR KNEW
LEAD: WHEN I was seated by Marguerite Yourcenar at a dinner given in her honor last February in New York - the occasion of her receiving the medal of the Commander of the French Legion of Honor and the National Arts Club's Medal of Honor for Literature - I placed before her my copy of ''Memoirs of Hadrian,'' which she had previously agreed to autograph.


Headliners; Borrowing Trouble
LEAD: ''I have deep regrets and no excuses,'' said former Gov.


Back to School: Combining Travel With Learning
LEAD: FOR youthful travelers, vacation can mean a welcome hiatus from classrooms, books and study; for another, often older group it means the opposite, an opportunity to spend two or three weeks rediscovering the pleasures of learning, in many cases through seminars, lectures or research projects.
A wide array of programs sponsored by academic institutions, museums and nonprofit organizations offers the opportunity to combine travel and education.


WORLDWIDE ODYSSEY LEADS TO PGA TOUR
LEAD: HE used to joke when he talked about the difficulty of getting into professional golf events without a tour card.


IN A BARN, BIRTH OF PAST AND FUTURE
LEAD: THERE is a barn behind my great-grandfather's house in Stony Brook.
I suppose now I should say my grandfather's, for it is he who inherited the house and lives there now, but to me it will always be Poppy's house.
Even after all the new paint, soft carpets and beautiful unfamiliar furniture, I still like it better the old way, the way it used to be.


FOES AND SUPPORTERS URGING ARIZONA GOVENOR TO RESIGN
LEAD: Opponents and some supporters of Gov.
Evan Mecham are urging that he consider stepping down while he responds to his indictment on charges of fraud, perjury and filing a false campaign financial report.


Lola Beltran: Mariachi's Queen Ignites Hope, Soothes Hardship For Multitudes
LEAD: THROUGHOUT MEXICO, across much of the rest of Latin America and among more than 12 million Mexican-Americans in the United States, she is known simply as La Reina - The Queen.


PLANETS OF THEIR IMAGININGS
LEAD:  THE SILVER DESOTO  By Patty Lou Floyd. 257 pp.
Austin: Council Oak Books/ Texas Monthly Press. $14.95.


THE U.S.: A FAILED BID FOR SAFE PASSAGE IN THE GULF
LEAD: EVER since the Government said it would allow Kuwait to fly the American flag on 11 Kuwaiti tankers and protect them with American warships in the Persian Gulf, American shipowners have petitioned the Defense Department for the same protection.
Even though their ships fly foreign ''flags of convenience'' to cut costs, the owners argued, their tankers carry more than 50 percent of American oil imports to United States ports and can be requisitioned by the


Question Of the Week; Should The Knicks Trade for Mullin?
LEAD: Having Chris Mullin back in New York would be great.
But if he accepts his alcoholism (and only he can say whether or not he is an alcoholic), then he and people around him must understand that moving back to New York doesn't mean he's cured of the disease.
JOEL SCHWARTZ  Jamaica, Queens


PRISON PLAN ADVANCING DESPITE OPPOSITION
LEAD: DESPITE opposition in some communities, Connecticut is pushing ahead with a record $300 million construction program to add 3,000 new prison beds in the next five years to keep pace with a steadily rising inmate population.


Bernie Kosar's Climate
LEAD: AS sharp and as cold as a knife blade that had been left overnight on the ice along the Lake Erie shore, the wind sliced through the 78,586 customers pounding their mittens together on the slopes of Cleveland Stadium's tundra.
This was pro football the way it always is here during the Super Bowl playoffs.


Hike! uh, Ahoy!
LEAD: WITH the America's Cup competition returning to its big-boat format, Dennis Conner, who won the cup for the San Diego Yacht Club with his 12-meter Stars &amp; Stripes last winter, must have been wondering if there was any future for the little boats.
Now Conner has come up with a way to keep a couple of 12-Meter craft in the public eye during Super Bowl week in San Diego.


Behind the Oil Tank Failure, Changes in the Use of Fuel
LEAD: THE public safety authorities in Pennsylvania are investigating why a storage tank failed last weekend, contaminating water supplies with enough oil to heat almost 1,000 single-family houses for a year.
If the accident prompts officials elsewhere to check the soundness of tanks in their jurisdictions, however, they are likely to find that knocking on the cold steel shell produces an unexpected sound - a hollow ring.


A Revival By the River
LEAD: TRAIN passengers to Wilmington used to arrive at a rundown railroad station in an equally shabby neighborhood.


Wearing James Baldwin's Crown
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mopeds
LEAD: To the Editor: In the article on the hazards of Bermuda's mopeds (Practical Traveler, Nov. 15) no mention was made of the fact that these auxiliary cycles apparently are not required to have rear-view mirrors on their handlebars.
Last summer, I was on both Block Island (where all mopeds seem to have such mirrors) and Bermuda (where only scooters seem to have them).


A Cautious U.S. Response To Plan on Afghanistan
LEAD: AFGHANISTAN has become the world's leading hypothetical question.
If the Soviet Union truly plans to withdraw its 115,000 troops in 1988, as Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze said last week, if it abandons its clients in Afghanistan's Communist Government, if it surrenders that country to the civil strife and rebel takeover that seem likely to follow a pullout, then the


English and Other Languages
LEAD: To the Editor:


A CONVENTION OF GROUSERS
LEAD: DETERMINING the difference between a children's book and a book for adults is often tricky business.
After all, many people once considered ''Huckleberry Finn'' - that bible of individualism, perhaps the most delightfully subversive, antiauthoritarian work in American literature - to be a charming children's story.


TO STEM TOURIST TRADE, ESSEX BARS NEW HOTELS
LEAD: AS state officials try harder than ever to promote Connecticut as a vacation spot, the picturesque town of Essex, near the mouth of the Connecticut River, has taken steps to make sure tourists don't linger too long within its borders.


U.S. Unsure Pakistan Seeks 2d A-Fuel Plant
LEAD: Pakistan may be building a second plant to enrich uranium to be used for nuclear weapons, in the view of some American officials.


Venezuela
LEAD: To the Editor: How disappointing that ''Venezuela's Island in the Caribbean'' (Travel, Nov. 15) focused on overpriced, overcrowded Margarita Island when Puerto La Cruz lies only 40 minutes from Caracas.
Five minutes after we arrived the Doral Beach Hotel staff had us happily in our rooms.
We were surrounded by tennis, volleyball and basketball courts, a long private beach and free shuttles to the shops and sights of Puerto La Cruz.


INVENTORY OF HISTORY
LEAD: OVER the years, the county has compiled lists of its wildlife, itemized its big trees and catalogued its open spaces.
Now it is starting an Inventory of Historic Places, and it is looking for local nominations of historically significant buildings, structures and sites.
Anything - a barn, a bridge, a house, a monument, a cemetery - might be eligible.


Philadelphia Asks, Is It Art Or Politics?
LEAD: The history of the world is littered with the debris of collisions between art and politics.
And so, to Philadelphians who like to call their city the birthplace of both American art and American politics, a current uproar over art exhibits in City Hall comes as no surprise.


NEW RESEARCH ON BOTTOM PAINTS
LEAD: EVER since primitive man discovered that his dugout canoe quickly became a garden of organisms if left in the water, mariners have fought the battle against bottom-fouling.


A Different Way To Sell a House
LEAD: DISENCHANTED with realty brokers, Linda and Carl Mattson tried a more challenging approach to sell their house in Buxton, Me.: a dog-naming contest with the house as the prize.


NAN T. KENNELLY ENGAGED TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Nan Terese Kennelly, a Foreign Service officer in Lahore, Pakistan, to Gregg Easterbrook, a journalist and novelist, has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James Kennelly of Short Hills, N.J.
Mr.
Easterbrook is a son of Dr.
George E. Easterbrook of Tallahassee, Fla., and the late Vimy


Comings and Goings
LEAD: PENN STATE'S leading rusher, Blair Thomas, who missed the Citrus Bowl after hurting his knee, will undergo surgery tomorrow.
If he has not fully recovered by the fall, Thomas has said he might sit out a year. . . .
Cris Carter, the Philadelphia Eagles' wide receiver, underwent surgery on his right foot and will be in a cast for six weeks.


WHAT CRITICS HAVE DONE, AND HOW WELL
LEAD:  LITERATURE AND ITS THEORISTS  A Personal View of Twentieth-Century Criticism.
By Tzvetan Todorov.
Translated by Catherine Porter. 203 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. $24.95.


MADNESS OF WAR
LEAD:  ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT  Directed by Lewis Milestone, wiith Lew Ayres (in photo), Louis Wolheim and Yola D'Avril (in photo). 1930.


Food Inspection Results
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 21 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


The Letters of Tell Leilan
LEAD: It's hard not to envy Harvey Weiss, an archeologist at Yale who is hot on the trail of an intriguing correspondence.
It's between the king of Shubat Enlil and his son, the governor of Mari.
Those were two once-great cities on the plains of Mesopotamia, where urban civilization began some 5,000 years ago.


BEVERLY BELEW TO WED A FELLOW ARMY OFFICER
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Beverly Ann Belew of the Army Nurse Corps and Col.
Michael Richard Antopol, commander of the Brooke Army Medical Center at Fort Sam Houston in Texas, plan to be married Feb. 14, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry B. Belew of Andrews, Tex., have announced.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  ANIMAL NUMBERS  By Bert Kitchen.
Illustrated by the author.
Unpaged.
New York: Dial Books. $11.95. (All ages)  CROWS  An Old Rhyme.
Illustrated by Heidi Holder.
Unpaged.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $14.95. (All ages)


Taking On Mount Kilimanjaro
LEAD: IT is two and a half hours after midnight, Tanzanian time.
In the light of the full moon lighting our climb, we can look down on the lofty peaks of Kenya's mountains poking up through layered clouds in the far distance.
We are more than three miles into the sky, almost as high as jet liners cruise, and higher at that moment than any of the millions of people on the African continent.


THE PALESTINIANS
LEAD: Israeli soldier facing Palestinians at a refugee camp in the Gaza Strip (Sygma/Derek Hudson)


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Wilmington, Del.; A Revival By the River
LEAD: TRAIN passengers to Wilmington used to arrive at a rundown railroad station in an equally shabby neighborhood.
Now the station has changed and so has the neighborhood.


Rival Guerrillas in Lebanon Seeking Unity Against Israel
LEAD: Palestinian and Lebanese guerrilla groups, which have been fighting among themselves for years, are showing new solidarity in their common war against Israel.


LONG ISLAND NEEDS A SENSE OF COMMUNITY
LEAD: Dispersed and fragmented Long Island needs more than leaders who take a hand in community affairs, as John Racanelli urged recently  [ ''Countering the Hysteria on Economic Growth,'' Opinion Page  ] .
Gaining ground on Long Island's future requires a mixture of public leadership with wider vision.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I am finishing my attic to add a workroom, so I want to add insulation to the roof (it is now on the attic floor).
I have been told to allow for ventilation above the insulation - between the insulation and the roof sheathing - but am not sure how to do this.
Can you tell me if this is really necessary, and if so where vents should be located?


ROSENTHAL APPOINTED EDITOR AT G.P. PUTNAM
LEAD: A. M. Rosenthal, a columnist and former executive editor of The New York Times, has been named editor at large at G. P. Putnam, the publishing house announced yesterday.


INDUSTRY WEATHERING THE FINANCIAL STORM
LEAD: THE New York National Boat Show, coming at the onset of a new year, is viewed by the marine industry as the bellwether for its coming season.
In 1988, eyes are peeled for a glitch in the boating market that might be traced to the stock market's Black Monday in October.
But few really expect such a ripple.


Israeli Troops Kill Gaza Protester In Clashes During General Strike
LEAD: Israeli troops clashed with Palestinians in the occupied Gaza Strip today during a general strike, killing a demonstrator and wounding five others, the army command said.


A Look Beyond Stravinsky's Style
LEAD: MUSICAL FASHION IDENTI-fies itself primarily with style, and only when time has sepaand only when time has separated the two (so that the style in which a work was composed merely becomes one of several attributes by which it can be judged, rather than the test of its timeliness) is it possible to attempt accurate comparative assessments of contemporaneous works.


FANS HAVE LITTLE SYMPATHY FOR SYRACUSE
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


MISS PENNINGTON ENGAGED
LEAD: The engagement of Juliet Jean Pennington to James Jude Matte, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Matte of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., has been made known by the future bride's parents, Gloria Pennington of Hastings-on-Hudson and Bruce Pennington of New York.
Miss Pennington, a reporter for The Sun Chronicle in Attleboro, Mass., and her fiance, a copy editor at The Boston Herald, plan to marry in May.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.83
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
7.03
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.82
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
11.07
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


OFF BROADWAY'S UNLIKELY HITS
LEAD: QUIETLY, WITHOUT FAN-fare, there has been a resurgence of Off Broadway, with plays as well as musicals developing into long-run successes.
This theatrical arena has once again become a healthy commercial territory at the same time that it is providing the theater with new and rewarding work.
The plays include Alfred Uhry's ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' Terrence McNally's ''Frankie and Johnny in the Claire de Lune,'' Robert Harling's ''Steel Magnolias,'' Barbara Lebow's ''Shayna Maidel'' and Tom Griffin's ''Boys Next Door.


OILERS TROUNCE ISLANDERS
LEAD: Craig Simpson scored twice as the Oilers routed the Islanders, 5-1, tonight, giving Simpson 16 goals in 22 games since being acquired from Pittsburgh in the trade that sent Paul Coffey to the Penguins on Nov. 24.


Question Of the Week; Should The Knicks Trade for Mullin?
LEAD: Chris Mullin is Bill Bradley reincarnate: a team player in constant motion who has a very good shot when he is open.
Just like Trent Tucker.
Based on Pitino's pitiful progress in getting his players to set picks and screens for Tucker, Mullin would fare no better.
KEN ROSENBERG  New York


Statues of Caligula Clan On Display in Florence
LEAD: Several life-size statues, thought to have been smashed nearly 2,000 years ago to eradicate traces of the Roman Emperor Caligula's family, have been restored and put on display.


Correction
LEAD: The TV View column in the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday, about the public TV series ''Inside Television'' misidentified an NBC News vice president.
He is Joseph Angotti.


Multiple Reviews
LEAD: To the Editor:


A STAY-HOME MOTHER WITHOUT CHILDREN
LEAD: AFTER 16 years, I am at last a stay-home mother.
The only thing is, the children are no longer there.
I timed my transition from corporate executive to budding author to coincide (was it coincidental?) with the high school graduation and departure for college of my younger daughter, Sarah.


Pelham Parkway
LEAD: WHEN the New York Police Department wanted to build a new precinct house directly on Pelham Parkway, the residents of the quiet Bronx neighborhood that takes its name from that thoroughfare were outraged at what they saw as a desecration of their tree-lined sense of identity.
They rallied to protest the plan, the new 49th Precinct stationhouse was built on Eastchester


RITUAL OF RENEWAL IN CLOTHES AND SELVES
LEAD: RECENTLY I read two articles whose juxtaposition had an impact on me.
The first was entitled ''Is Fashion Destiny?
Ask Cinderella,'' by Janice Gordon  [ Opinion Page ] .


Question Of the Week; Should The Knicks Trade for Mullin?
LEAD: The Knicks don't need a slow, and possibly chemically dependent shooting guard.
The Knicks should continue to build through the draft.
BRITT BURR  New York


Broadcast TV
LEAD: A varied batch of worthy films from works by well-known authors dots the week's agenda.
Topping the list, because it's so rarely shown, is ''The Beachcomber'' (1938), a wonderfully pungent version of Somerset Maugham's ''Vessel of Wrath,'' with Charles Laughton and Elsa Lanchester - Saturday at 11:30 P.M.


A Crack Addict, 17, Is Held in the Killings Of Five Since Jan. 1
LEAD: A 17-year-old, described by the police as a crack addict, was charged yesterday with killing five people and wounding six others in a series of robberies in East Harlem that began on New Year's Day.


NOVICE FINDS A SPOT ON THE Varsity
LEAD: MITCH BUONAGURO, the men's varsity basketball coach at Fairfield University, did a double-take when he spotted 6-foot-10-inch Alex Forbes shooting baskets last September at the school's recreational complex during the freshmen orientation weekend.


PREDICTING THE PULSE OF THE ECONOMY
LEAD: WHAT everyone in business needs is a good crystal ball.
But to be of value, forecasts must be accurate, and a Chappaqua consulting group, Levy Economic Forecasts, has compiled one of the best records in the country for predicting turning points of the business cycle in the United States for the last 40 years.


A TRICKSTER IN TIANJIN
LEAD:  GRIEVER  An American Monkey King in China.
By Gerald Vizenor. 238 pp.
Normal: Illinois State University/ Fiction Collective/Sun &amp; Moon Press.
Cloth, $15.95.
Paper, $8.95.


HOW TO INSTALL A LOCK ON A DOOR
LEAD: THE term ''lockset'' is used to describe collectively all door hardware (except hinges) that permit the door to be opened, closed and locked.
Usually a lockset consists of a lock with keys, a latch bolt, doorknobs and a strike plate, which is installed in the door jamb to receive the end of the latch bolt and hold the door shut.


By Freighter
LEAD: To the Editor: It was delightful to read ''Marquesas by Freighter'' by Robert Gordon (Travel, Dec. 6).
My friend and I took that trip last March and the best part of it was that there are no age limitations on the passengers.
She and I are both 80, and while it's true that one must be in good health since there's no doctor on board, we found no difficulty in making all the shore excursions and being tossed by muscular sailors into and out of the whaleboats on to the shore or back at the ship for the ascent up the ladder.


India Replaces a Top General in Sri Lanka
LEAD: India has replaced a senior military commander in northern Sri Lanka after months of speculation that New Delhi had been dissatified about his handling of the Indian peacekeeping force there.


ARTS AND CRAFTS FOR THE COLLECTORS
LEAD: RECENT stamp issues can be used to form a collection within a collection.
Pottery, fine jewelry and native crafts can be gathered for an international arts and crafts fair within the confines of a stamp album.


'THEY WANTED TO TERRIFY ME'
LEAD:  CHILE  Death in the South.
By Jacobo Timerman.
Translated by Robert Cox. 134 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.


CONDUCTOR IN DEBUT WITH CHOIR
LEAD: THE last Christmas concert of this season is coming up next Sunday, when the Ossining Choral Society begins its 51st year with Bach's ''Christmas Oratorio.'' The 3 P.M. performance at the high school also serves to introduce the choir's new maestro, Thomas Filo.


Judges and Lawyers Honor a 'Pioneer'
LEAD: Helen L. Buttenwieser, a legendary figure in New York legal circles, felt a bit of trepidation about what lay ahead Friday night.


VICTORIA ROCKEFELLER ENGAGED
LEAD: The engagement of Victoria Stillman Rockefeller to Peter Sandys Philip has been announced by Mrs.
John Philip Fisher of Toronto and Andrew Carnegie Rockefeller of Greenwich, Conn., parents of the future bride.
Her fiance is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Van Ness Philip of Bedford, N.Y.
A July wedding is planned.


WHEN THE ID COMES KNOCKING AT YOUR DOOR
LEAD:  HOW OLD WAS LOLITA?  By Alan Saperstein. 275 pp. New York: Random House. $16.95.


PREMISES AS PRETENSE
LEAD:  MONSIEUR TESTE IN AMERICA  &amp; Other Instances of Realism.
By Andrei Codrescu. 138 pp.
Minneapolis: Coffee House Press.
Paper, $9.95.


ASTRTAL BODIES AND TANTRIC SEX
LEAD:  FORBIDDEN JOURNEY  The Life of Alexandra David-Neel.
By Barbara M. Foster and Michael Foster.
Illustrated. 363 pp.
San Francisco: Harper &amp; Row. $21.95.


STACEY CHAPMAN ENGAGED TO WED
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Mark L. Chapman of Norwood, N.J., have made known the engagement of their daughter Stacey Ann Chapman to Adam Saravay, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Saravay of Roslyn Heights, L.I.


TEMPERED TAN
LEAD: BY NOW, EVERYONE KNOWS THAT A HEALTHY TAN IS A contradiction in terms.
The gap between knowledge and behavior, however, is big enough to hold all the cocoa butter in Florida.
People like the all-over toasted look.
Accordingly, tanning parlors, born in the early 1970's, now dot street corners across the country, holding out the promise of the impossible: a safe tan.


Knicks Stun Celtics As Jackson Stars
LEAD: Mark Jackson, the Knicks' rookie playmaker, has had so many outstanding games, it is difficult to pinpoint his best one.


SRI LANKA: A NATION DISINTEGRATES
LEAD: It was surprising that Steven Weisman's article made no mention of an interesting and important personality in the recent history of Ceylon/Sri Lanka, Sirimavo Bandaranaike, who became the world's first female prime minister, in 1960.
Her husband, Solomon West Ridgeway Dias Bandaranaike, had been assassinated the year before, and she was persuaded to take over the reins of his party, which won the general election the following year.


PROPOSED RATE RISE FOR HOSPITALS CRITICIZED
LEAD: The New Jersey Hospital Association has moved to increase all hospital rates as if it were opening a sales campaign for a new soap product.


THE ROAD TO SELF-RELIANCE
LEAD: Michael Norman makes some interesting observations in his article ''The Road to Self-Reliance'' (About Men, Dec. 13).
It's true that ''society forces  [ isolation ]  on men.'' But it strikes me as misguided to put aside or deny the anger and pain this causes and to speak of how ''the loneliness . . .


Bush and Dole Attack Each Other As Iowa Race Takes Negative Turn
LEAD: The front-runners for the Republican Presidential nomination, Vice President Bush and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, attacked each other sharply today, each accusing the other of having something to hide.


U.S. TO KEEP ALIENS OFFICE
LEAD: THE sole office in the state for helping illegal aliens obtain amnesty has escaped an early closing and will continue processing applications until next May, United States Representative Bruce A. Morrison, Democrat of New Haven, has announced.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I am finishing my attic to add a workroom, so I want to add insulation to the roof (it is now on the attic floor).
I have been told to allow for ventilation above the insulation - between the insulation and the roof sheathing - but am not sure how to do this.
Can you tell me if this is really necessary, and if so where vents should be located?


The Dollar's Up, With Some Help
LEAD: The dollar got strong support from central bankers in both words and deeds.
When the week's trading began in Tokyo the dollar resumed its slide to record lows, but central banks of several countries, including the United States, moved vigorously to prop it up, buying billions of dollars in the currency markets.


Stuart Feld Brings Zest to Americana
LEAD: STUART P. FELD'S stepped-up pursuit of American decorative arts over the past five years has made him the most discussed merchant in the field of Americana.
A relative newcomer as a dealer in the three areas he now handles at Hirschl &amp; Adler Galleries - folk art, 20th-century architect-designed furnishings and 19th-century revival styles - Mr.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''I don't have to comply with George Bush.
Why doesn't he release what we're all trying to find out about, the Iran-contra thing?''
- Senator Bob Dole.  [ 22:1. ]


In Gaza, Confrontation at Crossroads of History
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Stamford, Sweetening The Deals Makes a Difference
LEAD: FROM the time Stonegate opened in the summer of 1986 until last Oct. 19, 53 houses were sold.
But from the day the market crashed until the beginning of December, buyers and even lookers at the single-family subdivision in Stamford, Conn., virtually disappeared.


CENTER AIDS YOUNG ON PROPER DIET
LEAD: TEEN-AGERS, too often linked with alcohol and drugs through the devastation of family life, are seldom thought of in the same category as the compulsive under- or over-eater, whose pattern on examination is remarkably similar.


ALBANY RETURNS TO THE USUAL WARFARE
LEAD: DURING last year's tumultuous legislative session, traditional party alliances often seemed to break down into personality conflicts, with the new Speaker of the Democratic-controlled State Assembly, Mel Miller, more at odds with the state's Democratic Governor than with the majority leader of the Republican-controlled State Senate.


HAVE AN URGE FOR A GOOD BOWL OF SOUP?
LEAD: IN winter I could eat soup every day.
For lunch, I like nothing better than a bowl of hot soup and a sandwich.
I also like seasonal winter soups for dinner, thick vegetable soups that are almost like stews, with additions of lentils, beans, pasta, rice or potatoes.
I like to serve them in large deep bowls, along with some fresh French bread, with cheese and salad to follow.


HAZARD: ALL TOO FAMILIAR: In Coal Mining, A Call for Strict Standards
LEAD: In fulfillment of President Reagan's campaign pledges, the Mine Safety and Health Administration, known to coal men by the awkward acronym ''EM-sha,'' joined many other regulatory agencies in emphasizing cooperation with industry, rather than being its adversary.
Republicans and Democrats in Congress, the United Mine Workers union and now a number of the agency's top career safety engineers have accused it of going too far - of calculated laxity in enforcing safety standards in what has long been the most hazardous of all industrial workplaces.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  DIZZY AND McKEE


WATSON AIMS AT '88 RETURN TO TOP OF LEADERS' PACK
LEAD: Two shots in 1987 will go down among the most memorable in golf history -Larry Mize's chip into the second extra hole to beat Greg Norman for the Masters title and Lee Trevino's hole-in-one at the Skins Game in November.
Those who saw them on television or in person should remember them - they probably won't be repeated any time soon.


Food; DINING LIGHT
LEAD: WHEN I SEE CALORIE counts listed on a menu, I cringe.
Although the threat of extra pounds is constant, the idea of being reminded of this when I'm out to enjoy myself is no fun at all.
Paying dearly for diet food is only further insult.


Carnegie Hall Names A Music Administrator
LEAD: Carnegie Hall has appointed Catherine Gevers to the newly created post of music administrator, Judith Arron, general manager of the hall, announced.
Miss Gevers, who will assume her responsibilities Feb. 15, will be in charge of engaging artists and developing programs for the main hall.
Summer programming is to be expanded and planning begun for the hall's centennial celebrations in the 1990-91 season.


A Lottery (and Other) Affordability Deals
LEAD: UNTIL last year, Janet M. Bondeson could not afford to live in Wilton, Conn., where she is an assistant to the Superintendent of Schools.


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  Mexico's Debt Plan, Will It Work?


POSTINGS: Warehouses to Condos; Ugly Duckling
LEAD: Though Waterfront Invest once won an award for historic preservation, the group's current Jersey City project certainly does not fit that category. ''We have taken an extremely ugly, black-looking building and turned it into something quite nice,'' said Robert Fioretti, Waterfront's managing partner for Riverview Terrace.


THE ISRAELIS: RIOTS UNIFY THE UNITY GOVERNMENT - FOR NOW By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN
LEAD: NOW, the 64,000-shekel question: What is the impact on Israeli party politics of the recent Palestinian protests in the occupied territories?
Answer: Virtually none - so far.


INCEST VICTIMS GET SYMPATHY BUT LITTLE HELP
LEAD: IN sentencing Cheryl Pierson to six months in jail, the judge at her manslaughter hearing said that the 18-year-old Selden girl had had alternatives short of arranging her father's killing.
But many professionals who deal with such incest cases warn that had the teen-age victim turned to Suffolk County for help, she might have been frustrated and might even have ended up dead herself.


Headliners; Ousting the Boss
LEAD: It was propelled flight of a sort that was being arranged last week for C. Edward Acker, chairman and chief executive of the Pan Am Corporation, but it was unlikely he was looking forward to the trip.
According to sources who described a private meeting in New York City attended by ranking representatives of various contending parties, a representative of Pan Am's board offered to dismiss Mr.


'LIMITS' AT 30: THE TRIP IS WORTH IT
LEAD: In ''Learning Limits as 30 Looms''  [ Opinion Page, Dec. 6 ] , Lisa James offers more of her own depressed view of life than any insight into universal truths.


Police End Search for Heiress
LEAD: Law-enforcement officials from two states have called off a search for a missing heiress after concluding that a prison inmate had led them on a wild goose chase.


YANKEE AFFAIR WINS APPLETON AT GULFSTREAM
LEAD: Yankee Affair benefited from an inside start in a field of 14 but proved clearly best while scoring a three-length victory over Performing Pappy and King's River today in the $100,000 Appleton Handicap at Gulfstream Park.


AS AUSTERITY NEARS, WARSAW RELAXES RULES FOR AN ELITE
LEAD: POLISH sociologists, taking advantage of less restrictive travel rules, recently renewed academic links with the West that were severed under martial law six years ago.


UBIQUITOUS PESTS
LEAD: CATALOGUES are arriving; before tossing out the old ones, check them to be sure garden notes and plans are not discarded.
Use calcium chloride on icy steps and walks; keep it dry so it does not cake.
Start petunias, snapdragons and other long-season seed indoors.
Mealybugs


LAURIE K. NOVAK, BANK EXECUTIVE, BECOMES A BRIDE
LEAD: The marriage of Laurie Kay Novak, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Novak of Houston, to Thomas Stewart Glanville, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Glanville of Darien, Conn., took place yesterday at the Holy Rosary Roman Catholic Church in Houston.
The Rev.
John Brown officiated, assisted by the Rev.


HAVE AN URGE FOR A GOOD BOWL OF SOUP?
LEAD: IN winter I could eat soup every day.
For lunch, I like nothing better than a bowl of hot soup and a sandwich.
I also like seasonal winter soups for dinner, thick vegetable soups that are almost like stews, with additions of lentils, beans, pasta, rice or potatoes.
I like to serve them in large deep bowls, along with some fresh


'The Health of Nations'
LEAD: To the Editor:


MOVIES
LEAD:  That's Life!
Starring Julie Andrews, Jack Lemmon, Robert Loggia and Sally Kellerman.
Directed by Blake Edwards. 1987.
Vestron Video 102 minutes. $79.98.


INSTANTLY NOTORIOUS
LEAD:  CVJ  Nicknames of Maitre D's &amp; Other Excerpts From Life.
By Julian Schnabel.
Illustrated. 222 pp.
New York: Random House. $75.


Salving Market-Battered Managers
LEAD: WHEN the stock market falls, the flight to safety begins. ''Companies are looking at different vehicles that give people an equity position, but protect them from volatility,'' said Ms.
Meyer of Handy Associates.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page article last Sunday about the new immigration law incorrectly described the number of aliens whose applications have been approved for lawful status.
About 1.2 million aliens have applied so far, and fewer than a quarter of their applications have been fully reviewed.


Real Runaway
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wall Hangings From Oaxaca
LEAD: THE cacti, dwarf trees and small farm plots that dot the vast plateau of the Mexican state of Oaxaca create subtle harmonies of green and ocher right up to the jagged gray profile of the Sierra Madre.
As the Pan American Highway traces an unswerving black line across this alto plano, or high plane, a blue signpost overhead indicates, by a pattern of white lines symbolizing interwoven threads, the turnoff for Teotitlan del Valle.


JILL E. BUZZI WEDS M. A. TANENBAUM
LEAD: The marriage of Jill Elizabeth Buzzi, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Buzzi of Colonia, N.J., to Michael Alan Tanenbaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Tanenbaum of Short Hills, N.J., took place last evening at the Essex County Country Club in West Orange, N.J.
Judge John E. Keefe, presiding judge in the chancery division of the Superior Court of New Jersey, Middlesex


Early Early Music: Still a Fight
LEAD: A FEW DECADES AGO, THE term ''early music'' carried the implication of quaintness, oddity and distance, and described a vast literature that ran from medieval troubador songs to the dawn of the Classical symphony.
As musicologists supplied theories about ancient performing practices, established a hierarchy among medieval, Renaissance and Baroque composers, and fleshed out the lists of those composers' works, ensembles specializing in subdivisions within the genre flourished.


BROWNS STOP COLTS: Kosar's Passing Leads 38-21 Triumph
LEAD: On their painted, icy field, the Cleveland Browns disposed of one bad memory and one real obstacle today by beating the Indianapolis Colts in their American Conference semifinal playoff game.


Iranian and Iraqi Vessels Clash in Gulf
LEAD: Iran resumed artillery attacks on Iraq's second-largest city and the two sides fought a naval battle in the northern Persian Gulf, reports from Baghdad and Teheran said today.


A PRIVATE OWNER FOR PUBLIC HOUSING
LEAD: A 40-YEAR-OLD public housing project in New Rochelle, still solid but now shabby, graffiti-marked and in need of major repairs, is being sold to a private corporation that will renovate it at a cost of $7 million and continue renting it to 180 low-income families.


Melvin H. Worth Sr.; Executive, 84
LEAD: Melvin H. Worth Sr., retired president and chairman of Cosmopolitan Mutual Insurance Company, died of cancer of the colon Thursday in Staten Island Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Deerfield Beach, Fla.


STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES ACT TO SLOW EROSION OF FARM SOIL
LEAD: SOME farm land in the state is losing topsoil at a rate of 40 tons per acre per year, about 10 times as fast as it replaces itself, according to state conservation officials.


U.F.T. USES ITS POWER TO PULL A PUNCH
LEAD: AFTER Robert F. Wagner Jr. disclosed last week that he had threatened to resign as president of New York City's Board of Education unless Sandra Feldman relaxed her grip on the process of selecting the next schools chancellor, she said, ''It was my pleasure to be able to save Bobby Wagner's job and get an excellent chancellor in the process.


SMALL TALK AND BIG STAKES IN BEARS-REDSKINS MATCHUP
LEAD: The coach of the Chicago Bears, before his team's most significant game of the season, suggested that the defensive end of the Washington Redskins has ''the I.Q. of a grapefruit.'' Oh, yeah?
Well, Dexter Manley had a snappy answer for Mike Ditka.
Manley maintained that the coach has an ''ugly face.


FAIRFIELD 2000 SHOWS PROBLEMS ARE SIMILAR
LEAD: The recently released Fairfield 2000 Report now takes its place alongside Westchester 2000.
With it comes the recognition of just how many problems in the two counties are intertwined.


A STEADY GIRL WITH A BREAD KNIFE
LEAD:  LOVING ROGER  By Tim Parks. 151 pp. New York: Grove Press. $15.95.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Allendale  $385,000  11 Berkshire Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, slate roof, deck; taxes $4,500.
Lakewood  $154,000  125 Mountainview Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; wall-to-wall carpeting, fireplace, 2-car attached garage; taxes $2,500.


DATA UPDATE: January 10, 1987
LEAD:
*3*NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Oct. 87
Oct. 86
Change
Starts
152.3
165.7
-08%
Completions
153.6
174.5
-12%
Sales
672
675
0%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago


Local Foes Hamper New York's Bid for Collider
LEAD: When New York was selected last month as one of eight finalists in the national competition to become home state for the superconducting supercollider - the biggest and costliest tool for science research ever built - state officials expressed satisfaction.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  ANIMATION IN NORWALK  Eighteen prize-winning animated films are featured in the 20th Tourney of Animation to be shown at 7:30 P.M.
Friday through Jan. 18 at the SoNo Cinema, 15 Washington Street, South Norwalk.
A 5 P.M. matinee is scheduled on Saturday.


THE ROAD TO SELF-RELIANCE
LEAD: I hope the irony of the Nyack Boys School is not lost on Michael Norman.
The place where boys learned that the fundamental lesson of manhood is the ''lesson of separation'' and where ''the road to independence and self-reliance . . . insured forever the loneliness'' - that place became a therapeutic center for children with behavioral and emotional problems.


China Claims Nuclear Counterattack Power
LEAD: China said today that its strategic missile force has developed a nuclear counterattack capability.


THE PRIVATE PAIN OF INFERTILITY
LEAD: In reading Gwen Davis's article ''The Private Pain of Infertility'' (Dec. 6), I was struck by the many similarities to my own situation, and a few major differences.


Big Talents vs. the Big Screen
LEAD: FOR ONE REASON AND AN-other, some great performers don't fit easily onto the motion picture screen.
The camera wasn't kind to the Lunts in ''The Guardsman'' (1931), their first (and last) co-starring screen appearance.
Somewhere between the movie set and the movie theater, the grace and elegant humor that were evident in all of their theatrical performances evaporated.


S.M.U. Job Rejected
LEAD: BILL McCARTNEY, the head football coach at Colorado, changed his mind at the last minute last night about taking the Southern Methodist coaching job after consulting with his family, Colorado's athletic director, Bill Marolt, and the Colorado president, Gordon Gee, according to Doug Single, the S.M.U.


About Men; Shoveling
LEAD: THE MEN WHO LIVE ON MY ONE-BLOCK street are a banker, a lawyer, a television ad writer, an obstetrician, a librarian, a retired ophthalmologist and another college prof like me.
On mornings after a big snow, three or four of us will be out there at more or less the same time, shoveling the stuff out of our driveways and off our walks.


KENTUKY, AT HOME, UPSET BY AUBURN
LEAD: John Caylor sank a 3-point basket with 10 seconds left tonight as unranked Auburn stunned top-ranked Kentucky, 53-52.


OVER THEIR HEADS IN HISTORY
LEAD:  WINTER  A Novel of a Berlin Family.
By Len Deighton. 571 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Wider Testing For Radiation Urged in Study
LEAD: A major study of the monitoring of radiation at nuclear power plants has concluded that better equipment and procedures are needed in the plants and in nearby areas to achieve safe operations and inspire public confidence.


CHRONICLES OF THE PUMPHOUSE GANG
LEAD:  ALMOST HUMAN  A Journey into the World of Baboons.
By Shirley C. Strum.
Drawings by Deborah Ross.
Photographs. 294 pp.
New York: Random House. $22.50.


JILL L. JELENKO, STUDENT, WEDS ROBERT N. ANGEN
LEAD: Jill Leslie Jelenko and Robert Neal Angen were married yesterday at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
The Rev.
Peter Kreitler performed the ceremony.


Correction
LEAD: A Sunday television highlight listing and a front-page picture caption today in The Guide, section 2A, misstate Mike Nichols's connection with the ABC comedy series ''The Thorns.'' He is the executive producer.


FANS HAVE LITTLE SYMPATHY FOR SYRACUSE
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Special Gift Of Concerto Conducting
LEAD: LAST FALL, JORGE BOLET PLAYED A lovely run of performances of the Grieg Piano Concerto with the New York Philharmonic.
But what made them lovely was not just the pianist's own brand of commanding, diffident elegance.
It was also the orchestral accompaniment - forthright on its own; properly subservient yet never self-effacing in partnership with the pianist.


Arias: Whom Can He Trust?
LEAD: IT WAS MIDDAY AND THE President of Costa Rica was hungry.
Pausing just long enough to invite a visitor along, he hopped in his blue Honda Accord and drove to a nearby corner restaurant.
The President brought along his sunglasses but left his bodyguards behind.


Maybe the Party Will Thank Hart
LEAD: Contrary to some speculation, Gary Hart's latest caper may turn out to be a valuable gift to the Democratic Party.
He may turn out to be his party's deliverer in the coming electoral season.


Honors for Excellence
LEAD: THE RECOGNITION OF excellence is not a sure thing.
The maker of the better mousetrap may be in real trouble if the other fellow has the bigger ad budget.
They didn't know this back in the days when proverbs were coined.


PAMELA REYNOLDS, PHYSICIAN, IS WED
LEAD: At the Duke University Chapel in Durham, N.C., Dr.
Pamela Preston Reynolds, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Reynolds of Akron, Ohio, was married yesterday to Dr.
John Robert Ball, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Ball Jr. of Auburn, Ala.
The Rev.
Noel Calhoun, a Presbyterian minister, officiated.


How Far Will the New Travel Magazines Go?
LEAD: ITS publisher, Ronald A. Galotti, contends that Conde Nast's Traveler, which made its debut in September, is unique among travel magazines.
Several advertisers agree - which is why they withdrew their ads.


Hogmanay
LEAD: To the Editor: In his piece on the Scots' hogmanay (Travel, Nov. 29), Israel Shenker has resurrected an impressive list of folklore and folk customs about welcoming the New Year in Scotland.
Much of that applied, if it ever did, only to previous generations.


SAUDI PLAYS DOWN MARCOS PAINTINGS
LEAD: Adnan M. Khashoggi, the Saudi businessman, said today that at least a third of 31 paintings he bought from former President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines and his wife, Imelda, were reproductions of masterworks and that several ''cheap ones'' were among those turned over to the United States by


Fat Bear, Thin Bear and the U.S.; Is Soviet Growth Worth Betting On? Yes, a Little.
LEAD: The Soviet economy stagnates and it's clear that Mikhail Gorbachev is willing to undo a half-century of Stalinist central planning to get it moving again.
What's not clear is whether a successful fix would serve American interests.


WANTAGH EXTENSION IS DESIRABLE
LEAD: The letter to the editor from the Long Island Association  [ Dec. 13 ]  concerning the projected work on the interchange between the Meadowbrook and Northern State Parkways and the widening of the Northern State between the Wantagh and the Meadowbrook requires an answer.


BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 10, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
THE TOMMYKNOCKERS, by Stephen King.
(Putnam, $19.95.) Two writers' zealous attempt to
unearth mysterious artifacts creates nightmares
in a Maine village.
2
2
12
KALEIDOSCOPE, by Danielle Steel.


Boy's Return to Africa Barred
LEAD: Justice Harry A. Blackmun of the United States Supreme Court barred the State Department yesterday from returning a 9-year-old Zimbawean boy to his country until the court reviews the Government's arguments against legal attempts to block the boy's return.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: Air Travelers In Los Angeles Face New Delays


LEMON LAW BEARS FRUIT FOR CAR OWNER
LEAD: I would like to urge every car owner who qualifies to seek redress under the New York State Lemon Law and not through Autocap or the Better Business Bureau  [ ''Car Buyers Get a Referee in Disputes With Dealers,'' Dec. 13 ] .


Terrorism Stalks A Drama
LEAD: AIR FORCE COMMANDOS SNATCH A TERRORIST in Lebanon and bring him to the United States for trial.
The Justice Department is involved; the American Civil Liberties Union is involved.
Sy Resnik (played by Ron Liebman), the well-known defense attorney who also teaches law at the University of Pennsylvania, becomes involved, although not because he really wants to.


THE HIGH PRICE OF GARBAGE
LEAD: The sooner we face the undeniable fact that disposing of garbage costs a lot of money, the quicker we'll be able to solve our environmental difficulties.
I had hoped that the plight of the garbage barge would have raised our waste consciousness.
After all, it probably cost over $1,000 per ton to transport, inspect, incinerate and finally dispose of the garbage back on Long Island.


Sunday Observer; High-Flying Confusion
LEAD: AMERICANS ARE cruel to their journalists.
They say we would rather take cyanide than confess error.
Nonsense.
I am no different from the next journalist, and I am always eager to retract and apologize if I make an error.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Panama General on Visit  Manuel Antonio Noriega, the military strongman who has been criticized by Washington, is in the Dominican Republic on what he called a private visit.
Page 12.
Vikings and Browns Win  In the N.F.L. playoffs, the Vikings stunned the 49ers, who had the season's best record, 36-24.


DR. PATRICIA L. ROBERTS PLANS TO MARRY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley J. Roberts of Old Bethpage, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Patricia Lynne Roberts, to Dr.
Michael Stuart Rosenblatt, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred A. Rosenblatt of Margate, N.J.
A summer wedding is planned.


Hart Declines to Answer Query on Drug Use
LEAD: When asked today on a campaign stop here whether he had ever used drugs, Gary Hart told reporters, ''None of your business.''


DOCUMENTARY
LEAD:  At the Haunted End of the Day: A Profile of Sir William Walton  With Julian Bream, Yehudi Menuhin, Laurence Olivier, others.
Directed by Tony Palmer. 1981.
Kultur. 100 minutes. $59.95.


The World of Mothers and Daughters
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Indian Educator
LEAD: The Education Department said Thursday that John L. Sam had been named director of its $66 million Indian education programs.
Mr.
Sam, a 43-year-old member of the Cherokee Tribe, has been a Federal education official for the past decade and formerly taught in the Sand Springs, Okla., public schools.


HAVE AN URGE FOR A GOOD BOWL OF SOUP?
LEAD: IN winter I could eat soup every day.
For lunch, I like nothing better than a bowl of hot soup and a sandwich.
I also like seasonal winter soups for dinner, thick vegetable soups that are almost like stews, with additions of lentils, beans, pasta, rice or potatoes.
I like to serve them in large deep bowls, along with some fresh


SAVED BY HIS PROLETARIANISM
LEAD:  IN THE NAME OF THE WORKING CLASS  The Inside Story of the Hungarian Revolution.
By Sandor Kopacsi.
Translated by Daniel Stoffman and Judy Stoffman. 304 pp.
New York: Grove Press. $17.95.


GRETCHEN RICHTER PLANNING TO WED PAUL J. MASSEY JR.
LEAD: Announcement of the engagement of Gretchen Van Lear Richter to Paul J. Massey Jr. has been made by the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart A. Richter of Short Hills, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a Nov. 29 article from Concord, Mass., about efforts to ban swimming in Walden Pond in Concord, Mass., misstated the status of a concrete pier.
The pier was removed in 1983.


HOW TO INSTALL A LOCK ON A DOOR
LEAD: THE term ''lockset'' is used to describe collectively all door hardware (except hinges) that permit the door to be opened, closed and locked.
Usually a lockset consists of a lock with keys, a latch bolt, doorknobs and a strike plate, which is installed in the door jamb to receive the end of the latch bolt and hold the door shut.


MEASURING SUCCESS WITH A SCALE OF IMPS
LEAD: A small demon has long appeared in this column in enlarged form: the ''international match point,'' which will in future be described as an ''Imp'' and so conform to the practice of most bridge books and magazines.


Marion B. Reith Dead; Taught Aliens English
LEAD: Marion B. Reith, who founded the English in Action program, died of pneumonia Dec. 21 at Pomona (Calif.) Valley Community Hospital.
She was 91 years old and lived in Claremont, Calif.


SOMETHING FOR EVERYONE IN STORRS
LEAD: JACK COHAN, the director of the Jorgensen Auditorium at the University of Connecticut, faces the challenge each season of assembling a schedule that ''contains something for everyone.'' This time, he said, ''I think we've succeeded.''


Israeli Police Challenged on Palestinian Death
LEAD: An Israeli magazine asserts that the police investigating the sudden death of a Palestinian prisoner have rewritten their opinion ''to make it possible to close the file.''


POSTINGS: Leasing a Suite; Boesky's Space
LEAD: Last year, Ivan F. Boesky paid a record $100 million civil penalty for insider trading.
In March, he will begin serving a three-year prison sentence for conspiracy.
Clearly, he needs less office space.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  PERU, by Gordon Lish. (Scribners, $8.95.) A violent television newscast from Peru and a bump on the head jar a 50-year-old man into a remorseless recollection of a murder he committed as a child.
Told in an obsessively circular manner, the novel ''increases speed to a kind of frenzy,'' Stephen Dobyns said in The Book Review in 1986.


HART'S 1984 DEBTS MAKE THE 1988 CAMPAIGNS NERVOUS
LEAD: ON a national television program last week, a caller from Connecticut told Gary Hart that she was ''sick of hearing about your sleeping habits.''


Zaire Mission's Debts in New York Prompt Concern at U.N.
LEAD: Zaire's Permanent Mission to the United Nations owes landlords and companies in the New York region more than $150,000 in rent and other bills, with many of those debts outstanding for more than half a year, according to complaints filed with various official United States bodies by Zaire's creditors.


CHOICES BOTH GREAT AND SMALL
LEAD: THE rract of making a choice and all its implications have begun to take on a new meaning for me.
Most people, whether they make the right or wrong choice, usually have that option.
The degree varies, of course; should I remain at this job or look for another, should I stay with my husband or leave him, will


THE RIGHT GIFTS TO TAKE ABROAD
LEAD: A DELFT TILE of a blue sailing ship, a gift from a Dutch friend, hangs over our kitchen sink filling the blank space with sea voyages and adventure.
A miniature Puerto Rican ''coqui,'' decorates a shelf in my office, reminding me how the little green frog sings through the tropic nights.
It accompanied a birthday gift of local rum from a Puerto Rican friend.


ROBIN EISENBERG WEDS
LEAD: At the Woodmere (L.I.) Club, Robin Sue Eisenberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry M. Eisenberg of Hewlett Bay Park, L.I., was married last evening to Daniel B. Kula, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Kula of Jericho, L.I.
Rabbi Saul I. Teplitz and Cantor Lazar Wax officiated.
Mrs.
Kula, a graduate of George Washington University, is an account executive for Parfums Stern in Miami.


Gore Is Openly Challenging Jackson For Black Voters in Southern States
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr. is openly challenging the Rev.
Jesse Jackson for a share of the black vote in the 14 Southern and border states that on March 8 will choose delegates to the Democratic National Convention.


With Hope, Money Goes To Neediest
LEAD: ''Sorry I am late,'' Sophie Gluck of Brooklyn wrote in a note, along with her gift of $15 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
She requested that her contribution go to a needy older person.


Royal Cousin Weds Scholar
LEAD: The Earl of St.
Andrews married a Canadian scholar, Sylvana Tomaselli, today and became the first member of the royal family to wed in a civil ceremony in Britain.
Lord St.
Andrews, 25 years old, is the son of the Duke of Kent, a cousin of Queen Elizabeth II.
The bride, 30, a Roman Catholic and divorced, is a history research fellow at Cambridge University, where she met the Earl.


JODIE JUDD, A HORTICULTURIST, IS WEDD TO JEFF MORGAN
LEAD: Jodie Judd and Jeff Morgan were married yesterday on Great Camanoe Island, V.I., at the winter home of the bride's father, Eugene C. Judd of New York and Amagansett, L.I..
Sidney Jacobs, the Registrar for the British Virgin Islands, performed the ceremony.


Question Of the Week; Should The Knicks Trade for Mullin?
LEAD: There is no one in the N.B.A. that can make more of an impact for the Knicks than Chris Mullin.
He has the intellect that can help solidify the defense and a jump shot that would rock the Garden.
BOB LEE  Roslyn Heights, L.I.


LIBRARY USE AND L.I. GEOGRAPHY
LEAD: In response to your article of Dec. 6  [ ''Library Access Prompts Feud'' ] , I would like to make it clear that there is no ''feud'' between the Smithtown Library and the Commack Public Library.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  The Basement Grapes


ARIELLE BIENENSTOCK WEDS A PHYSICIAN
LEAD: &gt;The marriage of Arielle Nadine Bienenstock, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harry Bienenstock of Belle Harbor, Queens, to Dr.
David Kauver, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Abraham J. Kauver of Denver, took place yesterday at Temple Beth Sholom in Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbis Jacob Reiner and Bennett Rackman performed the ceremony.


Swallowing Hutton in 1,200 Bites
LEAD: THEY were taking turns at the microphone a few weeks ago in the auditorium of Shearson Lehman Brothers' data-processing center in downtown Manhattan.
About 225 managers entrusted with carrying out the firm's merger with E. F. Hutton &amp; Company lined up to give their weekly progress reports to Leonard V.


THE ARABS: A COLLISION OF CRISES UPSETS THE NEW AGENDA
LEAD: THE protest in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip has forced the issue of Israel and the Palestinians back to the top of the Arab world's agenda.
It has done so, however, at a time when the Arabs, increasingly focused on the hazards in the Persian Gulf war and the rivalries among themselves because of it, seem least prepared - or willing - to respond to the unrest.


In Gaza, Confrontation at Crossroads of History; The Old Ideologies
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Power Of Boards Challenged
LEAD: AS the elected directors of a co-op corporation, board members have long had the right to make management decisions without disclosing their reasons to the shareholders.


THE MYTHS OF HUNTING
LEAD: In explaining why he chooses not to hunt, gentle Hervie Haufler  [ ''Three-Generation Perspective of Hunting and Killing,'' Opinion page, Dec. 13 ]  shows he has bought two of the most powerful myths, both promoted by game agencies, that perpetuate the notions that hunting is necessary to reduce deer overpopulation and that the legendary conservationist John James Audubon is the prototype for combining kindness and killing No data support the overpopulation contention.


SPECIAL UNITS AIMING TO HASTEN DRUG CASES
LEAD: FIVE special prosecuting units for drug cases are being created in Connecticut this month, working with local police departments to insure that investigations withstand court tests and to target cases for speedy prosecution.
The units will be part of what state officials call Connecticut's most ambitious effort to step up drug enforcement.


YOUNG HOMELESS READERS
LEAD: It was just about a year ago when Elaine Mittelgluck, the young people's librarian of the Hastings-on-Hudson Public Library, decided that she had read just a bit too much about Westchester's burgeoning homeless population.


Does Clark Make the Yanks the Favorites?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


FANS HAVE LITTLE SYMPATHY FOR SYRACUSE
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 10, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
(Signet/NAL, $4.50.) A fairy tale, complete with
an aged king, an evil wizard and a mouse.
2
9
WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
(Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.


New Snow, Old Ice - and Old Excuses
LEAD: The big weekend snow that covered the Northeast would have caused mighty traffic problems all by itself.
But in many residential sections of New York City, it came on top of the thick ice still left from last Sunday night's fall.
With cars now swathed in snow and cemented in ice, some streets may not be cleared till the forsythia blossoms.


The Weather
LEAD: To the Editor: The Nov. 1 Q &amp; A column provided information about weather conditions for travelers.
Since March of last year, American Express has provided Accu-Weather forecasts to card members through our Global Assist Hotline.
The forecasts, updated twice daily, are available for 220 cities in the United States and throughout the world.


Unbidden, Confessions In a Dining Car
LEAD: IN my life, the two points between which I must routinely travel are Union Station in Washington, D.C., and Penn Station in Manhattan.
If I am feeling rushed, I pay a bit more for the Metroliner, which gets me back and forth a little faster.
Otherwise I take the regular train that stops for more pilgrims in its progress along the way.


Ortega: Can He Be Trusted?
LEAD: EARLY ON A HUMID MORNING in November, Daniel Ortega Saavedra boarded a jet in Managua and flew off to fight contras.
He was headed not for Nicaragua's rugged mountains or lush tropical rain forests, where combatants stalk one another, but for Washington, where he believes the contra war will ultimately be won or lost.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Street Smart  Starring Christopher Reeve, Morgan Freeman.
Directed by Jerry Schatzberg. 1987.
Media Home Entertainment. 97 minutes. $79.95.


FANS HAVE LITTLE SYMPATHY FOR SYRACUSE
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Frank Pace Jr., Former Secretary Of the Army and Executive, Dies
LEAD: Frank Pace Jr., a former Secretary of the Army and the first chairman of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, died of a heart attack Friday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 75 years old and lived in Greenwich.


THE ROAD TO SELF-RELIANCE
LEAD: Ralph Waldo Emerson warns us, in his essay ''Self-Reliance,'' not to drag about ''the corpse of memory.'' But Michael Norman drags his memory of childhood loneliness through all the phases of his maturation, calling it the road to self-reliance.
Romanticizing is dangerous.
All the current psychobabble -being your own person, not needing anyone, doing your own thing - boils down to being lonely.


Randolph K. Byers; Pediatrician and Neurologist, 91
LEAD: Dr.
Randolph K. Byers, a Milton, Mass., pediatrician and child neurologist, died of cardiac arrest Tuesday.
He was 91 years old.


A MASTER OF THE MINI-SERIES
LEAD: AMERICAN ACTORS ARE AS good as ours.
American technicians are as good as ours.
American executives are much more cowardly and will not risk their jobs.
Ours will.''


'PUBLIC OPINION IS QUITE VOLATILE'
LEAD: SHELDON R. GAWISER, 38 years old, owns a consulting concern in Westport that specializes in helping businesses collect and manage information.
He is also a recognized expert on polls, which the public will be seeing a lot of in the coming months of the Presidential campaign.


Shopping for Study Programs
LEAD: IT'S the time of year when teen-age students and their families discuss summer school, summer travel or a semester overseas.


New York Is to Buy Acreage on Hudson For Recreation Use
LEAD: New York State has announced an agreement in which it is to pay $13.3 million to buy a scenic peninsula in the Hudson River for conversion to a recreational area.


Miami-Florida St. May Go to Sept. 3
LEAD: Next season's game between the national champion, Miami, and second-ranked Florida State may be moved to Sept. 3 for prime-time national television, according to Wayne Hogan, a Florida State spokesman.


AFFORDABLE THAI FARE IN Westport
LEAD: THE Thai restaurant wave that seems to be flowing throughout the United States is rippling into Fairfield County.
First there was Bangkok in Danbury.
Now we have a new entry, Siam-o-cha, in Westport.
Tucked away in the largely unchanged upstairs premises formerly occupied by Chez Bach, Siam-o-cha (whose name means delicious Siam), is a happy addition to Westport's expanding ethnic dining scene.


The Big-Stakes Battleground of Shareholder Suits
LEAD: FOUR days after Black Monday, CJI Industries, a maker of coin and currency handling products, announced plans to merge with Triangle Industries, the nation's biggest packaging manufacturer and a company whose stock had been battered in the Oct. 19 market plunge.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  GUN AND KNIFE SHOW  One of two Winchester model 21 three barrel shotguns known to be in existence will be for sale at $50,000 in the Great Westchester Gun and Knife Show, in progress from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. today at the County Center in White Plains.
The weapon is owned by Dave Bichrest, a collector from Gray, Me.


Russell O. Blosser; Executive, 63
LEAD: Russell O. Blosser, senior vice president of the National Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream Improvement, died of a heart attack Dec. 29 in Denver.
He was 63 years old and lived in Norwalk, Conn.


ACTIONS AND WORDS AT PURCHASE CAMPUS
LEAD: The article about the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase  [ ''Performing Arts Center: Reviewing a Decade,'' Nov. 29 ]  speaks not only to local usage of a quasi-public facility and to programming but to larger issues of interaction between public institutions and private-sector giving.


WHY SHOULD NOBEL LAUREATES FORFEIT THE MONEY?
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the American Nobel Committee has no official connection with the Nobel Institutes in Norway and Sweden, we reflect the interests of some 100 American Nobel Laureates.
There are more Nobelists in the United States than the rest of the world combined.


CHAMBERS JURY TO TEST THE MEANING OF MOTIVE
LEAD: SINCE at least the 14th century, when English common law called it ''malice a prepense,'' judges and juries have struggled with the concept and the consequences of trying to gauge a killer's state of mind at the moment of killing.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THUMBS UP: The Life and Courageous Comeback of White House Press Secretary Jim Brady.
By Mollie Dickenson. (Morrow, $19.95.) Most of us are familiar with the tragic and heroic story of Jim Brady, the White House press secretary; now, Mollie Dickenson, a journalist, has given us a more complete portrait of the man.


Street Fashion; In Mink, Longer Is Better
LEAD: SKIRT lengths may be all over the lot these days, but coat lengths - especially fur-coat lengths - remain decidedly long.
And who can argue the logic?
Furs are supposed to keep one warm (in much of the nation recently one has needed all the warmth one can get), and fur coats can't serve that function adequately if they're cut off at the knees.


Salaries Inch Up - Sometimes
LEAD: JOHN H. GUTFREUND, the chief executive of Salomon, Inc., took a $2 million voluntary pay cut in 1987.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company is cutting brokers' compensation by 6 percent, and analysts say other brokerages mayfollow that lead.


U.P.I. News Service to Cut Its Local Coverage
LEAD: United Press International is planning to reduce its coverage of local news and instead concentrate on major news events in an effort to put the company back on a solid financial footing, a U.P.I. spokesman said today.


4 Former and Suspended Officers Are Accused in 2d Stun Gun Trial
LEAD: Two former New York City police officers and two suspended officers went on trial last week in the latest case stemming from accusations that suspects were tortured with an electronic stun gun at a Queens station house.


RAPPERS KEEP THEIR MUSIC'S CONTENT FRESH
LEAD: RAP IS HEALTHIER THAN IT'S ever been, although its death has been repeatedly forecast since it was born in the Bronx in the late 1970's.
In a typical week, half a dozen rap albums sit securely in the Top 40 of Billboard's black-albums chart, while the 12-inch single market flourishes with the diversity of an Arab bazaar.


2 Hurt in Shootings by Police
LEAD: Two men were shot by the police in Brooklyn and the South Bronx - 20 minutes apart - early yesterday, and one of them remained in critical condition last night, the police reported.


THE PRIVATE PAIN OF INFERTILITY
LEAD: Gwen Davis's article brought back all of the grievous memories of my five years of infertility treatments.
Her depiction of an in vitro fertilization cycle - in which couples gamble $5,000 and all of their hopes on a 10 percent long shot - is accurate.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, JANUARY 10, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-16


Salomon Brothers' John Gutfreund
LEAD: LAST MONTH, JOHN H. GUTFREUND, the chairman and chief executive of Salomon Brothers, Wall Street's largest investment banking house, completed the grueling task of fixing the annual bonuses for his senior managers.
There was a lot of bad news to be passed around, including that of his own compensation.


Estate Planning for Disabled Children
LEAD: WHEN parents of a disabled child draw up an estate plan, they face a concern that other parents do not.
While other adult children may be fully independent and in no need of a legacy, a disabled child may be left more vulnerable than ever by a parent's death.


Pro Slow Growth
LEAD: To the Editor:


Imperial Cycles: Bucks, Bullets and Bust
LEAD:  THE RISE AND FALL OF THE GREAT POWERS


Gorbachev and Hart on List of Admired Men
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Gary Hart are two of the 10 men most admired by Americans, the latest Gallup Poll says.


YANKEES LOSERS IN FREE-AGENT PITCHING PICTURE
LEAD: The Houston Astros' pitching staff is intact, Charlie Leibrandt has completed Kansas City's starting rotation, Detroit has Jack Morris and Frank Tanana back and California held onto Mike Witt.
Then there are the Yankees.


DOCUMENTARY
LEAD:  Mamet: Profile of a Writer  Produced and directed by Alan Benson; edited and presented by Melvyn Bragg.
Home Vision. 1-800-262-8600. 55 minutes. $39.95


A Hong Kong Satellite Looks Ahead to 1997
LEAD: TEN years ago Shatin was a quiet patch of farmland in Hong Kong's New Territories, with water buffalo pulling plows through geometric acres of rice paddies and fishermen's cottages along the Shing Mun River.
It was an evocation of rural China, even though it was only 10 miles north of the teeming city of Kowloon, separated from Hong Kong's busiest district by the steep Lion Rock


JILL WING TO WED HAROLD HECK JR., A LAWYER, IN MAY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Rodney G. Aller of Lakeville, Conn., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Aller's daughter Anne Jaquett Wing to Harold Daniel Heck Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Heck of Easton, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.


OUT OF CHAOS AND ORDER COMES JUDICIOUS MARRIAGE
LEAD: WE live in one of those 1930's not-quite-gracious Colonial houses that with imagination, money, time and hard work could be almost lovely.
When we bought it four years ago, my husband, Charlie, zealously and single-handedly began restructuring the neglected and overgrown two acres of land the house occupies.


HOME, HOME ON THE PUBLIC RANGE
LEAD:  THE KINGDOM IN THE COUNTRY  By James Conaway. 293 pp.
Boston: A Richard Todd Book/ Houghton Mifflin Company. $17.95.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  'MEET THE COMPOSER'


SRI LANKA: A NATION DISINTEGRATES
LEAD: Steven Weisman's article is a balanced analysis of a complex problem.
In the article, Sri Lankan President Junius Richard Jayewardene was quoted as saying: ''I don't mind giving in to India, I could not give in to Prabakaran  [ the Tamil guerrilla leader ] .'' Interestingly, this reflects the crux of the problem.


In Gaza, Confrontation at Crossroads of History; Ominous Arrests
LEAD: To the Editor:


CYNTHIA GOODWIN TO WED
LEAD: Cynthia Ann Goodwin, the travel and finance advertising sales manager for Vanity Fair magazine, and Timothy Francis Byrnes, a senior sales representative for the Harris Corporation, a computer company in New York, plan to be married March 19.
Mr. and Mrs.
Alton Bent Goodwin of Wellesley, Mass., have announced their daughter's engagement to the son of Mr.


WENDY SCHACK IS ENGAGED TO MARRY ALAN M. FORREST
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Julius B. Schack of Westbury, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Wendy Gail Schack to Alan Michael Forrest, a son of Joyce Forrest of New York and the late Milton Forrest.
A May wedding is planned.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  SEARCH FOR A SUPERTHEORY: From Atoms to Superstrings.
By Barry Parker. (Plenum Press, $21.95.) On the way to the Grand Unified Theory (GUT) charted in this book, we confront hoards of electrons, protons, neutrons, mesons and their discoverers, rushing by like billiard players burdened with eight-balls, positively and negatively charged.


A JULY WEDDING FOR AMY SCALERA
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph F. Scalera of Beaver, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Marie Scalera, to Donald Cameron Findlay 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Findlay Jr. of Elkhart, Ind.
A July wedding is planned.


PISTOL PETE AND BIRD: DREAM TEAMMATES
LEAD: I WAS standing at the head of the players' ramp just before game time, having small talk with Dennis D'Agostino, one of the Knicks' publicists.
The tipoff against the Phoenix Suns last Tuesday night was just a few minutes away and the Garden was about two-thirds full.
D'Agostino suddenly looked at his watch and then peered up at the game clock, which had counted down to zero.


THE EARLY EMPIRE
LEAD:  THE BINGHAMS OF LOUISVILLE  The Dark History Behind One of America's Great Fortunes.
By David Leon Chandler with Mary Voelz Chandler.
Illustrated. 292 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $17.95.


Question Of the Week; Should The Knicks Trade for Mullin?
LEAD: Chris Mullin may not be the missing link to make the Knicks a contender, but his unselfish style and excellent passing and shooting will contribute greatly.
ROGER L. GILDE  New York


Restricting Farming to Farmers
LEAD: Initiative 300 critics is that by strict enforcement of the tough constitutional language, the electorate's support of the constitutional amendment will weaken.


BRIDGEPORT TO PREMIERE BRITISH MUSICAL
LEAD: WHAT to call ''Blood Brothers''?
Is it a musical melodrama, a musical tragedy or, more singularly, a ''modern ballad opera brushed with legend,'' as one London reviewer described it.


HOW TO INSTALL A LOCK ON A DOOR
LEAD: THE term ''lockset'' is used to describe collectively all door hardware (except hinges) that permit the door to be opened, closed and locked.
Usually a lockset consists of a lock with keys, a latch bolt, doorknobs and a strike plate, which is installed in the door jamb to receive the end of the latch bolt and hold the door shut.


Moira Shearer: Still Chased by 'Red Shoes'
LEAD: MENTION THE NAME Moira Shearer and movie buffs will instantly smile and say:


Haiti Vote Panel Bars Duvalier Allies
LEAD: In a move that was could bring new violence in Haiti, the electoral council appointed by the military-led Government announced tonight that it had rejected 10 of 11 former associates of the deposed Duvalier dicatorship as candidates for president in an election Jan. 17.


WHEN FILM IS LOST...
LEAD: THE holidays are over, you've just finished your semiannual roll of film, and you're waiting for the prints to come back from the processor.
You wait and wait.
Weeks pass.
Could it be that your most treasured memories have vanished without a trace?


Correction
LEAD: An article on page 9 of the Travel section today about the Portman hotel in San Francisco identifies the hotel management incorrectly.
The property is managed by the Portman Hotel Company of Atlanta, which has affiliated with the Peninsula Group of Hong Kong for marketing purposes only.


Denounce Those Who Engage in Racism and Anti-Semitism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Refugee Family Facing Ouster
LEAD: AS Dr.
Tomas Koppany and his wife, Kornelia Nagy, tell it, they gave up prosperous jobs as lawyers in Hungary, a desirable apartment in Budapest, a summer cottage in a lake resort and a sizable bank account -not because they prefer poverty.


Appearance By Solo Sailor
LEAD: Tania Aebi, the 21-year-old sailor who recently circumnavigated the globe alone on a 26-foot sailboat, is scheduled to appear at the New York National Boat Show today and next Saturday and Sunday from noon to 4 P.M.
Her boat, the sailing sloop Varuna, will be on display throughout the show, along with a pictorial display of


TOTS ON THE FAST TRACK
LEAD:  MISEDUCATION  Preschoolers at Risk.
By David Elkind. 221 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Cloth, $16.95.
Paper, $7.95.


RADIO STATIONS AND SHOREHAM ISSUE
LEAD: More than one ''knowledgeable'' person has asked me why WGLI-AM agreed to continue to be member station of the Lilco emergency broadcast system  [ ''Emergency Broadcast Plan Decided,'' Dec. 13 ] .


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I am finishing my attic to add a workroom, so I want to add insulation to the roof (it is now on the attic floor).
I have been told to allow for ventilation above the insulation - between the insulation and the roof sheathing - but am not sure how to do this.
Can you tell me if this is really necessary, and if so where vents should be located?


'The Health of Nations'
LEAD: To the Editor:


FOR JAPANESE, POWER IN U.S. MARKETS IS HARD TO EXERCISE
LEAD: IN the high-stakes game of trade war, Japan's strong hand does not insure victory.


IDENTITY RECLAIMED, CONFUSION RAMPANT
LEAD: ''ORDERED, adjudged and resume the use of her maiden name, to wit: Kennedy.''


YONKERS PLAN ON CAR THIEVES
LEAD: A NEW Yonkers police program scheduled to take effect this month will give the police the right to stop any car between the hours of 1 A.M. and 5 A.M. that displays a special decal.
The decal allows the police to operate under the ''reasonable suspicion'' that the car is being stolen.


Question Of the Week; Should The Knicks Trade for Mullin?
LEAD: No way!
Coach Pitino is doing a great job with the pressure defense and he doesn't need any changes.
Mullin is a guard and we already have Jackson, Wilkins and Donovan.
DANNY PORITZKY
Chappaqua, N.Y.


POSTINGS: Putnam Project; Northward Ho!
LEAD: Most builders in New York City's northern suburbs are making two mistakes, according to Anthony J. Amicucci.
Either they overestimate how many people can afford high-priced, Westchester County houses, or they underestimate what customers will pay for homes farther north.


Q and A
LEAD:  Closing Without a Lawyer


James V. Siena, Former Pentagon Official
LEAD: James V. Siena, a former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense and an executive at the American Institute of Architects, died of cancer last Sunday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 55 years old and lived in Washington.


MARIA SICURELLI WEDS
LEAD: Maria Adriana Sicurelli, a daughter of Dr.
Robert J. Sicurelli of North Salem, N.Y., and Marie DiCapua of Brooklyn, was married last evening to Andrew Scott Wist, the son of Reba Psaty Wist of Brooklyn and the late Milton Wist.
Justice Martin Schneier of New York State Supreme Court in Brooklyn officiated at the St.


Anthony Lewis State Of Violence
LEAD: For all that Americans have learned about South Africa in recent years, we remain largely unfamiliar with the mechanisms of white control.
How does a government representing a small minority of the population actually exercise totalitarian dominion over the vast majority?


An Actor Gives New Direction to China's Stage
LEAD: YING RUOCHENG IS FAMILIAR to American audiences as the prison warden in Bernardo Bertolucci's new film ''The Last Emperor.'' However, in China, he is now primarily known not for his acting ability, but as the nation's Vice Minister of Culture.
In this powerful post he is presently at work on a broad reform of the performing arts.


MISS LONGOBARDO TO MARRY IN MAY
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Guy Longobardo of Bronxville, N.Y., and Amagansett, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alicia Anahid Longobardo, to Lance David Langston, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul D. Langston of Pittsburgh.
A May wedding is planned.


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
LEAD:  NIGHT SIEGE: THE HUDSON VALLEY U.F.O.
SIGHTINGS by Dr.
J.
Allen Hynek and Philip J. Imbrogno, with Bob Pratt.
Ballantine. 208 pages. $6.95.


SARAH E. THORNTON, FINANCIAL ANALYST, AND JOSEPH D. J. DOWNING ARE MARRIED
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church of Our Saviour in Manhattan was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Sarah Elizabeth Thornton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John V. Thornton of Bronxville, N.Y., to Joseph Dominic John Downing, a son of Gertrude Martin Downing of Pittsfield, Mass., and the late John F.


NEW COUNCIL TAKES ITS FIRST STEPS
LEAD: A NEW Yonkers government began work on an uncertain note last week, appointing an interim city manager while beginning the search for a full-time administrator and seeking a unified stand on the divisive housing desegregation issue.


A Top Machine Carries a Top Price
LEAD: THE Compaq Deskpro 386-20 personal computer is the most powerful PC an executive can buy.
It is certainly the fastest one I've ever used - and the most expensive, too.
Both its speed and price are likely to take your breath away.


U.S. Olympic Team Is Finally Set
LEAD: The figure-skating team that will represent the United States next month in the Winter Olympics in Calgary, Alberta, emerged today, after a hectic 24-hour period in which 12 of the 16 team members were determined and several judging decisions were questioned.


IN QUEENS, A DESIGN CENTER THAT LIVES UP TO ITS NAME
LEAD: There has been so extraordinary a flurry of publicity in the last couple of years surrounding the transformation of a group of old factory buildings in Long Island City into something called the International Design Center, New York - a set of showrooms for the design industry - that the whole project has seemed to take on an air of manifest destiny.


HAVING FUN, AIDING OTHERS
LEAD: Preservation Concert Jan. 10 - Pete Seeger will be the lead performer at a 4 P.M. benefit concert for Save the Village, a preservation group that is seeking to establish a historic waterfront district adjacent to Greenwich Village.
The concert, with refreshments at intermission, will be held at the chapel of St.


Toxic Cleanup Plan Moves Slowly Amid Criticism From Two Fronts
LEAD: A year after Congress toughened a 1980 law for cleaning up toxic waste sites, the Environmental Protection Agency is struggling to do the job Congress intended, caught between critics who say its efforts are not adequate and those who question whether the cleanup is the best use of the agency's resources.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: East Berlin  Question: To make the most of a day visiting East Berlin, do you recommend a guided tour or going on my own?
What costs are involved? -B.
B.
R., Cleveland Heights, Ohio  Answer: Travelers who feel they will be satisfied by a four-hour excursion to East Berlin should consider taking a bus tour arranged by a West Berlin travel agency.


What to Do With Worthless Options
LEAD: STOCK options took a bath in the October stock plunge, forcing corporate boards to wrestle with two problems: First, should they make up the losses for executives whose profits from options were wiped out by the collapse?
Second, given the market's volatility, how could options be tailored to provide a buffer against a repeat performance?


LATIN PEACE HOPES SEEM TO BE BLEAK BEFORE KEY TALKS
LEAD: The prospects for peace in Central America appear bleak as the region's leaders prepare to meet next week to judge the results of the peace plan they signed five months ago.


NEW YORKERS, ETC.
LEAD: YOU may well ask - her family certainly did - what Joan Hamburg was doing in her kitchen last week, in the middle of the night, cooking and baking.
Particularly as this occurred after the holidays, when she was not expecting company and there was absolutely no need for all that chopping and stirring.


Plan to Protect Bluefish Is Nearly Complete
LEAD: BLUEFISH have been abundant along the Atlantic coast for more than 10 years, so abundant that they have become the backbone of a multimillion-dollar marine sport fishing industry from Cape Cod to Cape May, N.J.
And now a Federal-state plan, aimed at insuring that the species is not overharvested by recreational or commercial interests, is nearing completion.


200 Protest Beating Death Of Black Man in a Texas Jail
LEAD: About 200 people gathered outside a church here today to protest the death of a black truck driver investigators say was killed in a beating by the police.


Body and Mind; The Drink-a-Day Lore
LEAD: MY FATHER, A soft-spoken, hard-working, heavy-smoking, meat-and-potatoes alcoholic, died the classic death of the mid-1950's.
Shortly after his 48th birthday, complaining of pain in his stomach, he spent a day in bed.
By afternoon, his heart, not his stomach, had stopped working.
The doctor explained that his coronary arteries had become ''filled with crud'' and so he had a fatal heart attack.


MONITORING DRUGS FOR THE AGED
LEAD: In his article ''Monitoring Drugs for the Aged'' (Body and Mind, Dec. 13), William Ira Bennett describes problems associated with drug side-effects, particularly in the elderly.


Group to Profile New York's History
LEAD: Nearly all New Yorkers know the Empire State Building as a towering symbol of their city, La Guardia Airport as a bustling memory of a legendary Mayor and Bryant Park as a place to avoid.
But they probably do not know that the Empire State Building replaced the original Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, that Fiorello La Guardia wanted to be a World War II general, or that Bryant


REPUBLICAN PARTY FLOATS ITS CAMPAIGN HOPES ON THE DOLLAR
LEAD: AS the 140-point plunge of the Dow Jones industrial average on Friday reminded Republican optimists, it would hardly be prudent to be smug.
What with the unknowable courses of things like the stock market, oil prices and the trade and budget deficits, a sour economy could rout the party from the White


Mubarak Begins Visit to Gulf States
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak, left, of Egypt with King Fahd in Riyadh, Saudi Araabia.
It was the first visit by an Egyptian head of state to Saudi Arabia since Egypt's 1979 peace treaty with Israel.
Page 3. (Reuters)


Oilers Eager To Face Broncos
LEAD: It is a tricky business figuring just what message the Houston Oilers' coach, Jerry Glanville, is sending to the Rocky Mountains.


IN AIDS RESEARCH, MONEY IS JUST THE START
LEAD: SEVEN years into an epidemic that is expected to kill more than 179,000 Americans by the end of 1991, Federal financing to fight AIDS is approaching the amount spent in the war on cancer.
Budget documents show that President Reagan plans to ask Congress for $1.3 billion in the next fiscal year to help the Public Health Service combat the epidemic, an increase of 37 percent over appropriations for the current year.


Chef at White House Quits After 4 Months
LEAD: John Hill, executive chef at the White House, resigned Friday, just four months after taking the job.


ONE-YEAR PACTS MAY BE MAKING A COMEBACK
LEAD: AT the rate the length of player contracts is shrinking, the players and the owners will soon be back to the days before free agents - the time of the one-year contract - or they will be immersed in a labor dispute that could severely intrude on the 1990 season.


REMEMBERING A CAT CALLED JENKINS
LEAD: I SPOTTED the cat at the other side of the road poised to bolt.
I slammed on the brakes but my front wheel caught it, and a pleasant day in the suburbs was plunged into confusion and gloom.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Boston; Condos to Rise On Pier Site
LEAD: A FORKED pier on the edge of downtown Boston will soon be the site of a condominium complex to be known as Burroughs Wharf.


Princeton Alters Plan For Jewish Center
LEAD: PRINCETON UNIVERSITY has revised its plans for a Center for Jewish Life, which were put on hold at the end of 1986 because the major contributor, Ivan Boesky, had run into trouble with the Securities and Exchange Commission and withdrawn his $750,000 pledge.


Verbatim: Britain's 'Cure'
LEAD: 'They used, when I first came in, to talk about us in terms of the British disease.
Now they talk about us and say, ''Look, Britain has got the cure.
Come to Britain to see how Britain has done it.'' That is an enormous turn-round.
And it has brought hope to others as well.'  Margaret Thatcher in an interview last week on the occasion of her becoming Britain's longest-serving Prime Minister of the 20th century.


The Dance: Program By Louis
LEAD: THE Murray Louis Dance Company and the Nikolais Dance Theater of Alwin Nikolais have been sharing a season at the Joyce Theater.
Usually, the two troupes have been sharing the programs, as well.
But on Friday night the program consisted entirely of works by Mr.
Louis for his eight-member company.
They showed Mr.


Panel Says MX Guidance Problems Continue
LEAD: The guidance systems used for aiming MX missiles are continuing to fail in tests at an alarming rate, the House Armed Services Committee reported today.


N.F.C. Playoffs; Vikings Peaking At the Perfect Time
LEAD: Obviously, the Minnesota Vikings are doing many things right in the National Football League playoffs, and their timing could not be better.


'Poor' Billionaire Is Returning Home
LEAD: This is one of the few cities in the world where Preston Robert Tisch could feel poor.
Not that Mr.
Tisch lacks money.
He can't tell you exactly how much he has, but he estimates his fortune as just under $1 billion.


Opera: 'Sir John in Love,' at Lehman College
LEAD: RALPH Vaughan Williams's ''Sir John in Love'' is probably the closest approach before Britten's ''Midsummer Night's Dream'' to a satisfactory Shakespeare opera in English.
The Bronx Opera Company opened its 20th-anniversary season with a new production of the piece (which it first revived in 1978) Saturday evening at the Lehman College Theater, in the Bronx.


Schultz Wants a Curb
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association must stop trying to legislate integrity, its executive director, Dick Schultz, said today in remarks opening the 82d annual convention.


Question Box
LEAD: QUESTION: Did Paul (Bear) Bryant coach the most Heisman Trophy winners?
In a head-coaching career that spanned 38 years at four colleges from 1945 to 1982 and resulted in 323 victories, Bryant saw only one of his players voted the Heisman Trophy, and it wasn't even a player at Alabama, where Bryant coached for 25 years.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, JANUARY 11, 1988
LEAD:  Markets


Koch Is to Hold Talks With Theater Council
LEAD: The city's relationship with Broadway theater is to be the subject of talks this morning between Mayor Koch and a panel that has accused him in the past of ignoring its suggestions: his Theater Advisory Council.


U.S. JOB OFFER FOR TOUGH PRINCIPAL
LEAD: Joe Clark, the Paterson, N.J., high school principal whose tough actions have led to conflict with the local school board, has been offered a post in the Reagan Administration, a White House official said yesterday.


A Brazilian Parable of Furniture and Computers
LEAD: To the Editor:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: AMR Corp., Dallas-Fort Worth Airport, and its American Airlines subsidiary announced that John C. Pope had resigned as senior vice president of finance and chief financial officer to become executive vice president of finance at United Airlines


Horse Racing; Funistrada Wins First Lady
LEAD: Funistrada, purchased two months ago for $810,000, earned back only a fraction of that price today, but she proved her class by rallying to beat a stellar field in the First Lady Handicap at Gulfstream Park.


At Harlem Church Ceremony, Koch Attacks Racism
LEAD: The Rev.
Frank C. Cummings, presiding bishop, during the rededication of the Metropolitan African Methodist Episcopal Church on West 135th Street.
With him are David N. Dinkins, left, Manhattan


Skiing, New York City-Style
LEAD: A man ventured to Vermont on a recent weekend seeking the tranquillity of mountain vistas.
It turned out to be one of the busiest weekends of the season and skiing was more of an urban experience: brief periods of skiing and long periods of standing in line.


2 Brokerages Penalized
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers said Friday that its surveillance committee began disciplinary action against two brokerage firms, R. G. Dickinson &amp; Company of Des Moines and Vail Securities Investment Inc. of Vail, Colo.
The association said both cases focus on the improper use of its Small Order Execution System, a computerized system that automatically executes orders.


A Day for Winter Sports
LEAD: With sunny skies and crisp temperatures providing near perfect conditions for sledding, Shay Coe pulled Gidon Shocken up a small hill in Washington Square Park.
At Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx, Betty Oleaga, a park ranger, gave a lesson in cross-country skiing.
For those planning for the outdoors in warmer weather, there was the Boat Show at the Jacob K.


Grand Jury Isn't Finished With Arizona Governor
LEAD: The state grand jury that has indicted Gov.
Evan Mecham on six felony counts will take a few weeks off but has not concluded its investigation of him, Attorney General Bob Corbin said today.


Remark on Maimed Official Brings Demand for Apology
LEAD: The District Attorney here has demanded an apology from a City Councilman who said the prosecutor won his election only because he lost a leg fighting in Vietnam.


Team of 100 Will Battle Building Industry Graft
LEAD: In a combined drive against corruption and racketeering in New York City's construction industry, state and city officials say they are assembling a unit of more than 100 prosecutors, investigators, auditors and other personnel.


False Picture Given Of Highway Fatalities
LEAD: To the Editor:


Retailers Seek to Use Scanners More
LEAD: For a dozen years, general retailers and apparel and textile manufacturers have envied the supermarket industry's black-and-white bar code, which has helped speed customers through checkouts.
But the vast number of general merchandise items -in many different sizes and shapes -had seemed to be an obstacle to wider use of bar-code scanners.


DR. LEONORE BETH MAX WED TO J. S. SILVERBERG
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
Leonore Beth Max to Jonathan Seth Silverberg took place yesterday at the Faculty House at Columbia University.
Rabbi Alexander M. Schindler performed the ceremony.


Edward V. Hickey Jr., Federal Maritime Commissioner, 52
LEAD: Edward V. Hickey Jr., chairman of the Federal Maritime Commission since 1985, died unexpectedly of heart failure on Saturday at his home in Falls Church, Va.
He was 52 years old.


On the Supply Side
LEAD: To the Editor:


Diplomacy to Rescue
LEAD: According to diplomatic sources here, orders have gone out from Tokyo to a Japanese whaling ship in Antarctica that it not harpoon any whales, at least until the end of Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita's visit to Washington this week.


GAINS ARE PROVING ELUSIVE FOR HAIG
LEAD: In his hotel suite overlooking this snow-draped city, Alexander M. Haig Jr. finishes his morning coffee and prepares, once more, to bundle up and shake hands at a factory gate.


KARYN SUSAN STIEFEL WED TO ASHER A. BLASS ON L.I.
LEAD: At Temple Ohr Torah in North Woodmere, L.I., Karyn Susan Stiefel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Stiefel of West Hempstead, L.I., was married yesterday to Asher Ansel Blass, a son of Lorell Blass of Herzliya, Israel, and the late Dr.
Judd Blass.
Rabbi Jonathan Blass, the brother of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, page C26 of The Home Section last week, opposite the television listings, bore an incorrect date.
The page, carrying articles about music, radio and television, should have been headed ''Thursday, Jan. 7.''


Clear for Take-Off
LEAD: Last year Tom Webster may have been willing to sell his soul to the doctor just to hear him say it was O.K. to fly.
The former Ranger coach suffered from a disorder that grounded him from flying and forced him to step down from a job he waited a lifetime to receive.


Two Youths Are Shot Outside Skating Rink
LEAD: Two youths were wounded, one of them critically, in a shooting yesterday afternoon outside a popular roller skating rink in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, the police said.


BUSINESSES HELP THE NEEDIEST
LEAD: This season the New York Graphic Society, fine art publishers based in Greenwich, Conn., adopted a new theme for its annual holiday art sale: ''Help the Homeless.''


Off Season for Baseball Isn't What It Used to Be
LEAD: IN the old days, Casey Stengel used to drive a taxicab in Kansas City to pay the bills, Walter Johnson dug postholes for the Idaho Telephone Company, Smoky Joe Wood and countless other baseball players spent their winters working the family farm and Rube Marquard passed three winters hoofing round the vaudeville circuit on stage with his wife, Blossom


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''A political dialogue is established.
We believe a Soviet-Chinese summit could be its logical extension.''  - Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  [ A1:6. ]


STICKS AND STONES ARE FLYING AS BUSH-DOLE RIVALRY HEATS
LEAD: Democrats have always relished political brawling.
The Republicans say they prefer campaigns run according to the rules of engagement laid down by Emily Post.


U.S. Legislators And Aid Group Going to Hanoi
LEAD: Although Vietnam and the United States have no diplomatic relations, three Congressional delegations are visiting Hanoi over the next two weeks.
So are an American humanitarian aid mission and a technical team looking for missing servicemen.


Colorado Avalanche Leaves 2 Dead and 1 Missing
LEAD: An avalanche roared down a mountain pass near this resort, killing two skiers today, the authorities said.
A third skier was missing.


Fitness; Exercising Carries Risks With Rewards
LEAD: THE death last week of the retired professional basketball player Pete Maravich offers a sober lesson for anyone who exercises or is thinking of exercising.
Maravich, who was 40 years old, collapsed and died of sudden cardiac arrest while playing basketball with friends in a church gymnasium in Pasadena,


Intimidated Colombia Courts Yield to Drug Barons
LEAD: Demoralized by corruption and virtually paralyzed by fear, Colombia's courts have signaled their unwillingness to continue fighting this country's powerful drug barons.


Hong Kong Market Shift
LEAD: Hong Kong's stock exchange, stunned a week ago by the arrests of three top officials, announced a management shake-up on Saturday.


Presidential Birthday Call
LEAD: President Reagan telephoned former President Richard M. Nixon on Saturday to wish him a happy 75th birthday, the White House said.
No details of the conversation were released.


U.S. Urged to Cut Reliance on Nuclear Arms
LEAD: A bipartisan Pentagon commission will recommend to President Reagan on Tuesday that the United States play down its reliance on nuclear weapons and shift toward a strategy of deterrence that gives greater emphasis to more advanced and accurate non-nuclear weapons.


Memphis Journal; Where Barbecue Lovers Go Simply Hog Wild
LEAD: A whole lot of people, including some Kansas Citians, many North Carolinians and most Texans, claim distinction when it comes to cooking and enjoying barbecue.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 10, 1988:  MONDAY  La-Z-Boy Chair Co...Phillips Petroleum  Oxford Indus  TUESDAY  Diversified Energies...TECO Energy  Procter &amp; Gamble  WEDNESDAY  Bard (CR)...Walgreen Co  Pacificorp...Wisconsin Pwr &amp; Lt  Transco Energy...Woolworth (FW) Co  USLIFE Inc Fd


Learning Democracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Brady Report: Looking for Flaws; Market Makers Receive Criticism and Sympathy
LEAD: The Presidential panel that evaluated the performance of market makers in October's stock plunge criticized the New York Stock Exchange specialists, although it acknowledged that they were faced with unprecedented conditions.


Israeli Army Reinforces Troops in Gaza
LEAD: The Israeli Army poured reinforcements into the Gaza Strip today but failed to quell continued violence as two more Palestinians died of army gunshot wounds.


Warsaw Journal; A Dream House? The Poles Just Keep Dreaming
LEAD: The white clapboard bungalow, four rooms, kitchen, bath and carport, seems better suited to Levittown than to Lublin.


Study Says Inspectors Overlooked Violations
LEAD: Environmental inspectors are overlooking more than half the serious violations at facilities handling and storing hazardous waste, a Congressional study says.


Back on Road, Nets Lose to the Bucks
LEAD: Desperate for a victory after four losses in their previous five games, the Milwaukee Bucks found the perfect solution today: the Nets.


Bears Lose and Payton's Career Ends
LEAD: The N.F.L.'s leading career rusher, Walter Payton, who has announced his retirement, on the sidelines in Chicago yesterday after the Bears were eliminated from the playoffs by the Redskins, 21-17.
In Denver, the Broncos beat the Oilers, 34-10.
SportsMonday, page C1. (AP)


A New Handle on Third World Debt
LEAD: Major banks are reported to be unenthusiastic about the novel debt-relief scheme cooked up by Mexico and the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company.
The reluctance of other big players may limit the scheme's effectiveness.
But the Mexican arrangement still could open a promising new chapter in the third world's crisis of overborrowing.


Business and the Law; Tactic on Witness Draws Judge's Ire
LEAD: WHEN a lawyer for a major financial underwriter refused last month to produce a company executive at a trial in San Diego, the Federal District Court judge supervising the case decided he had heard enough.


TV Reviews; 'Evil in Clear River,' With Lindsay Wagner
LEAD: CONFRONTING the disease of anti-Semitism, ''Evil in Clear River'' gets the symptoms right but is curiously vague about the root causes.
On Channel 7 at 9 this evening, the television movie is, according to a press release, ''a fictionalized drama suggested by real events.'' The fictionalizing seems to have left reality decidedly fudged.


After 17 Years Buried in Ice, Airplane Flies in Antarctica
LEAD: Seventeen years after it crashed on takeoff at a remote site in the Antarctic, a ski-equipped Hercules aircraft Sunday flew over the ice and snow that had once buried all but three feet of its tail.


MISS WALLACH, ACCOUNTANT, MARRIES ERIC MATZA ON L.I.
LEAD: At the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I., Robin Gay Wallach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Wallach of Malverne, L.I., was married yesterday to Eric Matza, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hyman Matza of Valley Stream, L.I.
Rabbi Theodore Steinberg officiated.


Chevron-Rhone Deal
LEAD: The Chevron Corporation said its subsidiary, the Chevron Chemical Company, would assume management responsibility for Orogil S.A., which it owns jointly with Rhone-Poulenc, a French chemical company.
Chevron said it might also acquire Rhone-Poulenc's 50 percent interest in the European manufacturer of petroleum additives in the future.


Opera: Hans Sotin as Wotan In Wagner's 'Rheingold'
LEAD: WITH its new production of ''Das Rheingold,'' the Metropolitan Opera has created a series of visual effects befitting the grandeur of Wagner's mythic tale.
At the same time, it has fashioned, through the sheer richness of imagery, a backdrop against which only the most heroic of singers can hope to compete for attention.


Verbeek's 3 Goals Do Trick for Devils
LEAD: Ron Hextall, the temperamental Flyer goaltender, was thrown out of tonight's game against the Devils with his team trailing by two goals midway through the first period.


Dukakis, Shunning Manager Label, Incorporates Oratory of Compassion
LEAD: It was a classic Democratic tableau: rich with ethnicity, populated by children and senior citizens, presided over by a candidate voicing compassion and concern.


Cabaret: Judith Cohen Returns to the Ballroom
LEAD: THE return to the Ballroom, at 253 West 28th Street, of Judith Cohen, one of the most popular figures in the 1970's cabaret revival, is a reminder of how, even in a milieu that treasures nostalgia, styles come and go.


Burmese Train Bomb Kills 8; Tie to Anti-Rebel Drive Seen
LEAD: A bomb exploded on a Burmese passenger train arriving in Rangoon from Mandalay today, killing at least eight people and wounding 38, the official Burmese radio reported tonight.


Dole Assails Bush Staff
LEAD: Bob Dole said today that the distribution of a negative article about him by the staff of Vice President Bush was similar to the derailment of Joseph R. Biden Jr.'s Presidential campaign by Michael S. Dukakis's campaign staff.


Noriega Is Home After Trip
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega returned today from an unexpected weekend visit to the Dominican Republic, ending speculation that his trip might be a flight into exile.


Reaching for Cognac, Seagram Is Blocked
LEAD: The Seagram Company has learned that it is not easy to wed a sexy French company like Martell &amp; Compagnie, the renowned cognac house.


Move to Require Recycling Gains In City Council
LEAD: Frustrated by the slow pace of the fledgling recycling efforts in New York City, 16 City Council members are backing legislation that would make recycling mandatory citywide and set a four-year goal of reusing a fourth of the city's garbage.


Figure Skating; Boitano, Thomas In Good Shape
LEAD: In figure skating, reputation is everything.


JUDITH TROSSMAN IS WED
LEAD: Judith L. Trossman, an editor in the communications department at the accounting firm of Peat Marwick Main &amp; Company in Montvale, N.J., was married in Manhattan yesterday to Dr.
Alvin Ruthenberg, a dentist in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Andre Unger officiated at the Village Green.
The bride is the daughter of Shirley Newman of Schenectady, N.Y., and Sanford Lindy of West Hartford, Conn.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday


Rangers Fall to Sabres
LEAD: Appalled at how little the play of his team in the first period resembled its performances of the last three weeks, Coach Michel Bergeron proceeded to tinker with its cast tonight.
Thus reorganized, the Rangers for two periods struggled to act in concert.
They wound up, however, producing only an old and disturbingly familiar encore.


Ballet: The Kirov's 'Giselle' in Paris
LEAD: Yekaterina Maksimova and Vladimir Vasiliev, two of the greatest dancers the Bolshoi Ballet has ever produced, are now in their late 40's - nearly three decades away from their 1959 New York debut with the company from Moscow.
It was an unforgettable beginning that made them international favorites.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption Saturday with an article about the play ''Half Deserted Streets'' misidentified the actor at right.
He was Michael Imperioli.


Congress Faces New Battle on Media Ownership
LEAD: Congress seems poised for a new and rancorous debate over whether there should be a ban on ownership of a daily newspaper and a television station in the same city.


GORBACHEV OFFERS A SUMMIT MEETING WITH THE CHINESE
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev proposed a summit meeting with China's leadership in an interview published today in a Chinese magazine.


2 Homeless Men Found Dead After Cold Night
LEAD: Two homeless men were found dead in Manhattan yesterday morning, the police said, and both appeared to have died of natural causes.


Knicks Top Celtics on 'Charm'
LEAD: Rick Pitino is noted for his ability to movitate his players.
He did it last year when his Providence College team went to the Final Four.
And he is trying to use some of that same psychology in his rookie season as the Knick coach.


Oil Discounts By Saudis Are Reported
LEAD: Losing patience with price discounting by other members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, Saudi Arabia has introduced a discount plan to insure it will hold on to its major American customers, a respected trade journal and industry experts said.


West Berlin Links Woman Sought In Disco Bombing to Palestinians
LEAD: The police suspect that a West Berlin woman working for Palestinian terrorists planted the bomb that killed two American soldiers and a Turkish woman and wounded 229 people in a West Berlin discotheque in April 1986, the authorities said today.


ERIC M. BREINDEL WEDS MS. JACOBY
LEAD: Tamar Jacoby, a senior writer at Newsweek, and Eric M. Breindel, the editorial page editor and a columnist for The New York Post, were married yesterday in Manhattan at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph H. Breindel.
Rabbis Judah Nadich and Arthur Hertzberg officiated.


Georgetown Halts DePaul Rally, 74-64
LEAD: Perry McDonald scored 16 points and Charles Smith, a reserve guard, added 15 today as Georgetown fought off a late rally by DePaul to defeat the Blue Demons, 74-64.


Computerized Honors
LEAD: Ever since baseball got things started in Cooperstown, athletic halls of fame have proliferated.
In addition to such obvious sports as football, basketball, tennis and golf, there are now halls for just about every athletic endeavor from rodeo to roller skating.


Mirth Control
LEAD: Four new sitcoms do not rely on laugh tracks: TV writers will now explore new forms of timing and content.
Such lofty talk betrays the art of television comedy.
What better typifies it than the sound of raucous laughter at dumb jokes?


John Cade, Political Strategist, 59
LEAD: John Cade, the political strategist who masterminded the 1979 campaign that made Dave Treen Louisiana's first Republican Governor since Reconstruction, died Friday at the age of 59.


Gasoline Tax Would Hurt Rural America
LEAD: To the Editor:


Disqualified Haitian Candidates Expected to Fight Panel's Action
LEAD: Many Haitians and Western diplomats said today that they expected former associates of the deposed Duvalier dictatorship to appeal the rejection of their candidacies for the presidential election scheduled for Jan. 17.


Why New Delhi's Plans Just Don't Work
LEAD: Declaring population growth to be India's most serious problem, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi doubled expenditures for health and family planning services in the last two years.
But the country's own experts say they have been disappointed by the results so far.


GIULIANI SAYS HE IS AVAILABLE FOR SENATE SEAT
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani said last night that he would be available to run for the United States Senate if an acceptable candidate could be chosen quickly to succeed him as United States Attorney in Manhattan.


Books of The Times
LEAD: HE GOT HUNGRY AND FORGOT HIS MANNERS.
A Fable.
By Jimmy Breslin. 275 pages.
Ticknor &amp; Fields/Houghton Mifflin. $17.95.


India's Birth-Rate Burden: One Northern Village Tells the Story
LEAD: Looking drawn and tired, Ram Kumari all but admitted that she was unlikely to become pregnant again.
In the last 20 years, she had given birth to six children, only four of whom survived, and now her husband was weak and ailing, unable to farm or harvest this year's rice.


U.S. Still Needs To Buy Grain
LEAD: The United States, the world's leading grower of grain, also is a major importer.
The reason, according to farmers and policy makers, lies in the conflicting goals of the Federal farm program, and in global competition.


Jet Passenger Discharged
LEAD: A USAir jetliner made an unscheduled stop in Kansas City early Saturday to discharge an intoxicated passenger who tried unsuccessfully to open the cockpit door and an outer door during the flight, officials said.
Federal agents arrested the man, who was identified only as a 24-year-old San Diego resident.


PLAN URGES NEW LOOK AT TERMINAL By RICHARD LEVINE
LEAD: The Metro-North Commuter Railroad would like to make Grand Central Terminal a destination in its own right and not just a place to catch a train.


Sports World Specials; Decoding Baseball
LEAD: Baseball has long been known as the national pastime.
But in recent years satellite transmissions have given the sport true national scope, at least for the 2 million or so Americans with satellite dishes connected to their television sets.


Dollar Up; Tokyo Stocks Fall
LEAD: The dollar was trading in mid-afternoon at 128.50 yen, slightly above its closing price of 128.30 yen Friday in New York.
But Tokyo stocks fell 1.3 percent today in thin trading as Wall Street's 140-point plunge on Friday reminded traders of the October stock market collapse.


Rise Predicted In Oil Demand
LEAD: The International Energy Agency has raised its estimates of world oil consumption to more than 50 million barrels a day for most of this year, about a million barrels a day more than previously forecast, according to a report to be released Monday.


Philippines' Delay Is Causing $1 Billion in Aid to Languish
LEAD: Some $1.5 billion in international aid available to the Philippines is stuck in the pipeline awaiting decisions on how it should be spent, according to officials of the State Department, Pentagon and Agency for International Development.


Bid for IU Is a Key Part Of Neoax Leader's Plan
LEAD: Louis A. Guzzetti Jr. is president and chief executive of Neoax Inc., which had a more recognizable name when it was known as the White Motor Corporation.


Memo to Schools Chief: A System Adrift
LEAD: At the Bronx High School of Science, one of New York City's premier public schools, more than 300 windows have been shattered since last summer.
But because of a union contract, only half have been fixed, leaving the school with the aura of an abandoned building rather than a place of achievement.


Kennedy vs. Murdoch: Test of Motives
LEAD: In a city with a distinguished political tradition of grudges and vendettas, some people are asking what is really behind Senator Edward M. Kennedy's hot battle with the publisher Rupert Murdoch.


Takeshita Ready for U.S. Visit
LEAD: As Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita departs for his first state meeting with President Reagan, Japan may be in its strongest position in years to turn aside American criticism.


It Takes Single-Minded Zeal to Protect New York's Landmarks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brooklyn Philharmonic And 'Meet the Moderns'
LEAD: The Brooklyn Philharmonic under the direction of Lukas Foss will give four concerts this season in its ''Meet the Moderns'' series, with programs including seven world premieres, three United States premieres and five New York City premieres.


Groups Are Bracing to Help More Refugees on Slim Funds
LEAD: Private American aid organizations, bracing for a substantial increase in foreign refugees seeking new homes in the United States, are being advised by the State Department that they cannot expect more money to cover rising costs.


Mr. Bush's Skeleton
LEAD: The questions Vice President Bush's campaign is raising about Senator Bob Dole's finances seem too contrived and nit-picking - even in this year of The Skeleton in the Closet - to divert inquiry from Mr.
Bush's own involvement in the Reagan Administration's Iran-contra scandal.


New York City to Reassess Zoning Trade-Offs
LEAD: Amid a heightened sensitivity about development in New York City, a range of officials - from Mayor Koch to some of his sharpest critics - are calling for a reassessment of the widespread practice of trading zoning variances for promises of public amenities.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; Executive in Demand - In Bankruptcy Court
LEAD: Philip B. Schwab's formal job description could be, and often is, president of any one of several construction, demolition or heavy equipment companies based in the New York City area.
But to hear his creditors tell it, sometimes in court testimony, he is in the bamboozle business - has been for years.


Lenox Hill Nurses Vote to End Their Strike
LEAD: Nurses at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan, who have been on strike since last Tuesday, approved a two-year contract yesterday, officials of the nurses' union and the hospital said.
The contract provides for raises and improved benefits.


Western Union Picks Chief and a Chairman
LEAD: The Western Union Corporation which has just completed a major financial restructuring directed by Bennett S. LeBow, its controlling stockholder, has announced its new management lineup.


Jazz: Philly Connection
LEAD: THE Philly Connection, a group consisting of the vibraphonist Khan Jamal, the bassist Jamaaladeen Tacuma, and the drummer Dennis Alston came to Jazztrack on Saturday night to have fun.
All three are virtuosos, and listening to their intense first set was like overhearing a conversation by friends who haven't seen each o erern n ara


It's Only Snow
LEAD: An eight-inch snowstorm that caused an official closing of the Federal Government on Friday was no match for the two main participants in one of Washington's longest-running public forums.
It was the 101st monthly appearance by Commissioner of Labor Statistics, Janet L. Norwood, before the Joint Economic Committee of Congress to explain the latest employment figures.


'Conserving America,' Documentary on PBS
LEAD: ''CONSERVING AMERICA'' is refreshing; it's about ordinary people as much as it's about the environment.
Ordinary people may fight to protect marshes, swamps and prairie potholes not so much because wetlands are consecrated as because people like them.
Documentaries about the environmental movement sometimes forget people; ''Conserving America,'' on


IN THE BATTLEGROUND OF GAZA, PARENTS JOIN IN YOUTHS' ZEAL
LEAD: A battered white Peugeot pulled up to the roadblock the Palestinians had thrown across the main highway through the Gaza Strip, and the driver opened the trunk to reveal his cargo: eggplant, tomatoes, scallions and potatoes.


In Era of AIDS, 'Safe Sex' Becomes the Latest Campus Crusade
LEAD: ''he talk was turning reflective at Phi Kappa Psi, a white-columned fraternity house on the campus of Syracuse University.
Sitting around the big brick fireplace recently, the brothers considered the rituals of dating.


Cabaret: Jimmy Webb Sings Webb at Wallman's
LEAD: THE songs of Jimmy Webb, whose hits for Glen Campbell, the Fifth Dimension and Richard Harris made him the ranking wunderkind of West Coast songwriters in late 1960's, are defined by an unblushingly effulgent romanticism.
From early hits like ''Up Up and Away'' and ''MacArthur Park'' to recent songs like the lovely ballad ''Skywriter,'' which he performed at Jan Wallman's on Friday, his music strains against the conventional boundaries of pop form toward an operatic breadth and expressiveness.


Punish the Mother, Not the Daughter
LEAD: Judith Clark, a former member of the Weather Underground, has spent the last six years behind bars for her part in a 1981 robbery that resulted in the death of two policemen and an armored truck guard.
Last month, she was suddenly transferred from New York State's penitentiary for women in Westchester County to a Federal facility in Tucson, Ariz.


On Your Own: Running; As Women Run More, Relationships Run Better
LEAD: IN the beginning, men ran and women didn't, and running came between them.
Seduced by the many health benefits of running and its combination of play and competition, the born-again athletes of the 1970's became obsessed, to the detriment of relationships.
Men even took perverse pride in their addictive behavior, flaunting their excesses as a kind of emancipation from the traditional needs of work, family and romance.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Shriver Wins in New South Wales Open: Top-seeded Pam Shriver scored an impressive 6-2, 6-3 victory over second-seeded Helena Sukova in the New South Wales Open at White City outside Sydney, Australia, yesterday.
In the men's final, John Fitzgerald of Australia, seeded fifth, posted a 6-3, 6-4 victory over third-seeded Andrei Chesnokov of the Soviet Union.


Advertising; Merger Goes Smoothly for Saatchi Unit
LEAD: THE much-talked-about merger by Britain's Saatchi &amp; Saatchi of its Ted Bates Worldwide and Backer &amp; Spielvogel, forming Backer Spielvogel Bates, was completed Oct. 1.
Now, three months later, G. Robert Holmen, who is chairman and chief executive domestically, is on the verge of calling the merger a success.


Pittsburgh Star Faces Charges
LEAD: Craig Heyward, the star running back for the University of Pittsburgh, was charged today with fighting with police officers who were investigating a campus shooting.


Spender Novel Emerges After 6 Decades
LEAD: ''Virginia Woolf read it, was fascinated by it, and told me to scrap it.
So I did.
She said that nobody should publish before the age of 30.''


Sports of The Times; Walter Payton's Last Time
LEAD: WHEN the game ended and the Bears had lost, when he knew he would never play football again, Walter Payton sat on the Bears bench with his head in his hands for perhaps five minutes.
In the chill - it felt as if it was 23 degrees below zero - his teammates had hurried off Soldier Field to the warmth of their locker room.


Olympic Notebook; U.S. Committee Sets Sights on Raising Budget
LEAD: With rising costs and increasing demands for new and better facilities and athletic development programs, the United States Olympic Committee has projected an operating budget for the next four years of about $200 million.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, JANUARY 11, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-11  A Moscow-Beijing summit proposal was made by Mikhail S. Gorbachev in an interview with a Chinese magazine.
The proposal underscored Mr.
Gorbachev's desire for more normal relations between the two largest Communist societies.
Page A1


Nofziger's Trial Is Opening With Jury Selection Today
LEAD: Jury selection is scheduled to begin Monday in the trial of Lyn Nofziger, the former top political adviser to President Reagan who is accused of capitalizing on his relationship with the President in violation of Federal ethics law.


The Right Choice
LEAD: For Phil Sellers, choosing a college to attend some 16 years ago was not an easy process.
It never is for high school basketball players who rank among the best in the country.


Not a Luxury Item
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jersey Legislators Face Old Issues in New Session
LEAD: Environmental concerns and other problems that have defied legislative remedies will be the most pressing issues when the New Jersey Legislature convenes on Tuesday to close the book on its 202d session and open its 203d.


Advertising; 2 Executives Leaving J. Walter Thompson
LEAD: With an exceedingly flowery memo, Burton Manning, chairman and chief executive of the British-owned J. Walter Thompson Company, notified his people that two members of Don Johnston's management team would be leaving the agency - as Mr.
Johnston, the former chief executive, quietly did himself late last year.


Couple Held in 2 Murders and Taking of Baby
LEAD: A husband and wife have been arrested in the killing of another couple and the kidnapping of the couple's newborn son.
The police say the suspects pretended for months that they were expecting a child of their own.


College Basketball; St. John's Can't Get Started
LEAD: Lou Carnesecca's postgame comments notwithstanding, St.
John's hasn't been through this before - at least, not recently.


Emhart Offers to Acquire Stanadyne
LEAD: The Emhart Corporation announced yesterday that it would make a $577 million unsolicited bid for Stanadyne Inc., which makes precision metal parts.


BOY KILLS MOTHER AND HIMSELF
LEAD: A 14-year-old Milton, N.J., boy interested in the occult killed his mother with his Boy Scout knife, set a fire in the family's house as his father and brother slept, then committed suicide with the same knife, the authorities said.


Metro Matters; In Land of 'Oz,' A State Senator Breaks the Rules
LEAD: Sometimes State Senator Nancy Larraine Hoffmann likens the State Legislature to a soap opera. ''It's like 'General Hospital,' '' she says, ''except it's called, 'State Capitol.' ''


A.F.C. Playoffs; Browns Get a Second Chance
LEAD: The Cleveland Browns won't play in the American Conference championship game until next Sunday, but along with their fans they've been playing the game for the past year.


U.S. FARM EXPORTS UP, WITH DEMAND GREATEST SINCE'84
LEAD: Influenced by political, economic and meteorological trends that have converged in recent weeks, the global demand for American farm products is stronger than at any time since 1984, and exports are climbing, according to the Department of Agriculture.


Brazil to Hold Talks on Debt
LEAD: Brazil will resume debt talks on Monday, and Goverment officials said the success or failure of the talks will determine whether the country definitively lifts its moratorium on paying interest on its $70 billion bank debt.


Redskins Knock Out Bears; Broncos Crush Oilers; Elway Leads Onslaught
LEAD: The Denver Broncos moved a step closer to a second consecutive appearance in the Super Bowl by ending the ambitious hopes of the Houston Oilers in the last of the weekend's four playoff games.


Recital: Lin and Schub
LEAD: FOR their recital at Carnegie Hall yesterday afternoon, Andre-Michel Schub and Cho-Liang Lin chose a program fitting to their talents but never really matching their youth and energy.
There was an air of safety to the proceedings - the requisite Beethoven piano-violin sonata (the E flat from Opus 12), the requisite Romantic piece (Brahms's D minor Sonata from the late years), Prokofiev's F minor Sonata to add a touch of easily digestible modernity, and novelties that were few and brief (two Stravinsky-Dushkin transcriptions called ''Pastorale'' and '


Short-Term Bill Auctions Highlight Sales This Week
LEAD: Treasury auctions this week are confined to the bill market, where today's regular sale of new three-month and six-month issues will be followed by a one-year issue on Thursday.


Colombia's Diversification Into Flowers Pays Off
LEAD: They are still tiny but, by the time they are chosen to bolster some message of love on St.
Valentine's Day, they will have traveled several thousand miles and matured into beautiful long-stemmed red roses.


Inside the 'Tank': Bowls of Candy and Big Brass
LEAD: When Marshal Sergei F. Akhromeyev, Chief of the Soviet General Staff, called on the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Washington summit meeting last month, he was invited into their sanctum sanctorum, a place rarely visited by any outsiders, much less Communist military men.


U.S. and Mexico: Trade Barriers Fall
LEAD: Mars chocolate bars, Miller Lite beer, Avon products and WestPoint Pepperell towels are among American products that will become available in Mexico for the first time after a spate of unusual agreements between the two countries.


Redskins Knock Out Bears; Broncos Crush Oilers; Washington Rallies, 21-17
LEAD: Jim McMahon had said he would return.
The posters all over this city - the solemn leader in his general's uniform and corncob pipe - had reinforced the promise.
McMahon was back, and everything would be all right.
Too cold, but all right.


Thatcher's Top Deputy and Consensus Builder Resigns in Ill Health
LEAD: Deputy Prime Minister Lord Whitelaw, one of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's closest aides, resigned today because of ill health after suffering a slight stroke last month.


Jersey's Anti-Takeover Law
LEAD: Gov.
Thomas H. Kean has signed legislation that makes permanent a law that protects New Jersey companies from hostile takeover bids.


Peace Monitors Criticize Sandinistas
LEAD: With less than a week until Central American Presidents meet to assess five months of progress toward regional peace, three of the four Nicaraguans appointed to monitor the compliance of the Sandinista Government with the new peace accord say it has not met its obligations.


Hopes Dim for Further Rate Cuts
LEAD: Hopes for lower interest rates were dealt a blow Friday when the Government announced stronger-than-expected employment data for December.


The Brady Report: Dissecting the Trading; 'Unsettling Signs,' Then a Sweeping Selloff, in October Stock Plunge
LEAD: Following is an excerpt from the report of the Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms, which spent two months studying the October stock market collapse:  A Ripple Effect


Father Wins Custody of Son
LEAD: A boy abducted from his California home seven years ago and found living with his father in a secluded shack near here has been returned to his father.


The Brady Report: Looking for Flaws; Study Cites Portfolio Insurers' Role as a Key to the Market Meltdown
LEAD: The report by a Presidential panel agreed with what some stock market participants have suspected for months: portfolio insurance managers were among the major villains in the frenetic five-day stock market drama of October 1987.


For Bissell, All Was Too Much
LEAD: When he was 8 years old, Patrick Bissell jumped off a 30-foot-high diving board, even though he did not know how to swim.


Olympic Games; Cubans Facing a Dilemma Over Sending Team to Seoul
LEAD: The unresolved issue of North Korea's participation in the Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea, could place Cuba in the uncomfortable position of either supporting an ally or satisfying its own considerable sports appetite, according to senior Olympic officials in the United States and elsewhere.


Colombia Loan Accord
LEAD: Colombia and its creditor banks signed a $1 billion loan Friday that will finance energy and public investment projects for 1987-88, bankers said.
As previously announced, the loan is for 10 1/2 years with 5 1/2 years' grace and carries an interest rate of 15/16 percent above the London interbank offered rate.


To Stay Alive at 65 M.P.H.
LEAD: Do states have a right to set their own speed limits?
Of course.
The national 55-mile-an-hour limit was imposed by the need to conserve oil.
That's no longer so urgent a national concern.
Last April's highway bill properly relaxed the Federal rule; the continuing resolution just passed relaxes it a bit more.


3 SLAIN AND 2 HURT IN BRONX SHOOTING
LEAD: Three gunmen entered an apartment in the Bronx early yesterday, forced the occupants to remove their clothes and then shot them repeatedly, killing three men and wounding two others, the police said.


Outdoors: Sonar, Radar and Loran
LEAD: TRYING to chart a sensible course through the enticing maze of sonar, radar and Loran units displayed at New York City's 78th National Boat Show reminded me of the time when, with pocket watch and compass, I learned to pilot my father's open launch between the north shore of Martha's Vineyard and the Elizabeth


Music: Emigres at Merkin
LEAD: ''THE MUSIC OF MIRACLES'' at Merkin Concert Hall on Saturday night was part celebration, part plea and partly music as well.
Its subject (and object) was Chamah, an organization dedicated to the health and growth of Judaism in the Soviet Union.
A good part of the evening was taken up by speeches and awards, but there was also music by Russian-Jewish musicians who have emigrated to the


Gore's Youth
LEAD: There are some minor disadvantages to becoming a Presidential candidate at 39.
When Senator Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee, who was born in 1948, was asked at a recent news conference in Tallahassee whether he was interested in becoming the Democratic Vice Presidential nominee this year, he offered a low opinion of the post and its historic significance.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Saudis Said to Cut Oil Price


System's Surprising Breakdowns
LEAD: A startling features of the report by the Presidential panel on the stock market collapse is its conclusion that several major systems that had been expected to protect the market or keep it in balance instead contributed to its near disintegration last October.


PUERTO RICO GAINS AS TOURIST HAVEN
LEAD: One year after a fire at the Dupont Plaza hotel killed 97 people, Puerto Rican tourism is thriving and leaders of the industry are painting a bright future for travel to the island.


QMAX TECHNOLOGY GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QMAX TECHNOLOGY GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
480,000
600,374
Net loss
245,000
662,132
6mo sales
1,663,000
1,482,000
Net inc
81,000
b525,370
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


100 Years of National Geographic
LEAD: ''How do you understand 'A Tale of Two Cities,' '' asked Gilbert M. Grosvenor, ''unless you understand the English Channel and London and Paris?''


Milt Jackson's Classical Jazz
LEAD: Last week Milt Jackson, the vibraharpist and one of America's most recorded musicians, flew to California to play ''Save the Bones for Henry Jones,'' one track of a record with Lou Rawls and Ray Charles.


Children Find Ways to Make Donations to Neediest Cases
LEAD: Elizabeth Koster of Manhattan, who is 8 1/2 years old, and her friend Alizah Allen have been collecting money for the poor by selling books and toys they no longer want.


MCCORMICK &amp; CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCCORMICK &amp; CO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
324,458,000
293,865,000
Net inc
14,677,000
17,485,000
Share earns
1.24
1.45
Yr sales
1,078,453,000
975,727,000
Net inc
b30,578,000
29,739,000
Share earns
2.59
2.46


No Headline
LEAD: A teen-ager who resisted a robbery was shot in the thigh, and the same bullet seriously wounded a woman who was seated near him on a subway train in Brooklyn yesterday, the police said.
The gunman escaped.
The victims were shot on a southbound A train as it approached the Kingston-Throop Avenue station in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section about 1 P.M., the police said.


NATIONAL CITY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL CITY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b12,841,000
35,659,000
Per share
.31
.86
Yr net inc
b96,945,000
134,953,000
Per share
2.34
3.44
b-Include pre-tax charges of $45 million for the quarter and $100 million for the year from special loan loss provisions related to National City's less-developed country exposure.


New Antibiotics Offer Freedom From Hospitals
LEAD: WORKING with a drug tried unsuccessfully against malaria in the 1960's, scientists have developed a new class of antibiotics that promises to have a profound effect on the treatment of important infectious diseases.
Many patients who in the past have been hospitalized for weeks in order to receive intravenous antibiotics can now be discharged to take the new drugs orally at home.


Banks' Mexican Debt View Mixed
LEAD: The negative accounting effects of a proposal to exchange United States-backed Mexican bonds for some of Mexico's bank debt will apparently limit the role of big banks in the plan.


U.S. Considers Broadcasting A TV Version of Radio Marti
LEAD: Congress has taken the first step toward creating a television version of Radio Marti, the Government's news service beamed to Cuba.


HOVNANIAN ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOVNANIAN ENTERPRISES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
63,521,000
68,818,000
Net inc
b5,177,000
c4,416,000
Share earns
.24
.21
9mo rev
185,700,000
175,270,000
Net inc
b15,021,000
c9,859,000
Share earns
.70
.47


L.I. Husband Seized as Strangler Of Young Bride on Christmas Eve
LEAD: A Huntington Station man was arrested today and charged with strangling his bride of two months on Christmas Eve and dumping her body in a garbage bag in a field.


Blair Thomas's Surgery
LEAD: Blair Thomas, Penn State's star running back, underwent arthroscopic surgery for ligament damage in his right knee yesterday at Hershey Medical Center.
Dr.
Alexander Kalenak, the Penn State orthopedic surgeon who performed the operation, said the procedure was successful.
Kalenak said a return to full activity from such an operation can require from nine months to a year but a swifter return is possible.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the snow, alternate-side parking rules are suspended today in Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx and Staten Island.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Children's-Book Award To Lincoln Biography
LEAD: Russell Freedman won the annual Newbery Medal yesterday as the author of the most distinguished contribution to American literature for children, for ''Lincoln: A Photobiography'' (Clarion Books/Ticknor &amp; Fields).


LILLIAN VERNON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LILLIAN VERNON CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 27
1987
1986
Revenue
50,832,000
42,886,000
Net inc
4,943,000
3,646,000
Share earns
.81
.74
Shares outst
6,140,000
5,000,000
9mos rev
97,119,000
82,841,000
Net inc
6,532,000
4,282,000
Share earns
1.21
.86
Shares outst
5,418,000
5,000,000


Business and Health; Behind Troubles Of Empire Plan
LEAD: WHEN the government of the nation's second-largest state and three highly respected health insurers are burned as New York State and Metropolitan Life, Blue Cross and Equitable have been in recent months by losses in the state's Empire health insurance plan, a lot of people start asking questions.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Saturday about the installation of Harold T. Shapiro as president of Princeton University misidentified the man at the center, in light-color robes.
He was John V. Fleming, a professor of English, who acted as mace bearer.


U.S. and Canada Close Extradition Gap
LEAD: Officials of Canada and the United States signed an amendment to an extradition treaty today in an effort to close loopholes that allowed some people wanted for crimes in one country to find haven in the other.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I am exhilarated by the Court's decision and relieved that this nightmare seems finally to be ending.''  - Rubin (Hurricane) Carter, on the Supreme Court's  refusal to reinstate a murder conviction.  [ B8:1. ]


East Side Water Main Break Disrupts Utilities and Traffic
LEAD: Two aging water mains broke yesterday at Madison Avenue and 72d Street, cutting off water, electricity, heat and phones and leaving a gaping hole that will take about three days to repair.
Page B1. (NYT/John Sotomayer)


Scherer Purchase
LEAD: The R. P. Scherer Corporation, a Troy, Mich., manufacturer of pharmaceutical products, said it had agreed to pay $15.25 a share in cash, or about $59 million, for the Paco Pharmaceutical Services Inc. of Lakewood, N.J.
A Scherer subsidiary is to be merged into Paco as soon as Scherer obtains a majority of Paco's 39 million shares outstanding.


Science Watch; Test Tube Chickens
LEAD: THE question of which came first, the chicken or the egg, may be losing some of its meaning.
A scientist has learned how to produce the chick without its own egg shell.


S.M.U. Wooing Gregg
LEAD: Forrest Gregg of the Green Bay Packers said last night he has received permission to talk with Southern Methodist University officials about the vacant coach's job at his alma mater. ''We will talk,'' Gregg said. ''I'm sure they are interested in what I have to say and I'm interested in what they have to say.


Dollar Finishes With Gains After Central Banks Step In
LEAD: The dollar finished slightly higher in relation to most other major currencies yesterday after central banks intervened to stem its fall.


Pollution Is Blamed for Killing Whales in St. Lawrence
LEAD: Pollution from industrial activity along the St.
Lawrence River and its tributaries, including the Great Lakes, is causing disease, premature death and a declining birth rate among the white beluga whales in the river, according to Canadian researchers.


Roth and Rhodes Books Get Critics Circle Awards
LEAD: ''The Counterlife'' by Philip Roth was named the best novel of 1987 by the National Book Critics Circle yesterday, beating out ''The Bonfire of the Vanities'' by Tom Wolfe after what a participant described as a ''passionate and heated discussion.''


Dialing QuantumLink
LEAD: IF you own a Commodore 64 or 128 and a modem, QuantumLink is definitely worth a trial flight.


Plea in Concealing of Death
LEAD: The father of a boy whose body was found in a ditch two years ago pleaded guilty today to misdemeanor charges of abandoning a body and concealing a death.
The man, Eli Stutzman, was sentenced to 18 months in prison after he entered the pleas in Thayer County Court.
Mr.
Stutzman testified that he and his 9-year-old son, Danny, were driving from Wyoming to Ohio on Route 81 in December 1985 when the boy died.


GERMAN IS SEIZED IN DISCO BOMBING
LEAD: The police announced today that they had arrested a West German woman suspected of planting the bomb in a West Berlin disco that killed two American servicemen and a Turkish woman, wounded 229 and prompted the American air attack on Libya in April 1986.


TEAM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEAM INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,743,000
10,412,000
Net inc
156,000
22,000
Share earns
.08
.01
6mo rev
21,034,000
20,347,000
Net inc
60,000
36,000
Share earns
.03
.02


Shuttle to Be Delayed At Least Until July 15
LEAD: Problems with the space shuttle's booster rockets will delay the resumption of flights at least until July 15, space agency officials said today.
But they said they would launch the craft as soon as it was ready, countering speculation that they might delay the flight until after November's Presidential election for political reasons.


For Soviet Alternative Press, Used Computer Is New Tool
LEAD: In the living room of his southwest Moscow apartment, Lev M. Timofeyev has a Toshiba 1000 personal computer and a Kodak Diconix printer.


Boy, 13, Saves 4 Neighbors
LEAD: Matt Snyder, a 13-year-old boy who stayed up late doing homework, has been credited with saving four neighbors when their home caught fire.
He was translating Latin sentences about 12:30 A.M.
Sunday when he heard a crackling noise.
After alerting his parents to call the fire department, he ran next door and banged on the front door until Mike Oklevitch answered and got his family out.


Night of College Upsets
LEAD: Villanova's Mark Plansky shooting over Rony Seikaly of Syracuse in a Big East game last night in Philadelphia.
Villanova scored an 80-78 upset.
Oklahoma and Indiana were also upset.
Page D27. (AP)


WALL TO WALL SOUND &amp; VIDEO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WALL TO WALL SOUND &amp; VIDEO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
30,308,000
29,636,000
Net inc
107,000
479,000
Share earns
.02
.09
9mo sales
81,015,000
75,918,000
Net inc
824,000
1,107,000
Share earns
.16
.21


Koch Meets With Theater Council
LEAD: A panel that has accused Mayor Koch in the past of ignoring its suggestions - his Theater Advisory Council - met with the Mayor yesterday morning to discuss the city's relationship with Broadway theater, and then said little had been accomplished.


BIOMET INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOMET INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,793,000
13,001,000
Net inc
3,081,000
1,930,000
Share earns
.25
.16
6mo sales
37,136,000
25,603,000
Net inc
5,706,000
3,525,000
Share earns
.47
.31


'Pappy' Boyington Is Dead at 75; Hero of the Black Sheep Squadron
LEAD: Gregory (Pappy) Boyington, the Marine flying ace of World War II who commanded the famous Black Sheep Squadron, shot down 28 Japanese planes and won the Medal of Honor, died here this morning at a hospice for cancer patients.
He was 75 years old.


Genetic Testing Limits Rejected in New Jersey
LEAD: A bill that sought to establish the nation's first state commission to review and regulate products of genetic engineering was defeated here tonight by the state Assembly.
With 41 votes needed for passage, the bill attracted only 26 votes.


WISCONSIN TOY reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WISCONSIN TOY (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,835,000
10,220,000
Net inc
1,039,000
775,000
Share earns
.22
.19
9mo sales
25,388,000
29,139,000
Net inc
1,827,000
b2,605,000
Share earns
.43
.65


Seaport in a Storm
LEAD: The historic vessels and unusual older buildings at New York City's South Street Seaport Museum were saved with funds generated by selling unused air rights over the old buildings to a consortium of banks.
The banks hoped to resell the rights for transfer to new buildings nearby.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association yesterday offered $250 million of short-term floating-rate notes, due on July 14, at a price of 100 through various securities dealers.


BENGUET CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BENGUET CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
64,500,000
58,200,000
Net inc
5,100,000
b100,000
Share earns
.16
-
9mo rev
191,100,000
156,000,000
Net loss
1,300,000
1,600,000
b-Net loss  Results for the latest net income and net loss are based on Benguet's current equity in its Engineering Equipment Inc.


INSURANCE RATES FOR HEALTH CARE INCREASE SHARPLY
LEAD: A surge in health insurance premiums, reflecting an unexpected failure to bring rising medical costs under control, is stunning thousands of employers and millions of workers nationwide.


True Love Revealed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Isidor Isaac Rabi, a Pioneer In Atomic Physics, Dies at 89
LEAD: Isidor Isaac Rabi, a pioneer in exploring the atom and a major force in 20th-century physics, died yesterday at his home on Riverside Drive after a long illness.
He was 89 years old.


Arms Pact: Next Hurdle Is Senate 'Graveyard'
LEAD: When the Senate returns to Capitol Hill Jan. 25, the main order of business will be its consideration of the arms reduction treaty signed last month by President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev to eliminate land-based, shorter- and intermediate-range nuclear weapons.


ESTERLINE CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESTERLINE CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
70,645,000
59,218,000
Net loss
30,181,000
b61,000
Share earns
-
.01
Yr sales
259,661,000
235,940,000
Net loss
29,306,000
b922,000
Share earns
-
.11


A Cultural Trailblazer To Seek New Path at 77
LEAD: For 16 years they have been an inseparable pair: Roger L. Stevens and the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, and now they are about to go their separate ways.


Thanks, Travis McGee
LEAD: Travis McGee, the hard-drinking, free-wenching hero of John D. MacDonald's adventure novels, has come to the aid of the Library of Congress and its continuing campaign to promote reading.


COOPER COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COOPER COMPANIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
243,493,000
139,913,000
Net loss
b4,775,000
cd16,400,000
Share earns
-
.73
Yr rev
627,487,000
460,279,000
Net inc
b52,000,000
d9,000,000
Share earns
2.25
.41


Meier &amp; Frank Officer Is Back
LEAD: Judith Hofer is returning to a former post - president and chief executive officer of Meier &amp; Frank, the eight-store chain of department stores in Oregon - from her present position as president and chief executive of Famous-Barr, the St.
Louis-based department store group.


Campaign Trail; Just Cool It
LEAD: Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa said today that he understood why Senator Bob Dole and Vice President Bush are scrapping so fiercely, given the closeness of their race and the importance of the voting in the Feb. 8 caucuses.


Dance Teacher Facing Loss of Studio
LEAD: Mary Anthony, a teacher and choreographer of modern dance, is facing imminent eviction from the lower Manhattan studio where she has worked for 20 years, and she says she is the victim of a vindictive landlord and an unfair city ruling.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American President Co., Oakland, Calif., appointed Robert K. Dahl senior vice president and chief financial officer, replacing John Flynn, who left earlier this year to pursue his own interests.


Our Towns
LEAD: Where does all the time go? David Roth knows.


SFE TECHNOLOGIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SFE TECHNOLOGIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
9,576,000
10,374,000
Net loss
2,310,000
b6,752,000
Yr sales
39,482,000
42,672,000
Net loss
5,666,000
b15,889,000
b-Includes a gain of $2,620,000 on capital restructuring.


'Teddy and Alice' to Close
LEAD: ''Teddy and Alice,'' a musical with a book by Jerome Alden and music by John Philip Sousa, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Minskoff Theater.
Directed by John Driver and starring Len Cariou, it will have run for 77 regular performances and 11 previews.


Our New China Traders Must Learn Patience
LEAD: To the Editor:


SILICON VALLEY BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILICON VALLEY BANCSHARES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net inc
535,000
b346,000
Per share
.56
.37
Yr net inc
1,503,000
b844,000
b-Includes tax credits of $230,000 and $246,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Leading Candidates
LEAD: Representative Jim Bunning, the Kentucky Republican who won 224 games in his career as a major-league pitcher, and Willie Stargell, whose name appears on the ballot for the first time, are considered the leading candidates to gain admittance to the baseball Hall of Fame when the results are announced tonight.


FULLER, H B CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FULLER, H B CO (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
153,227,000
139,852,000
Net inc
7,289,000
5,157,000
Share earns
.76
.54
Yr sales
597,061,000
528,483,000
Net inc
25,812,000
18,922,000
Share earns
2.69
2.00


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, JANUARY 12, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-10


Dance: 'Einszweidrei'
LEAD: JODY OBERFELDER-RIEHM'S ''Einszweidrei'' ought to be bottled and sold as instant good cheer.
It is that rare genuinely funny dance that manages both to make its points wittily and to give its dancers a chance to let loose and yet be themselves on stage.
There was a good deal more to their performances on Friday evening, in a program of four dances presented by the Jody Oberfelder-Riehm Dance Company at the Dia Art Foundation theater.


Superconductivity Moves From the Laboratory to the Classroom
LEAD: THE discovery in 1986 of a new class of substances called high-temperature superconductors has galvanized research in chemistry and physics, spurred a global race for industrial and military applications and led two scientists to a Nobel Prize.
Now, less than two years after the landmark discovery, even high school students can demonstrate high-temperature superconductivity for less than $50.


Ex-Worker Sues Hutton
LEAD: A former executive with the E. F. Hutton Group filed a $30 million class action lawsuit yesterday, contending that he and other Hutton employees were denied shares in the brokerage house they had been promised when it was acquired by Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.


Tears for Kelly: An Elderly Man Freezes to Death
LEAD: Last Thursday, on the day workers from a cleaning service arrived, along with a city social worker carrying a bag full of shirts, Joseph Stiletto was found frozen to death in his second-floor apartment at 16 Abingdon Square in Greenwich Village.
He was 79 years old.


A PLEA FOR MARKET COORDINATION
LEAD: The Presidential panel's report on the stock market crash has run into a cool reception from some in the White House and heavy criticism from some in Congress and on Wall Street for its proposed reforms of the financial system.
Already there have been predictions that the proposals will never be enacted.


'Cabaret' to Switch Theaters
LEAD: The revival of ''Cabaret,'' starring Joel Grey, is to move from the Imperial Theater to the Minskoff to make way for the musical ''Chess,'' Fred Nathan, a spokesman for the show, said yesterday.
The show, which must move no later than March 20, may move earlier, he said. ''Chess'' is to begin performances at the Imperial on April 4.


ZYTEC SYSTEMS reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZYTEC SYSTEMS (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,808,747
2,409,264
Net inc
b221,808
b367,754
Share earns
.04
.07
b-Includes tax credits of $82,000 and $203,000 for the latest and prior years, respectively.


Vice Chairman Named At Continental Illinois
LEAD: The Continental Illinois Corporation said yesterday that S. Waite Rawls 3d, a managing director of Chemical Bank, would join it on Feb. 1 as vice chairman.


Mecham Seems Contrite in a Speech
LEAD: The troubled Governor of Arizona, Evan Mecham, opened the state's legislative session today by acknowledging ''I have made mistakes'' and extending a conciliatory hand to legislators he had largely ignored in his first year in office.


Kirin Buys Bottler
LEAD: Japan's leading brewer said its United States subsidiary had acquired the Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Northern New England.
KW Inc., a Bedford, N.H., subsidiary of the Kirin Brewery Company, bought the remaining 75 percent of the bottling company's stock for $46.5 million earlier this month, Kirin said.


'Slippery Water': Mystery Seems Finally Solved
LEAD: A VISION of long, silken molecules coiling and uncoiling like millions of invisible yo-yos appears to have explained one of the most perplexing phenomena of fluid flow.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Dec. 24 about Hob Broun, a writer, included an incorrect account from his publisher, Alfred A. Knopf, about his illness and death.


U.S. Services Agency to Hire An Outside Firm on Auditing
LEAD: The General Services Administration said today that for the first time it would hire an outside accounting firm to audit its books.


Stage: 'By Sondheim'
LEAD: THERE'S entertainment tonight at the Equity Library Theater - more than two dozen songs from about a dozen shows by Stephen Sondheim.
The occasion is the return of ''Side by Side by Sondheim,'' the revue or concert or party that was brought to Broadway by the British in 1977.
Drawn from shows for which Mr.


KING WORLD PRODUCTIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KING WORLD PRODUCTIONS (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
97,460,000
81,354,000
Net inc
22,758,000
10,997,000
Share earns
.78
.36


Prison Riots Provoke Debate Among Cuban Exiles
LEAD: The consequences of the recent prison riots by Cuban alien inmates in Atlanta and Oakdale, La., are still reverberating here in a divisive debate about the image of the Cuban-American community, After the riots late last year there was a consensus here that the image of Miami Cubans, who account for more than 700,000 of the area's population of l.9 million, had been tarnished.


N.C.A.A. Told to Review Aid
LEAD: The elimination of athletic scholarships would help return college sports to ''the amateur student-athlete model'' that most college presidents desire, the head of the American Council on Education told the National Collegiate Athletic Association today.


INTECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTECH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 4
1987
1986
Sales
2,921,000
3,615,000
Net loss
105,000
b78,000
Share earns
-
.02
36wk sales
9,627,000
10,748,000
Net inc
26,000
264,000
Share earns
.01
.08
b-Net income


Sterling Sues Hoffmann-La Roche
LEAD: Sterling Drug Inc., the object of a $4.2 billion takeover offer from F. Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company, filed suit yesterday against the big Swiss drug producer, accusing it of falsifying dealings to hide profits and avoid income taxes, buying stock on inside information and failing to disclose details about who owns the company.


Winning Hole-in-One
LEAD: Dan Pohl posted a hole-in-one yesterday, although his ace on the 181-yard third hole at LaCosta Country Club in Carlsbad, Calif., won't go into the official record book.
The eagle 1 proved to be the margin of victory as Pohl won the annual nine-hole Epson shootout by two strokes over Ben Crenshaw, Paul Azinger and John McComish.


Seagram Raises Its Bid For Martell Cognac
LEAD: Faced with objections from the French Government over its earlier offer, the Seagram Company said today that it would raise its bid for the cognac maker Martell &amp; Compagnie to 2,975 francs a share, thus topping a bid made by Grand Metropolitan P.L.C.


DECOY UNIT ON BIAS CASES IS READIED
LEAD: Moving to deter the rising number of bias-related crimes reported in New York City, the Police Department announced yesterday that beginning today it would deploy at least six decoy teams ''to identify and arrest those who victimize others because of race, religion or ethnicity.''


NELLCOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NELLCOR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
22,780,000
19,369,000
Net inc
2,041,000
2,051,000
Share earns
.14
.16
Shares outst
14,418,000
12,967,000
6mo rev
46,688,000
36,754,000
Net inc
5,418,000
3,179,000
Share earns
.37
.29
Shares outst
14,452,000
12,967,000


U.N. Lowers '88 Estimates
LEAD: The United Nations said today that it had revised downward its forecast for worldwide economic growth in 1988.
The United Nations is now predicting growth of 3 percent, instead of the 3.5 percent rate reported two weeks before the Oct. 19 stock market plunge.


Latins Fighting U.S. Bid for Veto Power at Bank
LEAD: Eight Latin American countries are threatening to block the appointment of a new president of an international lending agency unless the United States backs off from a demand for virtual veto power over new loans.


ONCOGENE SCIENCE reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONCOGENE SCIENCE (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,707,286
5,285,866
Net inc
200,918
609,916
Share earns
.02
.08


Airbus Gives U.S. Warning
LEAD: The president of Airbus Industrie, the European aircraft consortium, today threatened to bring trade actions against America's leading aircraft makers if they file trade suits against his company.


FASHION: PATTERNS
LEAD:  Cameron Line Crashes


Afghan Guerrillas Are Said to Clash
LEAD: At a time when Moscow has increasingly talked of an early withdrawal of its troops from Afghanistan, differences among the Afghan insurgent groups have worsened and led to new fighting among them on Afghan soil, according to guerrilla spokesmen and diplomats.


MARK IV INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARK IV INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
110,128,000
73,955,000
Net inc
4,001,000
2,676,000
Share earns
.37
.31
Shares outst
10,811,000
8,511,000
9mo sales
296,826,000
219,615,000
Net inc
b12,887,000
7,684,000
Share earns
1.33
.90
Shares outst
9,724,000
8,511,000


Chess: Tal Parries Gambit to Defeat Romanishin in Soviet Event
LEAD: Four grandmasters tied for first place in the Jurmala International Tournament in the Soviet Latvian Republic: Aivar Gipslis, who has given himself mainly to training top women in recent years; Lev Psakhis, a two-time Soviet champion; Mikhail Tal, a former world champion, and Yuri Razuvayev, a tournament regular.


Oil Prices Off - Saudi Discount Seen
LEAD: The prices of crude oil and oil-related futures crumbled further yesterday as more traders questioned OPEC's ability to maintain the production and pricing levels to which its members agreed at a meeting last month.


SOUND WAREHOUSE reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUND WAREHOUSE (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
41,019,000
34,254,000
Net inc
163,000
c220,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo rev
84,497,000
69,205,000
Net inc
b1,506,000
1,379,000
Share earns
.28
.26


12 Make All-Pro Again
LEAD: Mark Bavaro, the Giants' tight end, and Jerry Rice, the San Francisco 49ers' wide receiver, were among 12 players named yesterday to the Pro Football Writers of America All-Pro team for the second consecutive year.
Ron Meyer of the Indianapolis Colts was named the American Conference Coach of the Year and Jim Mora of the New Orleans Saints was selected National Conference Coach of the Year.


GORDON JEWELRY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GORDON JEWELRY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
87,089,185
86,977,714
Net loss
2,298,685
b20,083,549
b-After a loss of $6,678,347 from discontinuance of the Catalog-Showroom Stores division.
The year-ago first quarter's loss from continuing operations included a provision for inventory valuation allowance of $15 million, pretax.


China Rejects Gorbachev Summit Offer
LEAD: China today rejected a proposal by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, to hold a summit meeting with Chinese leaders.


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, JANUARY 12, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Foreign Edge in Takeovers
LEAD: Companies in Britain, West Germany and Japan have an advantage in acquiring American companies because of how laws regarding good will payments are handled by their countries, a Congressional report says.


Mexico City Journal; Economists' Day Dawns; Twilight for Lawyers?
LEAD: An old Mexican saying has it that every student who enrolls at the law school of the National Autonomous University of Mexico here does so ''dreaming of someday wearing the presidential sash across his chest.''


SEQUEL CORP reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEQUEL CORP (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,630,152
191,425
Net loss
b264,361
b426,367
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $59,743 for the latest year and $326,708 for 1986.


Redskins Counting On Fans' Craziness
LEAD: The Washington Redskins, fresh from their playoff victory over the Chicago Bears on Sunday, prepared for the National Conference championship game next Sunday with a light workout today, and their coach, Joe Gibbs, said the Redskins' fanatical fans should provide an extra lift against the Minnesota


Apple Unit's New Products
LEAD: The Claris Corporation, a software subsidiary formed last spring by Apple Computer Inc., yesterday announced new software programs for the Macintosh computer.


CONTINENTAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINENTAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
155,594,000
77,052,000
Net inc
5,559,000
3,464,000
Share earns
.43
.27
Shares outst
12,765,000
12,793,000
9mo rev
330,151,000
209,895,000
Net inc
11,236,000
9,164,000
Share earns
.88
.72
Shares outst
12,799,000
12,795,000


Bush Questioned by Iran-Contra Investigators
LEAD: Vice President Bush was interviewed under oath today by investigators working for the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair and was assured that he was not under investigation in the case, Mr.
Bush's office said today.


Pinch Scotch Goes to Grey
LEAD: Grey Advertising has got the Pinch Scotch assignment back.
It had lost it a year ago after Schenley Industries acquired Renfield Importers.
At that time the brand, billing about $1.2 million, was reassigned to Chester Gore Advertising.


Keep Ice Hockey
LEAD: To the Editor:


Driver Denies Charge
LEAD: Michel LaChance, one of seven harness drivers suspended by the State Racing and Wagering Board in connection with a Nov. 14 race at Yonkers Raceway, told the board yesterday that ''I tried everything I knew to win.''


Former Agent Indicted
LEAD: A grand jury in Opelika, Ala., yesterday indicted Jim Abernethy, a former Atlanta sports agent who has said he paid performance bonuses to the Auburn defensive back, Kevin Porter.
Don Siegelman, the Alabama attorney general, said that the panel returned misdemeanor counts of tampering with a sports event, violating the deceptive practices act and commercial bribery.


FITZGERALD, DEARMAN &amp; ROBRTS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FITZGERALD, DEARMAN &amp; ROBRTS (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,501,681
3,680,719
Net inc
474,683
206,119
Share earns
.13
.10
6mo rev
16,458,970
7,092,051
Net inc
1,116,333
571,934
Share earns
.32
.27


Itel Offers Notes
LEAD: The Itel Corporation is offering $125 million of 12 5/8 percent senior subordinated notes, due in 1993, at a price of 100 through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
Rated B-3 by Moody's Investors Service and B- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, the issue is noncallable for life.


BANCO POPULAR DE PUERTO RICO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANCO POPULAR DE PUERTO RICO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
10,247,139
9,969,626
Per share
1.02
1.00
Yr net inc
38,340,592
38,278,400
Per share
3.83
4.03
Shares outst
10,000,000
9,500,000


Florence Eiseman, 88, a Designer And Leader in Children's Fashion
LEAD: Florence Eiseman, a designer of children's clothes who was known for excellent workmanship, top quality fabrics and simple but elegant styles, died of emphysema Friday at Columbia Hospital in Milwaukee, Wis.
She was 88 years old and lived in Milwaukee.


BRAJDAS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRAJDAS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,054,042
8,411,549
Net inc
b528,386
c233,770
Share earns
.18
.09
Shares outst
2,921,778
2,596,893
9mo sales
34,558,633
25,120,045
Net inc
b1,608,684
c794,045
Share earns
.55
.31
Shares outst
2,929,302
2,579,115


Court Allows Natwest's Broker Link
LEAD: Further breaking down the barriers between the banking and securities businesses, the Supreme Court refused today to hear an appeal of a decision that allowed bank affiliates to offer investment advice and brokerage services to institutional or wealthy clients.


Syracuse Surprised by Villanova, 80-78
LEAD: Tom Greis talked himself into a perfect scoring game tonight, helping Villanova to a 80-78 Big East upset over Syracuse.


An Instant Musician
LEAD: OKAY, it's fantasy time.


Massachusetts Housing Bonds
LEAD: The Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency is tentatively offering $55.1 million of tax-exempt multifamily residential housing revenue bonds with a maximum yield of about 8.89 percent for an issue due in 2021, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


L.S.U. Stuns Oklahoma
LEAD: Jose Vargas scored 30 points and led a defense that held Oklahoma 40 points below its average tonight as Louisiana State University handed the Sooners their first defeat of the season, 83-71.


Campaign Finance Folly
LEAD: The New York City Council is considering legislation to use tax money to finance political campaigns.
Under it, candidates who choose to participate must accept a spending cap and limit the private contributions they accept to certain maximums.
Each contribution would be matched by city tax dollars.


Books of The Times
LEAD: FOOL'S SANCTUARY. By Jennifer Johnston. 132 pages. Viking. $15.95.


TCA CABLE TV INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TCA CABLE TV INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,897,000
12,443,000
Net inc
1,115,000
1,196,000
Share earns
.09
.11
Yr rev
60,397,000
48,269,000
Net inc
5,070,000
5,547,000
Share earns
.46
.51


ANALYZE EX-ATHLETE ANALYSTS
LEAD: THE sports divisions at the major television networks are huge operations, making and spending hundreds of millions of dollars each year.
They pay their broadcasters astronomical salaries, and provide them with excellent working conditions and a national audience that religious leaders might covet.


Supreme Court Refuses to Revive Hurricane Carter's Murder Case
LEAD: The United States Supreme Court refused yesterday to consider reinstating the triple-murder convictions of Rubin (Hurricane) Carter and John Artis.
It was the latest and perhaps the last chapter in a tangled 21-year legal struggle.


N. Korea Won't Go . . . Unless
LEAD: North Korea said today it would not attend the Seoul Olympics unless its demands to be a co-host of the Games were met by the International Olympic Committee and the Seoul organizing committee.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allegheny International, Pittsburgh, said it had called a meeting of the holders of its $11.25 cumulative preferred stock for March 2 in Pittsburgh to elect two additional directors to the company's board as requested by a shareholder, Spear, Leeds &amp; Kellogg.


Excerpts From Message by Kean
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Governor Kean's State of the State Message, which will be given Tuesday to the 203d New Jersey Legislature.


Napa Journal; Custom Caves for Vintners' Tastes
LEAD: Give Alf Burtleson a mountain, and he'll give you a cave.
In California's Napa Valley, about 45 miles north of San Francisco, no one is more in demand these days than Mr.
Burtleson, who calls himself a cave man.
He digs caves.
But not ordinary caves.
Burrowing into hillsides, he creates spacious and elegant caverns in the earth that wine makers fill with barrels and bottles of aging wine.


Computer Unit Discloses Talks
LEAD: The Computervision Corporation, which last week rejected a $380 million takeover bid from Prime Computer Inc., has indicated that it talked with other potential suitors.


B.B.D.O. Is Beginning Its First Pizza Hut Ads
LEAD: The first Pizza Hut advertising from Batten, Barton, Durstine &amp; Osborn will begin to run on the three commercial TV networks tomorrow.
You will certainly get familiar with it since the national budget is $70 million and additional millions will be spent on the same advertising by the franchisee advertising groups.


SCIMED LIFE SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCIMED LIFE SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,077,000
2,551,000
Net loss
331,000
b127,000
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
2,554,000
2,721,000
9mo sales
10,515,000
7,276,000
Net loss
4,000
b148,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
2,545,000
2,592,000


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.How do people who have been deaf from birth articulate their thoughts internally?


Honda Lifts Prices
LEAD: The American Honda Motor Company said it had raised its prices to reflect the falling value of the dollar against the yen.
The Honda division, which sells Civic, Accord and Prelude cars, raised prices by an average of 2.2 percent, or $274 a car.


SOUTHERN NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN NATIONAL CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,200,000
4,900,000
Share earns
.42
.39
Yr net inc
18,000,000
16,400,000
Share earns
1.42
1.29
The prior year includes a gain equal to 8 cents a share from the sale of the mortgage servicing rights.


Soviet Union Will Join Olympics But North Korea May Stay Home
LEAD: The Soviet Union said today it would participate in the Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea, later this year, clearing the way for the first Soviet-American Summer Olympic showdown in 12 years.


Stage: From Foreman, 'Symphony of Rats'
LEAD: THE central character in Richard Foreman's ''Symphony of Rats'' (at the Performing Garage) is the President of the United States, but his residence is more a labyrinthine fun house than anything remotely resembling the White House.
As is customary with Mr.
Foreman, the evening's author, director and designer, the scenery and properties are animated.


STANLINE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANLINE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
17,952,000
15,882,000
Net inc
481,000
451,000
Share earns
.28
.26
Yr rev
64,921,000
59,692,000
Net inc
1,858,000
1,510,000
Share earns
1.08
.87


Our New China Traders Must Learn Patience; Managers of Future
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Speech: Jack F. Kemp; 'The Dollar Should Be So Trustworthy, So Good, That It's as Good as Gold'
LEAD: Candidates seeking the Presidential nomination make dozens of speeches in their campaigns.
Some address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
But more often the candidate uses a ''basic speech.'' It summarizes, with little variation from one occasion to the next, how the candidate wants to present himself to the voters.


DIGITAL COMMUNICATIONS ASOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGITAL COMMUNICATIONS ASOCIATES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
54,795,000
46,148,000
Net inc
9,580,000
b8,659,000
Share earns
.64
.58
6mo sales
104,955,000
85,797,000
Net inc
18,492,000
b12,754,000
Share earns
1.23
.86


Islanders Air Their Mistakes
LEAD: After a lengthy practice in Pittsburgh yesterday, Coach Terry Simpson of the Islanders transformed his hotel room into a counseling session as player after player on his slumping team filed in and recited their mistakes.


Vote Spurs Exodus From Haiti Capital
LEAD: The old coastal steamer was packed with hundreds of people, bundles of clothing, sacks of food and even a few pigs.


Vikings Looking Great In the Role of Pretender
LEAD: In this National Football League season of the unexpected, the unusual prevails even in the playoffs.


DAMON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAMON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
47,489,794
37,900,157
Net inc
1,345,655
b499,079
Share earns
.14
-
Shares outst
9,865,305
9,332,247
b-Net loss and after an extraordinary credit of $35,000.


Kean, in Annual Message, to Urge Aid for Exporters
LEAD: A wide range of new programs to help New Jersey businesses sell their goods overseas will be proposed by Governor Kean in his State of the State Message to the Legislature on Tuesday.


People
LEAD: *
Michael Feuer has resigned as senior vice president, marketing, advertising and financial communications, from Fabri-Centers of America, Cleveland.


CHERRY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHERRY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
50,337,000
41,290,000
Net inc
2,368,000
680,000
Share earns
.52
.15
9mo sales
144,820,000
118,007,000
Net inc
5,077,000
2,245,000
Share earns
1.12
.50


Plan for Atom Smasher Riles a Town
LEAD: At this time of year, when the winds sweep off Lake Ontario, bringing an unending supply of snow, this is a community of stark beauty and natural calm, of gnarled apple orchards and old farm homes clustered in ice-covered fields.


The Crash, Backward and Forward
LEAD: The Brady task force deserves high marks for its detailed, sophisticated analysis of the October stock market catastrophe.
The report does better at pinpointing Wall Street's weaknesses, however, than providing credible remedies.


Little Space Station Demands a Hard Look
LEAD: FIVE years ago, a young Texas company said it wanted to open the heavens to American industry, creating a cheap, private, no-frills space station where the marvels of weightlessness could be used to purify metals, grow rare crystals, fashion new semiconductors, make scarce drugs, form exotic compounds and invent altogether new types of materials.


A State Department Official Meets President of Paname Special to The New York Times
LEAD: William G. Walker, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Central America, made an un-announced trip to New York today to meet with Panama's civillian Presi-dent, Eric Arturo Delvalle, State De-partment officials and senior Latin American diplomats said.


ASSOCIATES CORP OF NORTH AMERICA reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASSOCIATES CORP OF NORTH AMERICA (NYSE)
Year to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,733,200,000
1,646,400,000
Net inc
236,100,000
213,600,000


Jackson Isn't Afraid to Beg for Funds
LEAD: ''I've got to look Presidential,'' the Rev.
Jesse Jackson told a group of supporters at a house party here. ''Don't you all make me beg.''


UNITED STOCKYARDS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED STOCKYARDS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
290,000
7,309,000
Net loss
4,234,000
c1,539,000
Share earns
-
.29
Yr rev
23,060,000
29,666,000
Net inc
b1,435,000
5,127,000
Share earns
.04
.99


Furs: Now It's a Buyer's Market
LEAD: The deep freeze of the last week has set many cloth-coat wearers to thinking about furs.
And now is the time to buy.
Between fears about the economy and concern over hemlines, fewer coats were sold earlier in the season than furriers had anticipated.
As a result, fur salons, stores and manufacturers are marking down furs anywhere from 20 to 50 percent.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Pacers 111, Clippers 90: John Long scored 9 of his 19 points in the decisive third quarter last night as the Indiana Pacers handed the Los Angeles Clippers their 11th straight loss.
It was their 12th loss in 13 games and the last game of a disastrous seven-game road trip against Eastern Conference teams.


COLLINS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLLINS INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
28,532,000
28,109,000
Net inc
b263,022
c953,228
Share earns
.07
-
Yr rev
105,513,000
101,944,000
Net inc
b1,113,794
c968,451
Share earns
.30
-


RANGERS LET 2-GOAL LEAD SLIP TO A TIE WITH HAWKS
LEAD: Lucien DeBlois emerged from the shower, quietly made his way to his locker and picked up the sheet of statistics that showed how the Rangers and Blackhawks had played to a 2-2 tie last night.
He had fully anticipated that the numbers would anger him, but he had no idea a name on the sheet would leave him infuriated.


UNITED TOTE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED TOTE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,964,230
3,116,237
Net inc
b544,441
c527,427
Share earns
.33
.32
Yr rev
18,608,293
9,635,025
Net inc
b1,390,069
c1,160,771
Share earns
.85
.71


MELBOURNE, Australia, Jan. 11 (AP) -
LEAD: Ivan Lendl of Czechoslovakia scored a 6-3, 7-6, 6-2 first-round victory over Bryan Roe tonight in the Australian Open.


Campaign Trail; Running Mate Efforts
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts has named Francis O'Brien, a man of some renown in press and political circles, to the position of senior press adviser.


5 Die, 17 Hurt In Building Fire On the East Side
LEAD: Five residents of an apartment building on the East Side of Manhattan died in a fire last night that began in a ground-floor office and spread up an elevator shaft to the top floor, where most of the victims were found, fire officials said.


ANGLO ENERGY LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANGLO ENERGY LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,211,000
13,797,000
Net loss
b7,101,000
c59,740,000
Share earns
-
11.33
Yr rev
31,335,000
72,305,000
Net loss
b85,593,000
c56,142,000
Share earns
-
17.55


Sikorsky Contract
LEAD: The Sikorsky Aircraft division of the United Technologies Corporation. has been awarded a $983.2 million contract to build 252 UH-60 Blackhawk helicopters, the Army said.
The contract is for four years.
The Army said Sikorsky had been given $243.5 million as a first-year increment toward work on the helicopters, which will be built in Stratford, Conn.


Portraits on a Wall
LEAD: In the end, what will count most about Rajiv Gandhi is whether he rules India in the tradition of his grandfather or of his mother.


Life in New York's Lock-and-Buzzer Boutiques
LEAD: To the Editor:


Careers; Motivation After Layoffs Is Stressed
LEAD: PRODUCTIVITY on the assembly line has been stressed in recent years, with some success.
Now many companies are seeking to insure that their middle managers and the workers those managers supervise are also motivated.


AIDS Researchers Frustrated in Hunt For Genetic Factors
LEAD: THE search for genetic factors in susceptibility to AIDS has suffered a setback with the failure to confirm preliminary findings of a main candidate.


Autopsy of Maravich Discloses Heart Defect
LEAD: Pete Maravich's death last week resulted from an enlarged and weakened heart with a continuous lack of oxygen into the heart muscle, the Los Angeles County Coroner's Office said today.


Corrections
LEAD: A music review on Sunday about a concert by the Brooklyn Philharmonic gave an incorrect title, taken from the printed program, for a composition by John Corigliano.
It was the ''Promenade'' Overture.


Toronto's New Force In Theater
LEAD: Sometime after Ed Mirvish bought the Old Vic Theater in London in 1982, he was invited to a reception at Clarence House, the residence of Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother.
An aide took him around to meet the royals and the other prestigious guests.


Settlers in West Bank Kill a Palestinian
LEAD: A Jewish settlement leader and his bodyguard fired at Palestinian demonstrators today, killing a teen-ager in the first significant involvement by militant settlers in the unrest that began a month ago.


Detective Says Marks on Levin Drew Speculation
LEAD: Detectives examining the body of Jennifer Levin in Central Park on Aug. 26, 1986, discussed the possibility that morning that the red marks found on her neck might have been caused by a metal watchband, a police sergeant at the scene testified yesterday.


Emhart's Plans For Stanadyne
LEAD: The Emhart Corporation said it would consider selling all of Stanadyne Inc.'s non-plumbing businesses if its $40-a-share hostile tender offer is successful.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Emhart also said that it had received a commitment for $600 million to complete the takeover from a syndicate of banks led by the Bankers Trust Company.


INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGIES
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,601,000
3,209,000
Net inc
573,000
354,000
Share earns
.14
.09
Yr sales
19,459,000
11,175,000
Net inc
2,019,000
1,336,000
Share earns
.49
.36


CUOMO SEEKS QUICK LEGISLATIVE ACTION
LEAD: Hoping to end the legislative session as soon as possible, Governor Cuomo filed an unusually large number of bills today -61 measures, including his plan to give Mayor Koch control of the New York City Board of Education.


Why So Diffident on Haiti?
LEAD: Make no mistake about the decision of Haiti's electoral council to bar Duvalier collaborators from the presidential election.
This minimal concession to constitutional procedure won't salvage the impending travesty: the election of a regime-approved puppet under rules requiring voters to hand unsealed ballots to armed soldiers.


Worse Than Himalayas?
LEAD: Last Friday, the Washington headquarters and museum of the National Geographic Society, whose explorers have braved blizzards to reach Himalayan peaks and the North and South Poles, were closed on account of an eight-inch accumulation of snow.
Intrepidity returned Saturday as officials mushed their way in to work on downtown M Street.


Wall Street: The Inquiry
LEAD: Wall Streeters, inside traders and corporate raiders beware: Representative John D. Dingell, one of the toughest questioners on Capitol Hill, is preparing to hold hearings on the operations of the stock market.
The hearings, to be held by the investigations subcommittee of the Energy and Commerce Committee, are expected to last six to eight days and focus on leveraged buyouts, corporate takeovers and insider trading.


SBE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SBE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,631,000
2,132,000
Net inc
b347,000
c294,000
Share earns
.02
.02
Yr sales
8,671,000
6,934,000
Net inc
b849,000
c783,000
Share earns
.05
.05
Shares outst
16,784,113
16,593,225


Recital: Marilyn Horne
LEAD: FOR her recital at the Metropolitan Opera House on Sunday afternoon, Marilyn Horne presented a program of German songs, sung with characteristic security and precision, though without much heart.


Pan Am Board Faces Tough Choices Today
LEAD: A showdown between the Pan Am Corporation's board and the company's chairman, C. Edward Acker, grew nearer yesterday.


INTERVOICE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERVOICE INC
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,790,585
812,714
Net inc
224,239
118,673
Share earns
.07
.04
9mo rev
4,259,818
2,054,171
Net inc
539,334
161,648
Share earns
.17
.05


SONY, IN A SHIFT, TO MAKE VHS UNITS
LEAD: The Sony Corporation, which popularized the home video cassette recorder with its Betamax in 1975, announced today that it would sell the rival VHS system that has come to dominate the market.


Bond Prices Regain Part Of Losses
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices rose modestly yesterday, recovering part of Friday's steep losses.


RSI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RSI CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,009,000
21,354,000
Net inc
2,433,000
b1,789,000
Share earns
.32
.24
b-Includes a $178,000 loss from discontinued operations.


Publishing: At Warner, More Public Affairs Titles
LEAD: For 16 years Ida Nudel was denied permission to leave the Soviet Union, and she was banished to Siberia for four years after she hung a banner from her apartment balcony that read: ''K.G.B., give me my visa to Israel.''


Short Shifts at Porsche
LEAD: Porsche put 6,100 workers on short shifts today as the luxury sports car maker tries to make up for a sharp decline in United States sales.
A Porsche spokesman said the move affects 4,300 workers at Porsche's main plant in Stuttgart-Zuffenhausen and 1,800 at Volkswagen A.G.'s Audi unit in Neckarsulm, where Porsche's four-cylinder cars are built.


Supreme Court Roundup; Nevada A-Test Plaintiffs Lose Appeal
LEAD: The Supreme Court today let die the last appeal by civilians suing the Government for deaths, cancers and other illnesses that they say were caused by open-air atomic bomb tests in Nevada from 1951 to 1962.


Fashion's Stars Gather at Met To Fete the Best of Their Own
LEAD: ''It's quite different from Dallas,'' said Victor Costa, the designer from Texas. ''I'm like a kid in a candy store.''


MORE TEAMS SCORE BY A LONG SHOT
LEAD: The Boston Celtics race downcourt, then swing the ball around the free-throw circle waiting for Larry Bird or Danny Ainge to get into position to take a shot from beyond the 3-point line.


D'AMATO DECIDES TO SUPPORT DOLE
LEAD: After weeks of public fence-sitting,Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato yesterday endorsed his Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole, for President.


NAHAMA &amp; WEAGANT ENERGY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NAHAMA &amp; WEAGANT ENERGY CO (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
412,000
198,000
Net loss
12,000
126,000
Shares outst
2,815,585
2,604,716
9mo rev
942,000
920,000
Net loss
435,000
2,024,000
Shares outst
2,814,029
2,446,957


Advertising; Bulova Olympic Campaign
LEAD: TIME is of the essence, as they say in clock and watch circles, and there are probably few companies that have such a lock on the very word as Bulova has.


Bridge: Book Offers Post-Mortems From Husband-Wife Teams
LEAD: If complete statistics were available on the millions of post-mortems conducted around the world each year by bridge partnerships, it might well be found that more than half the post-mortem time is consumed by married couples.
Husbands and wives often dissect the details of bidding and play while on their way home after a session of play, and the discussion, or battle, may resume at breakfast the next day.


CONTINENTAL HOMES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINENTAL HOMES (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
31,386,000
33,465,000
Net inc
901,000
1,222,000
Share earns
.24
.49
Shares outst
3,807,585
2,500,000
6mo rev
72,939,000
66,584,000
Net inc
2,310,000
2,496,000
Share earns
.60
1.00
Shares outst
3,843,225
2,500,000


Mullin Leaves Hospital
LEAD: Chris Mullin, who was treated for alcohol abuse, leaving Centinela Hospital in Inglewood, Calif., yesterday with John McEnroe, who picked up Mullin.
The security guard was Kevin Glaze.
Page D24. (AP)


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article from Washington yesterday about a commission on American military strategy misstated Zbigniew Brzezinski's former title.
He was national security adviser, not Secretary of State.


New Bid Made For Dyncorp
LEAD: Dyncorp, which had agreed to be acquired for $216 million by a group led by its chairman, Jorge E. Carnicero, said today that a separate management group had made a new takeover offer.
Anaylsts said the new offer, from DME Holdings Inc., was worth $1 a share more than the Carnicero bid, or about $226 million in all.


Drawing; FASHION: BY DESIGN Pants Update
LEAD: Stylish wearing of any kind of clothing has little to do with common sense but everything to do with the fashion of the moment.
Right now, of course, the short skirt has surpassed every other silhouette.
Even recently, with the temperature in the teens, it has prevailed at see-and-be-seen restaurants.


A Solitary Dissenter Disputes Cause of AIDS
LEAD: A provocative argument that the wrong culprit has been cited as the cause of AIDS is almost universally rejected by AIDS scientists, but it is gaining attention in the gay press and other publications and has even piqued the interest of a White House official.


New Registry Is Raising Hope For Those in Need Of Bone Marrow
LEAD: THE recently established National Bone Marrow Donor Registry has given new hope to thousands of people whose lives depend on finding genetically compatible strangers willing to donate some of the tissue that produces life-sustaining blood cells.


Health Secretary Assails Proposed Cuts
LEAD: Dr.
Otis R. Bowen, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, today denounced personnel and budget cutbacks proposed in President Reagan's draft budget for the next year, saying they would cripple management of his department.


Prize Reporting
LEAD: The Gerald R. Ford Foundation has established two $5,000 journalism prizes, one for coverage of the Presidency and the other for national defense.
The 1988 awards, to be presented in Washington in June, will recognize ''lifetime journalistic achievement'' in the field; subsequent prizes will honor ''consistent, judicious, sensitive and noteworthy coverage'' during the previous calendar year.


Dance: John Carrafa
LEAD: JOHN CARRAFA, Donald Fleming and Vicky Shick are all very good dancers.
They move interestingly and have strong techniques.
They also have intelligent, clearly defined stage presences.
And the dances they presented on Saturday at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, in a program produced by Dance Chance, were as sophisticated and well-crafted as one might have expected.


2 Water Mains Burst on Upper East Side
LEAD: Two aging water mains burst early yesterday morning on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, flooding basements, knocking out utilities and making the rush hour treacherous for commuters as water turned to ice in the subfreezing weather.


Global Climate Project Is Summit Bonus
LEAD: To the Editor:


Austria Glances Back
LEAD: Austria is preparing nervously for the 50th anniversary of its absorption into Hitler's Third Reich, on March 11.
As Chancellor Franz Vranitzky says, it wiped the country off the map in 1938, but also led to ''its rebirth as a nation'' after the war.


WALGREEN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WALGREEN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,114,762,000
960,272,000
Net inc
18,813,000
13,244,000
Share earns
.31
.22
The company noted that the Tax Reform Act of 1986 eliminated investment tax credits retroactively to Jan.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Settlers Kill Palestinian  A Jewish settlement leader and his bodyguard opened fire on Palestinian demonstrators in the West Bank, leaving a teen-ager dead.
Page A8.
Afghan Guerrilla Infighting  Rivalries among Afghan rebel groups have worsened and led to new fighting among them, guerrilla spokesmen and diplomats say.


Trade Record In Germany
LEAD: West Germany, under international pressure to buy more foreign goods and sell fewer abroad, reported a record trade surplus last year, according to early official figures published today.


Seoul Opposition Leader Accepts Outcome of Vote
LEAD: The opposition leader Kim Young Sam said today that he had decided to stop fighting the presidential election victory of Roh Tae Woo and would meet with him Wednesday.


Mattingly Signs for 3 Years
LEAD: The deal was essentially done last month, but yesterday the Yankees finally announced the signing of Don Mattingly, their most valuable first baseman, to a guaranteed three-year contract after finding an insurance company to write a policy covering the player's back.


Reagan Assails Economic Doomsayers
LEAD: In his first public appearance of 1988, President Reagan stepped into the political campaign today by extolling his own economic record and raising money for the prospective Republican nominee for Senator from Ohio, Mayor George V. Voinovich of Cleveland.


NANTUCKET INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NANTUCKET INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
14,011,386
13,011,583
Net loss
342,596
50,490
9mo sales
42,944,366
39,320,263
Net loss
328,298
b173,822
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income


SANTA MONICA BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANTA MONICA BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,397,850
1,928,206
Per share
.71
.57
Yr net inc
8,454,086
7,068,113
Per share
2.50
2.09


Big Bank's Loss Reserve
LEAD: The Security Pacific Corporation said today that it had set aside a reserve to cover more than half of its $1.8 billion portfolio of loans to developing countries, making it the largest bank to declare more than half of the portfolio in jeopardy.


A.T.&amp;T. to Raise Stake in Venture
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said it would put more money and technological expertise into its European joint venture with Philips N.V. of the Netherlands.
It also said it was seeking additional partners.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Executives Changes column of Business Day on Dec. 31 misidentified the new positions of Kazuo Ishikure and Norihiro Takeuchi of the Bridgestone Corporation.
Mr.
Ishikure is returning to Tokyo as a director and assistant to the executive vice president in charge of corporate planning and tire sales.


Dollar Steady In Tokyo
LEAD: The dollar remained steady today, while stocks declined after an initial rally in early trading in Tokyo.


Paine Webber to Sell C.D.'s Tied to Rise in College Costs
LEAD: Paine Webber Inc. and the College Savings Bank in Princeton, N.J., have agreed on plan whereby the bank's certificates of deposits can be sold through the brokerage firm's 285 offices around the nation.


TELEDYNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELEDYNE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
807,900,000
834,800,000
Net inc
b158,800,000
c47,000,000
Share earns
13.60
4.01
Yr sales
3,216,800,000
3,241,400,000
Net inc
b377,200,000
c238,300,000
Share earns
32.25
20.35


Protein Fights Cat Allergy
LEAD: Injections of protein extract from cats can help reduce suffering for those allergic to cats, a researcher says.


Debate Double-Talk
LEAD: The wonder of it, given the length of this Endless Campaign, is that there haven't been more bobbles by the Presidential candidates.
They've already endured debates by the dozen.
But as demonstrated in the Republican debate Friday in Iowa, the demon of mystification has suddenly struck.


Laura Chapman, Educator, 78
LEAD: Laura Chapman, a former dean of the School of Nursing at Rutgers University, died of leukemia Jan. 1, at Princeton (N.J.) Medical Center.
She was 78 years old and lived in Piscataway, N.J.


SPEX GROUP INC reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPEX GROUP INC
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,216,000
13,787,000
Net loss
1,077,000
b680,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income


SCHULMAN, A INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCHULMAN, A INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
143,614,000
107,116,000
Net inc
5,823,000
4,126,000
Share earns
.65
.46


Savings Bond Sales Up 16%
LEAD: Sales of United States savings bonds climbed 16 percent in December, the Treasury Department said today.
Sales rose to $630 million in


Three Theater Events Out of Festival
LEAD: Two key theater events planned for the First New York International Festival of the Arts, including a show that would have had its premiere on one of the festival's three opening nights, have been postponed until after the festival, and a third has been canceled, the chairman of the festival board, Martin E.


INTERMAGNETICS GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERMAGNETICS GENERAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 29
1987
1986
Revenue
7,912,000
3,048,000
Net inc
295,000
b849,000
Share earns
.05
-
6mo rev
14,285,000
7,310,000
Net inc
581,000
b784,000
Share earns
.09
-


Cocktail Party to Aid Biaggi
LEAD: Patrick J. Cunningham, a former Bronx and state Democratic chairman who served more than a year in prison for income tax evasion, is sponsoring a cocktail party tomorrow evening at the New York Athletic Club to help defray Representative Mario Biaggi's legal expenses.
It is one of at least five fund-raisers being held for Mr.


No Shelter Funds Cut For Homeless Families
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rockwell-SOMA
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation said it had acquired the assets of SOMA Europe Transmissions S.A., a French automotive-equipment supplier with sales of $80 million in 1987.
Terms were not disclosed.
Rockwell said SOMA, which has a plant in St.
Etienne, complements its own automotive-equipment plants in Europe and Troy, Mich.


EARTH TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EARTH TECHNOLOGY
Qtr to Nov 27
1987
1986
Revenue
5,866,850
5,944,296
Net inc
266,563
272,499
Share earns
.09
.15
Shares outst
2,988,050
1,788,756


Waite Case Fraud Denied
LEAD: One of two men the Church of England said it paid for information about Terry Waite, the kidnapped church envoy, denies that the deal was a fraud.
A church spokesman said Sunday that the $21,000 payment was made to Charles Armstrong and John Entwhistle after they said they would meet with Lebanese contacts who knew Mr.


Chief Financial Officer Is Chosen by Citicorp
LEAD: Nancy S. Newcomb has been named chief financial officer of Citicorp, the nation's biggest banking company announced late yesterday, Ms.
Newcomb, who is 42 years old, has been with Citicorp and its primary subsidiary, Citibank, for 20 years.


Contributors Say LaRouche Misled Them on Donations
LEAD: Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. is using money for his Presidential campaign that some contributors say they thought was going into an anti-AIDS program.


Reagan Seeks Increase In World Bank Money
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is hoping to negotiate an increase in payments for the World Bank that would necessitate annual Congressional appropriations of less than $100 million, Administration officials said today.


Ex-Officials to Hold A Party to Aid Biaggi
LEAD: Patrick J. Cunningham, a former Bronx and New York State Democratic chairman who served more than a year in prison for income tax evasion, is sponsoring a cocktail party tomorrow evening to help defray Representative Mario Biaggi's legal expenses.


ADAC LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADAC LABORATORIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
17,300,000
14,100,000
Net inc
1,900,000
602,000
Share earns
.05
.01


APPLIED POWER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APPLIED POWER INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
37,616,000
28,436,000
Net inc
b3,196,000
c1,324,000
Share earns
.50
.27
b-Includes a tax credit of $450,000.
c-Includes net of $144,000 from discontinued operations.


CINTAS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINTAS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
50,970,000
41,673,000
Net inc
4,039,000
3,321,000
Share earns
.30
.25
6mo sales
96,469,000
76,676,000
Net inc
7,805,000
6,430,000
Share earns
.59
.49


COOPER DEVELOPMENT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COOPER DEVELOPMENT CO (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b58,941,000
c53,650,000
Share earns
18.19
-
Yr net inc
b53,591,000
c61,670,000
Share earns
17.52
-
b-After a gain of $59,721,000 on the sale of discontinued operations for both the quarter and year, an extraordinary credit of $4,189,000 and an extraordinary loss of $522,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and the year also includes income from discontinued operations of $7,775,000.


Owners May Face Fines if Cabs Refuse Service
LEAD: Mayor Koch, asserting that New York City cabdrivers frequently refuse to accept black passengers, proposed yesterday that cab owners be punished if their drivers refuse service to potential passengers.


Arab Marked for Exile: Still a Militant?
LEAD: Just two months before he was ordered deported by the Israeli authorities, Jibril Rajub, 34 years old, promised his wife that he was giving up militancy.


REDICARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REDICARE INC
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,445,000
4,425,000
Net inc
424,000
132,000
Share earns
.05
.02
9mo rev
19,230,000
13,075,000
Net inc
1,409,000
584,000
Share earns
.16
.08
Revenue represents patient revenue.


Game Ends, Scoreless Tie
LEAD: AFTER taking turns swatting each other with the powerless forms of their finest athletes, the Soviet Union and the United States are calling it even.
We got them.
They got us.
On your mark, get set, go.


INTERMETRICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERMETRICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,009,000
11,622,000
Net inc
b602,000
c157,000
Share earns
.17
.05
Shares outst
3,448,000
3,418,000
9mo rev
35,538,000
36,327,000
Net inc
b1,494,000
c448,000
Share earns
.43
.13
Shares outst
3,443,000
3,407,000


Bantering Nofziger Goes on Trial in Case Involving Ethics Law
LEAD: Jury selection began today in the trial of Lyn Nofziger, President Reagan's former political director, on charges of illegal lobbying after he left Government service.


Bishop Sees No Moral Issue If Feeding Ends in Coma Case
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Bishop of Providence, R.I., Louis E. Gelineau, said yesterday that a diocesan official's opinion approving the removal of a feeding tube from a comatose patient ''does not contradict Catholic moral theology.''





Retail Sales Gain of 5.8% Seen for 1988
LEAD: The chief economist for Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company predicted yesterday that sales of general merchandise would increase 5.8 percent in 1988, compared with a 5.2 percent rise last year.


Big Three Get a Tax Break
LEAD: New language inserted in last month's omnibus Federal spending bill appears to have insured that a tax benefit originally intended for a farm-equipment manufacturer will also apply to the Big Three auto makers, Congressional and industry sources said today.


Justice Dept. Plans Anti-Racketeering Drive Against Pornographers
LEAD: In a move to close down several major distributors of pornography, the Justice Department plans to seek a series of racketeering indictments this year designed to seize tens of millions of dollars from the distribution and sale of sexually explicit material.


KN Energy Rejects Mesa Buyout Offer
LEAD: KN Energy Inc. said it had rejected as inadequate an $18-a-share buyout offer from Mesa Limited Partnership.
J.
Robert Wilson, KN Energy's chairman and chief executive, said in a letter to Mesa, of Amarillo, Tex., that the KN board believed the company's continued independence was in its shareholders' best interests.


A Better Way to Tame Bikers
LEAD: New York City still seeks to limit the dangerous excesses of bicycle messengers by banning all bikes from congested midtown blocks.
A comment period on the ban proposal expires today.
The ban does not make nearly as much sense as another city proposal to license the messenger business.


Mets' Tribute to Seaver
LEAD: The Mets announced yesterday that they would retire Tom Seaver's uniform next July 24 in a tribute to ''the best player to perform for the Mets in their 27-year history.''


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.85
6.80
6.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.70
5.86
5.36
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.43
6.35
5.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.75
8.82
6.90
30-YR.


Campaign Trail; Robertson's Resume
LEAD: ''Here's the total picture of Pat Robertson.''


Irving Bank's Adviser
LEAD: The Irving Bank Corporation confirmed yesterday that it had hired J. P. Morgan &amp; Company as a special adviser in Irving's efforts to ward off a hostile takeover bid by the Bank of New York Company.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company remains Irving's principal investment banker, but Morgan, a commercial banking company, is providing advice specifically about commercial-banking matters.


Waldbaum's Agency
LEAD: The Waldbaum's chain of 100 or so supermarkets in the New York area is taking its advertising to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles.
The budget is $5 million.
The chain formerly handled its own advertising.


Music: Chamber Society
LEAD: THE Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center came hearteningly close Saturday afternoon to solving the basic contradiction of its chosen medium - trying to provide a sense of intimacy in a ''chamber'' (Alice Tully Hall) that holds over a thousand people.


STUDENT LOAN MARKETING ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STUDENT LOAN MARKETING ASSN (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
47,770,000
37,239,000
Share earns
1.11
.83
Shares outst
42,388,000
43,887,000
Yr net inc
181,017,000
144,559,000
Share earns
4.14
3.08
Shares outst
43,148,000
45,557,000


TV Review; 'Into the Homeland'
LEAD: HOW do you make a serious subject ridiculous?
One way is to concoct a movie script that seems determined to make believability a hazard that must be studiously avoided.
Witness ''Into the Homeland,'' a made-for-pay-cable movie currently on the Home Box Office schedule.
It can be seen at 10 o'clock this evening.


Babes in Law Land
LEAD: You are checking your notes in preparation for cross-examining the star witness in a sensational murder trial.
The telephone rings.
It's your baby-sitter.
She has the measles!


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE CONSOLATION OF NATURE AND OTHER STORIES.
By Valerie Martin. 147 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $16.95.


Agatha Singer, Physician, 76
LEAD: Agatha Singer, a retired New York City physician who for many years worked in child-health care in the city's Health Department, died Sunday at New York Hospital.
She was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Reagan Battle to Reshape Courts Is in New Arena
LEAD: Message to anyone who might think there are no more battles left to fight over the Reagan Administration's judicial nominees: stay tuned.


Cecil Cooper Waived
LEAD: Cecil Cooper, the Milwaukee Brewers' career leader in batting and runs batted in who did not play after the All-Star break last season, was waived yesterday for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Cooper, 38 years old, played 11 of his 14 major-league seasons with the Brewers.
The five-time All-Star had one year remaining on a contract that called for a reported $700,000 in 1988, not including a deferred payment of $840,000.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A chart with the Eating Well column in The Living Section last Wednesday referred incorrectly to Nabisco Spoon Size Shredded Wheat.


Grass-Roots Reform In Miami Experiment
LEAD: Jim Griffin's sixth-grade classroom at the North Miami Elementary School is home to 36 children, a boa constrictor named Clyde, a cockateel named Keiko, Columbus the turtle, salamanders and a colony of gerbels whose population depends on when you last counted.
Along the back wall is a ''mini-lab'' where students peer into a microscope to examine amoebas or use a computer to calculate wind velocities.


6-Month-Old Drowns In Bathtub in Brooklyn
LEAD: A 6-month-old Brooklyn girl drowned in the bathtub of her parent's Cobble Hill apartment last night while being bathed by a baby sitter, the police said.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Jan. 08
Jan. 1
Jan. 09
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
7.1
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.3
3.0
Gasoline stocks
231.2
227.6
242.4
Distillate stocks
135.7
136.7
152.6
Crude imports, daily
3.9
4.6
4.8
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.2
1.8
Crude stocks
323.3
350.5
336.8
Crude production, daily
8.2
8.2
8.4
Refinery utilization (%)
83.5
85.0
81.5


State Colleges' Appeal To Nonresidents Grows
LEAD: When the tuition at your favorite ivy-covered private college is simply out of the question and you would not be caught dead at your local state university, what to do?


E-II to Talk With Brands
LEAD: Donald P. Kelly, chairman of E-II Holdings Inc., a Chicago-based offshoot of the Beatrice Companies, will meet today with William J. Alley, chairman of American Brands Inc., to discuss ideas to improve American Brands' stock price, both companies said yesterday.


New Sprint Service
LEAD: The U S Sprint Communications Company is offering digital, private-line service for large business customers.
Private lines are used for intracompany communications where high volumes of voice traffic or data are transmitted between sites.
U S Sprint, the third-largest long-distance telephone company, said that the new service, to be called Clearline 1-dot-5, was intended for such large telecommunication users as stockbrokers, airline reservation centers and hotel chains.


Moore to Seek Fourth Term
LEAD: Gov.
Arch Moore, the silver-haired patriarch of West Virginia's Republican Party, has announced that he will seek a fourth four-year term.
The announcement Monday by the 74-year-old Governor ended months of speculation that he would run for the United States Senate.Mr.
Moore won his first of two consecutive terms in 1968, then stepped down.


Harried Lawmakers Find Congress 'Too Chaotic'
LEAD: A study of 114 members of Congress has found that nearly 95 percent complained that the legislative process was ''too chaotic.'' Among other criticisms, most lawmakers said that an ineffectual budget process was increasingly dominating policy considerations.


N.C.A.A. Rejects I-A Football Playoffs
LEAD: A proposed national championship football playoff was overwhelmingly rejected today by the nation's major football schools.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: IT is amusing to think that when French chefs were passing out names for dishes in the days of Escoffier, they often named the simplest of dishes ''a l'anglaise,'' meaning in the English style.
The term was used for foods that were simply boiled in water or stock, like mutton or chicken or potatoes.


Testing 5-Year-Olds: Helpful or Hard on the Ego?
LEAD: In Minneapolis, children can flunk kindergarten.


Trustee Plan At Sharon Steel
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge has ordered that a trustee be appointed to run the Sharon Steel Corporation.
Such a move is likely to reduce control of the nation's 12th-largest steel maker by its chairman, Victor Posner, the Miami financier.


Ron and Nobu
LEAD: Soon after Noboru Takeshita's selection as Japan's leader last October, he received a congratulatory telephone call from President Reagan.


THEATER: ''MIDSUMMER NIGHT''
LEAD: AS festively staged by A. J. Antoon, ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' is the perfect show to inaugurate Joseph Papp's marathon presentation of the entire Shakespeare canon -not by any means because it's perfect Shakespeare, but because it's quintessential Joseph Papp.
The cast is an urban populist's utopian ideal, as diverse in show-biz experience (and inexperience) as it is in ethnic mix.


Back Behind the Wheel
LEAD: Roberto Guerrero, who suffered critical head injuries in September, will climb back into the cockpit of a race car for the first time tomorrow at Firebird International Raceway in Phoenix.
The 29-year-old Colombian driver was injured in a crash during tire testing at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.


Guggenheim Names a New Director
LEAD: The director of the Williams College Museum of Art in Williamstown, Mass., who is known as aggressive museum administrator and an innovator in the field of art museum management, has been appointed the new director of the Guggenheim Museum of Art, museum officials announced yesterday.


FREDERICK'S OF HOLLYWOOD reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FREDERICK'S OF HOLLYWOOD (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
14,283,000
13,294,000
Net inc
114,000
b91,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


The Little King
LEAD: Who is to blame for the loss of more than a score of Palestinian Arab lives in the past month?


Morris Giloni, Stockbroker, 80
LEAD: Morris Giloni, a stockbroker and a member of the board of the Jewish National Fund of America, a group that represents the Herut Zionists, died on Jan. 4 at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
Mr.
Giloni, who had suffered a massive stroke five days earlier at his home in Manhattan, was 80 years old.


N.H.L. All-Stars
LEAD: Mario Lemieux, a center, and Paul Coffey, a defenseman for the Pittsburgh Penguins, were chosen yesterday as starters on the Wales Conference All-Star Team.
The 39th National Hockey League All-Star Game will be played Feb. 9 in St.
Louis.
Lemieux, with 315,699 votes, was the leading vote-getter in the conference and outdistanced his nearest rival, Peter Stastny of the Quebec Nordiques, by nearly 200,000 votes.


4 LATIN PRESIDENTS CAUTIONED BY U.S. ON CONTRAS' FATE
LEAD: The President's national security adviser has warned the leaders of four Central American countries that they could face serious economic and political consequences if Congress lets the contras collapse, according to senior Administration officials and diplomats familiar with the discussions.


Legislators Seek a Panel to Study New York City Board of Education
LEAD: In a move that some New York City officials fear could delay proposed changes in the city's Board of Education, some legislators are pressing for a state commission to examine the structure of the board.


Perils of Gulf Can Be Yours With a Cruise
LEAD: This is the plan: they will sail into the Persian Gulf aboard a vessel offering what the publicity calls ''delicious food, parties, festive activities,'' and offer a vision of peace.


Simon Sees Tax Rise as Likely
LEAD: Senator Paul Simon of Illinois said today that the ''most probable'' way to finance his plan to bolster long-term health care would be to increase Social Security taxes.


Soviet Is Losing Rights To Fish Off West Africa
LEAD: The waters off West Africa -long the Soviet Union's largest overseas source of fish - are increasingly off limits to Soviet fishing boats.


Market Place; 2 Analysts Assail Retailer Inertia
LEAD: TWO Wall Street analysts took on hundreds of retailers yesterday and showed them no mercy.


Mafia Trial Discloses Inquiry Into Jury Tampering
LEAD: The Federal trial of a reputed Mafia ''capo'' and nine other defendants took an unusual turn yesterday when the judge disclosed that he had privately questioned one or more jurors.
The disclosure came amid indications that he was inquiring into possible tampering.


White Columbia Student Ia Ruled Bias Victim
LEAD: A jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan found yesterday that Columbia University had discriminated against a white student by disciplining him after a racial brawl last spring, and awarded the student a nominal $1 in damages.


Educated Guesses About '87 Vintages
LEAD: THERE is a tale about a brash fellow who stopped J. P. Morgan as he left his club and asked, ''Will the market go up or down?'' To which old J. P. is said to have replied, ''Yes.''


East Side Dries Off After Day of Flooding
LEAD: When Helen Costantino Fioratti lifted a soaked antique chair in her Upper East Side shop yesterday, the leg, weakened by moisture, plopped to the floor.


Pan Am Board's Deal With Unions Hits Snag
LEAD: The deal between the board of the Pan Am Corporation and its airline's unions, which would lead to the ouster of the company's top two officers, ran into major snags yesterday.


PSA Official Takes Job At McDonnell Douglas
LEAD: Russell L. Ray, an aviation executive, crossed into hostile territory on Monday.


Macchiarola Assails Board of Education
LEAD: Frank J. Macchiarola, the former New York City Schools Chancellor, excoriated the city's Board of Education yesterday, accusing its members of being ''more concerned with political influence'' than with education.


Campaign Finance Thaw
LEAD: New York's Mayor Koch and the City Council majority leader, Peter Vallone, deserve praise for a compromise on public financing of city election campaigns.
It should make possible Council approval of a landmark campaign finance law.


Lindsay, in Rare Move, Backs Historic District
LEAD: Making a rare public statement before a city agency, former Mayor John V. Lindsay yesterday urged the Landmarks Preservation Commission to protect a huge swath of the Upper West Side of Manhattan from ''unrestrained, unplanned, unthinking, rampant development.''


Jersey Firms Searched in Drexel Case
LEAD: Expanding their investigation of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., Federal authorities confiscated records from a securities firm in Princeton, N.J., last month to gather evidence of possible securities and tax fraud.


Economic Scene; Learning Caution The Hard Way
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the London stock market remains ''jittery and skittish,'' as one highly placed Government economist put it yesterday, there is a growing belief on London's Wall Street that the danger of another market crash is receding.
That belief was strengthened by the ability of equity markets here and around the world to withstand the shock of last Friday's plunge in the New York stock market, when the


Time Capsule and Presidential Proclamation Commemorate King Legacy
LEAD: Coretta Scott King and her son Dexter watching as a time capsule containing memorabilia of the Rev.


SOFTECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOFTECH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 27
1987
1986
Revenue
12,299,000
10,537,000
Net inc
316,000
490,000
Share earns
.09
.14
6mo rev
23,190,000
21,228,000
Net inc
b897,000
965,000
Share earns
.25
.27
b-Includes a gain of $230,000 reflecting an accounting adjustment for income taxes.


Dublin Backs Disputed Road
LEAD: The City Council has agreed to build a four-lane highway that will pass within yards of the Irish capital's Anglican St.
Patrick's Cathedral, despite furious protests from environmentalists.
The council voted on Monday to go ahead with a $3 million highway through the Liberties, the city's most ancient part.


Plain Old Vanilla Isn't All That Plain Anymore
LEAD: DINNER included salad with vanilla vinaigrette, vanilla-glazed beef kebabs and vanilla cream seltzer.
For professional reasons, the diners dutifully consumed eight vanilla custards, or at least took a thoughtful taste; each was made with a different vanilla extract or bean.
Organizers of this unusual vanilla dinner, a gathering of the San Francisco Professional Food Society, had hoped to decide which vanilla was best.


REALTY SOUTH INVESTORS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REALTY SOUTH INVESTORS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,061,000
554,000
Net inc
584,000
418,000
Share earns
.28
.25
Yr rev
3,434,000
2,403,000
Net inc
2,073,000
1,982,000
Share earns
.99
1.03
Shares outst
2,105,000
1,665,000


Concert by Andre Watts Celebrates 25-Year Career
LEAD: Andre Watts, who has been playing a big, rare Romantic piano concerto with the Brooklyn Philharmonic, has three big familiar ones waiting for him tonight at Avery Fisher Hall, the scene of his spectacular television debut under Leonard Bernstein 25 years ago.
As his anniversary celebration approached, Mr.


American's Filing
LEAD: American Airlines has filed a com-plaint with the Department of Trans-portation seeking sanction against British Airways P.L.C. for maintain-ing ''a virtual monopoly'' on its flight schedule system in Great Britian.
The complaints has asked the Govern-ment to ''eliminate several unfair air-line computerized reservation sys-tem practices of British Airways.


Chicago Journal; Poverty Kills a Church That Disaster Couldn't
LEAD: More than a century ago, struggling immigrant families, mostly from Ireland and Italy, pulled together to erect a church that matched their own gritty determination and soaring hopes.


Apply U.S. Pressure To Delay Haiti's Vote
LEAD: It is not too late to help Haiti.
Washington should use what influence it still has there to persuade Lieut.
Gen.
Henri Namphy's ruling junta to postpone the presidential elections scheduled for Sunday.
By gaining more time, the Reagan Administration could help assure that all candidates could take part in a fair election.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: ARCO, Los Angeles, has raised its holdings in British-based Britoil P.L.C. to 23.04 percent from 21.91 percent.


TV STATION FACES PENALTY IN F.C.C. INDECENCY CASE
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission moved today to penalize a television station in Kansas City, Mo., saying it appeared to have violated rules against broadcasting indecent programming at a time when children were likely to be in the viewing audience.


Dollar and Gold Down a Bit As Cautious Mood Prevails
LEAD: The dollar dipped in light trading yesterday as currency dealers warily awaited Friday's report on the American trade deficit.


UNIFIRST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIFIRST CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Revenue
47,824,000
31,167,000
Net inc
b2,473,000
2,936,000
Share earns
.49
.58
b-Includes a gain of $741,000, or 8 cents a share, from the sale of the wiper business, and also includes the results of the Texas Industrial Services unit, acquired in December 1986.


Failed Engine Part Cited in Crash
LEAD: An Air Force fighter jet that crashed into an Indianapolis hotel last October lost power because of the failure of a part that connects the plane's jet turbine to its driveshaft, according to an Air Force report issued yesterday.


Advertising; WCRS Deal Expands Hong Kong Operation
LEAD: Della Femina, Travisano &amp; Partners' sister agency in Hong Kong has just gotten much bigger.


Taiwan Plan For Investing
LEAD: Taiwan is planning ''large scale'' investments in hotels, theaters and other cultural establishments in Hong Kong, according to a Cabinet statement issued Monday.


Lemieux Forces A Tie
LEAD: For too long, neither the Islanders nor the Penguins have felt the comfort that comes with victory, so they have been playing without confidence and with uninspiring results.
Nothing changed tonight and the division rivals emerged with a 5-5 tie.


New Orleans Symphony Cancels Rest of Season
LEAD: Struggling with a large debt and low attendance, the New Orleans Symphony has decided to cancel the rest of its season.


U.S. Ready to Tell Japan It Will Back Nuclear Cooperation Pact
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is prepared to tell Japan during its Prime Minister's visit here this week that the United States intends to proceed with a nuclear cooperation agreement despite Congressional objections, Administration officials said today.


Ashton-Tate Seen In Microsoft Pact
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Company, a leading producer of software for personal computers, is expected to announce a major agreement with the Microsoft Corporation, industry officials said.
The terms of the agreement were not available.
Ashton-Tate, based in Torrance, Calif., and Microsoft, of Redmond, Wash., declined to comment.


About New York; Presto, It's Open! Wizard Is on Call And Expensive
LEAD: Leslie Koerner was having his cheeseburger with a slice of onion and a Dr.
Brown's black cherry soda at Big Nick's on Broadway when his beeper went off and he leaped out the door to find a pay phone.
He was just saying, ''a lot of times people are antagonistic because of the price - they feel they're being ripped off even if they're not,'' when he was summoned.


Another U.S. Study Down the Drain?
LEAD: It is too early to tell if the $1.6 million study on future American military strategy delivered to the President today by a distinguished group of former Government officials and retired military men will suffer the fate of most other such studies.
But it is highly likely.


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: ONE of the first terms of art you learn in the newspaper business is that there is something called the silly season, which used to occur around August.
That was the time of the year when news had ground to a dead halt, when the Mayor was at the beach, the kids were out of school and public relations people called up promoting things like the Madonna look-alike contest.


KEY TRONIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 12
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEY TRONIC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 12
1987
1986
Sales
32,273,000
24,714,000
Net inc
700,000
265,000
Share earns
.08
.03
6mo sales
58,015,000
44,873,000
Net inc
1,386,000
b1,990,000
Share earns
.16
-


Rights Group Reports Iraqis Used Rat Poison on Kurds
LEAD: Amnesty International said yesterday that it had received reliable reports that Iraqi security forces had used rat poison to try to kill at least 40 Kurds opposed to the Government.


Mrs. Dole to Seek More Meaningful Role in Race
LEAD: It was shortly before 8 o'clock this morning, and Elizabeth Hanford Dole was speaking to a Rotary breakfast in a rising voice while her husband sat silently behind her.


CONSTON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSTON CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Revenue
44,715,000
40,995,000
Net inc
242,000
1,651,000
Share earns
.03
.22
9mo rev
139,483,000
128,180,000
Net inc
3,597,000
6,207,000
Share earns
.47
.88


Hart's Campaign Igniting Emotions
LEAD: When Gilbert Fuchsberg, a Harvard student, asked Gary Hart whether he had ever used marijuana or any other illegal drug, he expected that the Democratic Presidential candidate would not like the question.


U.S. Prosecutor Is Resigning
LEAD: The head of the nation's largest Federal prosecutor's office announced his resignation today after leading investigations ranging from espionage to corruption in the administration of Mayor Marion Barry Jr. of Washington.


122 New Yorkers Are Chosen In a Science Talent Search
LEAD: In an improved performance over last year, students at New York City public high schools have won more than one-third of the semifinal places in the national Westinghouse Science Talent Search.


European Jobless Up
LEAD: The number of unemployed in the 12-nation European Community rose to 15.9 million in November from 15.8 million in the previous month, Eurostat, the statistical service, reported today.
Eurostat said the unemployment rate was unchanged at 10.8 percent in nine community nations, excluding Greece, Spain and Portugal.


Curb on News Copters Urged
LEAD: The National Transportation Safety Board is calling for tighter curbs on the use of helicopters by the news media at accident scenes, saying that they often interfere with rescue or cleanup operations.


USX and Bethlehem Lift Sheet Steel Prices
LEAD: Two leading steel companies said yesterday that they had raised prices by 4 percent to 8 percent on their sheet steel products, which are used heavily in the automobile and appliance industries.


New Job for Williams
LEAD: The Chicago Cubs announced yesterday that Billy Williams, a former star outfielder for the team, would join the front office as a special player consultant for the 1988 season.
Williams, 49 years old and a member of the Hall of Fame, will be primarily involved with scouting and evaluating players in the major and minor league.


DIGITAL MICROWAVE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGITAL MICROWAVE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,290,000
5,689,000
Net inc
1,917,000
b1,127,000
Share earns
.16
.11
Shares outst
12,232,000
10,309,000
9mo sales
27,720,000
13,074,000
Net inc
4,936,000
b2,478,000
Share earns
.42
.24
Shares outst
11,828,000
10,147,000


MAYFAIR SUPERMARKETS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAYFAIR SUPERMARKETS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
133,251,000
119,945,000
Net inc
3,008,000
2,127,000
Share earns
.38
.27
The year-ago share earnings adjusted to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split paid in August 1987.


TRANSACTIONS
LEAD:  BASEBALL


GENERAL COMPUTER reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL COMPUTER (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,997,000
3,224,000
Net inc
74,000
b73,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
1,574,000
1,458,000
6mo rev
7,799,000
7,052,000
Net inc
258,000
66,000
Share earns
.17
.05
Shares outst
1,516,000
1,458,000


Commuter Train Kills a Man
LEAD: A 79-year-old man was struck and killed by a Metro-North Commuter Railroad train early today, the police said.
The victim, Eleuterio Giacovelli of Harrison, was hit by the New York-bound train at about 6:30 A.M. just south of the Harrison station, the police said.The train involved was the 6 A.M. from Stamford, due in Grand Central Terminal at 7 A.M.


EDUCATION: Lessons
LEAD: In auditoriums and conference rooms across the country, local school boards are preparing their budgets.
Yet it is unlikely that the process, which involves billions of dollars, is monitored by more than a handful of citizens.
And this lack of interest is perplexing.


MUSIC: 55TH ANNIVERSARY OF COMPOSERS GROUP
LEAD: TO mark the 55th anniversary of its founding, the National Association of Composers, U.S.A., sponsored a program of six works at Weill Recital Hall on Monday evening.
Three of the pieces were given their local premieres and, as it happened, they were the program's least memorable selections.


Governor Offers Vermont a Plan on Controlled Growth
LEAD: In a state where growth has been one of the most divisive issues, Gov.
Madeleine M. Kunin today outlined a set of sweeping proposals that could shape Vermont for years to come.


Hanover Staff Cuts
LEAD: The Manufacturers Hanover Corporation will begin cutting its staff this week to reduce its payroll by 9 percent, the company's chairman, John F. McGillicuddy, said.
Mr.
McGillicuddy said the reductions among the New York-based banking group's 30,134 employees would affect some units more than others.


Neediest Cases Fund Tops Last Year's Record
LEAD: Contributions to the 76th annual appeal of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund have set a record, passing the $3 million mark for the second year in a row.


3 N.B.A. Stars In Dunk Contest
LEAD: Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls will defend his title in the slam-dunk competition during the National Basketball Association All-Star weekend against two former winners, Dominique Wilkins and Spud Webb of the Atlanta Hawks.


At Adolfo, the Antic Mood Moderates
LEAD: BETWEEN periods of turbulence, fashion often simmers down.
Despite the prevalence of lace boleros, fluffy skirts paved in ruched ruffles and the glitter of gold-colored metal, the Adolfo collection for spring and summer actually reflects a moderate mood.
It contrasts with the boisterousness of his last collection, giving women as well as the designer a chance to catch a breath.


To Skate or Not to Skate
LEAD: Michael Ephraim skating in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Today, temperatures are expected to plunge as winds bring arctic air into the area. (NYT/Barton Silverman)


KENTUCKY UTILITIES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENTUCKY UTILITIES CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
124,983,000
129,362,000
Net inc
13,689,000
9,416,000
Share earns
.32
.18
Yr rev
553,245,000
550,859,000
Net inc
73,651,000
64,195,000
Share earns
1.72
1.43


Tripoli Journal; Face to Face With Square Jaws of Billboard Fame
LEAD: As personality cults go, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi's is up there with the most visible.


Lush Life: Investor, 23, Named in Huge Fraud
LEAD: David P. Bloom, a 23-year-old New Yorker with an unregistered investment business, collected $10 million in the last two years from 100 friends and associates to play the stock market.
Instead, according to the Securities and Exchange Commission, he bought himself an art collection, a beach house on Long Island and a reputation as a philanthropist.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: American President Cos., Oakland, Calif., appointed Robert K. Dahl senior vice president and chief financial officer, replacing John Flynn, who left to pursue other interests.


COMPUTERVISION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTERVISION CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
155,374,000
136,495,000
Net inc
8,040,000
d3,471,000
Share earns
.28
.12
Yr rev
564,028,000
494,672,000
Net inc
b19,480,000
c5,774,000
Share earns
.67
-


Concert: From Babbitt, 'Joy of More Sextets'
LEAD: THE title of ''The Joy of More Sextets'' - a recent violin and piano work by Milton Babbitt that had its first local performance Sunday afternoon at Merkin Concert Hall - refers to a work of 20 years ago entitled simply ''Sextets.'' Neither involves a sextet in the conventional sense of six instruments; the term refers to numerical groupings that govern the pitches and other events in the 20-minute work.


New TV System Offers Descriptions for Blind
LEAD: When public television broadcasts a three-part performance of Eugene O'Neill's ''Strange Interlude'' next week, blind and vision-impaired people in nine areas may be able to enjoy the show more than in the past, since an oral description of the visual portions will be broadcast at the same time.


Toyota's Exports
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation expects its exports will be down for the third con-secutive year, its president, Shoichiro Toyoda, said.
A higher Japanese yen and changes in the American tax sys-tem can be blamed for sluggish ex-ports, he said.
Toyota's exports num-bered 1.77 million cars in 1987, down 6 percent from 1.88 million in 1986.


U.S. Would Put Off Sending Child Home Pending Counseling
LEAD: The Reagan Administration, while urging the Supreme Court to lift an interim order barring the return of a 9-year-old boy to Zimbabwe, indicated today that it might allow a brief wait for psychological reasons before returning the boy, who the Administration says was badly abused by his diplomat father.


HILLENBRAND INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HILLENBRAND INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Revenue
199,528,000
171,382,000
Net inc
17,500,000
14,879,000
Share earns
.47
.38
Yr rev
724,602,000
641,067,000
Net inc
57,429,000
50,523,000
Share earns
1.51
1.30


First Titan 4 Is at Canaveral
LEAD: The first Air Force Titan 4, the United States' most powerful unmanned space rocket, arrived here today to be prepared for a launching with a military payload in October.
The 204-foot booster was brought here by a C5A cargo plane from a plant near Denver.
In addition to the Air Force's plans to launch two of the rockets annually from here, the space agency is considering using the Titan 4 for scientific payloads, and its manufacturer, Martin Marietta, wants to market it for commercial customers.


Jane S. Nickerson, 87, Writer and Historian
LEAD: Jane Soames Nickerson, a writer and historian, died Sunday at her home in Locust Valley, L.I.
She was 87 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the articles on daily trading in the stock market yesterday and on Saturday incorrectly ranked Friday's 140.58-point drop in the Dow Jones industrial average.
The decline was No. 13 in percentage terms and No. 3 in points.


EATING WELL
LEAD: IN the New York Times survey of American eating habits published last week, 25 percent of the respondents said they watched their cholesterol intake at every meal.
But when these people were asked what they had eaten the day before, they described meals high in fat and cholesterol.
Like so many of us, the respondents probably were not really sure what to look for when watching the cholesterol in their meals.


What New Tiles?
LEAD: Senators returning from recess later this month might not notice the new tile floor that is being installed in one of the main lobbies on the first floor of the Senate wing of the Capitol.
Their oversight would be understandable, because the new floor looks exactly like the old tile floor that has been in place since it was installed in the 1850's.


Real Estate; Vertical Plan Cuts Costs of Retail Space
LEAD: SHUNNED by retailers and office tenants, the cheapest space in most commercial buildings is to be found in the basement or on the second floor.


Study Finds Antibodies for AIDS In 1 in 61 Babies in New York City
LEAD: One of every 61 babies born in New York City last month carried antibodies to the AIDS virus, indicating that their mothers were infected and that many of the babies were carriers of the deadly virus.


Advertising; Franchising World Now Available to Public
LEAD: Franchising World, the year-old publication of the Washington-based International Franchise Association, is making itself available to the public on a limited number of newsstands and bookstores beginning with its January-February issue.


Australian With U.N. Force Is Killed by Mine in Lebanon
LEAD: An Australian Army captain serving with a United Nations peacekeeping force in Lebanon was killed today when his car ran over a land mine, a United Nations spokesman said.


U.S. Study of Airline Accidents Finds Sharp Increase in 1987
LEAD: The major airlines in the United States had their highest number of accidents in 13 years last year and the most deaths in five years, the National Transportation Safety Board reported today.


What's the Hot Item in Town? Depends on the Town
LEAD: GRANTED, some local favorites make sense: grits in New Orleans, rice in Charleston, S.C., and cranberry juice in Boston.
But why do people in Dallas eat more canned spinach than anyone else in the United States?
And why is New York City, supposedly a center of sophisticated tastes, the Wonder bread capital of the country?


In Reversal, Black Clergy Group Votes to Invite Koch to Memorial
LEAD: In an unexpected reversal, a group of black Baptist clergy members voted to invite Mayor Koch to attend its annual memorial service for the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., the president of the group said yesterday.


Jones Leads St. John's by Rutgers, 73-55
LEAD: Taking a brief respite from the Big East Conference, St.
John's defeated overmatched Rutgers handily, 73-55, last night at Madison Square Garden.


BARRY'S JEWELERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARRY'S JEWELERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
31,732,000
19,379,000
Net inc
647,000
520,000
Share earns
.14
.12
Shares outst
4,582,593
4,586,670
6mo rev
59,530,000
35,091,000
Net inc
628,000
443,000
Share earns
.14
.10
Shares outst
4,584,631
4,586,670


VOLT INFORMATION SCIENCES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VOLT INFORMATION SCIENCES (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 30
1987
1986
Revenue
128,867,000
112,869,000
Net inc
b672,000
c4,841,000
Share earns
.10
-
Yr rev
467,267,000
427,620,000
Net inc
b2,689,000
c4,025,000
Share earns
.39
-


U.S. Says Iran Received More Chinese Missiles
LEAD: An Administration official said today that Iran had received a new shipment of Chinese-built Silkworm missiles by way of North Korea.


Grand Union Plan
LEAD: The Grand Union Company, a unit of Generale Occidentale of Paris, said that a management group, led by its chairman, Floyd Hall, had organized a leveraged buyout for all the assets of the supermarket company, based in Elmwood Park, N.J.
Terms were not disclosed.
The transaction is scheduled to close March 1.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: ON a recent evening Zeus Goldberg, an executive with Restaurant Associates, left the Grand Tier Restaurant at the Metropolitan Opera House.
At the Lincoln Center station he boarded a downtown IRT train.
Some stops later a well-dressed woman laden with shopping bags and assorted parcels got on board.


Reagan Said to Ignore Data on Downing of Jet
LEAD: Three days before President Reagan declared that there was ''no way'' a Soviet pilot could have shot down a Korean Air Lines jet in 1983 by mistake, American intelligence had concluded that a mistake was the likely explanation, according to declassified documents released today.


Bradley Back on Track As Hawkins Leads Way
LEAD: There were rumblings in these parts as early as 1986 after a quiet but devastating sophomore guard led Bradley to a 32-3 record.


Singer Board To Meet on Bid
LEAD: The Singer Company said yesterday that its directors had called a special meeting today to consider a $1 billion takeover bid from Paul A. Bilzerian, the Florida investor.


JAPAN MAY YIELD ON PUBLIC WORKS
LEAD: Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita of Japan will tell President Reagan this week that he is ready for negotiations to open some public works projects to foreign construction companies, Japanese officials said today.


REISTERSTOWN FEDERAL SAVNGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REISTERSTOWN FEDERAL SAVNGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
756,314
457,712
Per share
1.09
-
Year-ago share earnings were unavailable; the company went public in February 1987.


Supreme Court Rules State Judges May Be Sued for Discrimination
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled 8 to 0 today that state court judges may be sued on allegations of discrimination or other illegality in the demotion or dismissal of court employees.


Air Force Pact Set Special to The New York Times
LEAD: The Computer Sciences Corporation said that it had received a five-year, $278 million contract to help conduct flight tests at two Air Force ranges, includ-ing Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave Desert in California.


The Pointless Minuet
LEAD: After the stock market's October blowout Wall Street said it was Washington's fault.
What caused it, said Wall Street, was President Reagan's famous voodoo economics: spend and spend, and tax not, tax not, tax not.


States With 55 M.P.H. Limit Face Millions in U.S. Penalties
LEAD: Twelve states that have retained the 55-mile-an-hour speed limit, including New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, could lose millions of dollars in highway funds under a new quirk in Federal laws and regulations.


ROBESON INDUSTRIES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROBESON INDUSTRIES CORP
Qtr to Nov 27
1987
1986
Sales
13,428,277
18,570,770
Net loss
781,031
b8,836
9mo sales
35,072,506
41,969,407
Net loss
3,980,953
844,319
b-Net income


Iowa Caucuses: Clear as Mud
LEAD: One of the largest concentrations of reporters ever will descend on Iowa Feb. 8 to record the purported success or failure of a baker's dozen of Presidential candidates.
History suggests that relatively narrow margins at the state's Republican and Democratic caucuses could decide which candidates are launched, which are humbled and which are eliminated from the


Kicking About Discrimination
LEAD: Managers of the Radio City Rockettes may pat themselves on the back for finally hiring a black dancer to perform with their world famous New York City chorus line.
Others wonder what took them so long.


John Williams, Ex-Senator, Dies; Represented Delaware for 4 Terms
LEAD: John J. Williams, a Republican Senator from Delaware for 24 years, died of heart and respiratory failure Monday night in a hospital in Lewes, Del.
He was 83 years old and had been in poor health for some time.


Korea Export Rise Seen
LEAD: South Korea's merchandise exports in the first quarter are expected to reach $12.1 billion, up 28.8 percent from the corresponding period last year, the Korea Foreign Trade Association said today.
The association also forecast that the nation's imports in the January-March period would remain at $10.4 billion, creating a trade surplus of $1.7 billion.


The Open-Pit Barbecue: A Texas Tradition in Good Hands
LEAD: THE owner is a 74-year-old Hawaiian-born woman of Japanese descent, the manager is a classically trained British chef, the cooks are originally from Mexico and the waitress is a hillbilly from southern Missouri.
They keep the secret of one of Texas' dearest and most fragile treasures: the traditional open-pit barbecue.


Accidental Shootings of Children Raising Concern
LEAD: Sensational shootings often draw more attention, but to many people here there is something deeply troubling in the numbing frequency of incidents like the one Monday that left 14-year-old Aaron Fultz critically wounded.


Ray Bauduc, Drummer, 81
LEAD: Ray Bauduc, a jazz drummer and composer in the era of the big bands, died Jan. 8.
He was 81 years old.


HELEN OF TROY (CO)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HELEN OF TROY (CO)(O)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
23,154,000
17,834,000
Net inc
2,199,000
b1,708,000
Share earns
.66
.51
9mo sales
52,046,00
42,004,000
Net inc
4,369,000
b3,682,000
Share earns
1.29
1.14


'SWORD OF ISLAM,' ON 13
LEAD: ''SWORD OF ISLAM'' explores the world of Moslem fundamentalists.
The view is not always attractive.
Many of the fundamentalists seem to be in love with death.
Political fanatacism and sexual repression join.
The 90-minute documentary, on Channel 13 at 10 o'clock tonight, is compelling.


Advertising; New Magazine Caters To the Performing Arts
LEAD: A new magazine for the visual and performing arts called Contemporanea, with a publishing frequency of six a year, will make its debut here and in Italy in May.


FIRST AMERICAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMERICAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,346,000
14,122,000
Per share
.36
.70
Yr net inc
b47,764,000
53,657,000
Per share
2.34
2.75
b-After an extraordinary charge of $1,091,000 from the call of debentures for both the quarter and year, and the quarter also includes a pre-tax charge of $10 million from a special provision for loan losses.


American Express Bank Write-Off
LEAD: The American Express Bank said yesterday that it had written off all its loans to Latin America's private sector and added $350 million to its reserves for loan losses.


Gerald Peter Plano, Record Producer, 49
LEAD: Gerald Peter Plano, a record producer for 25 years, died of lung cancer Saturday at his home in Pacheco, Calif.
He was 49 years old.
Mr.
Plano, a native of Los Angeles, was director of arts and repertoire services for RCA/Ariola Records in New York City.
He produced 6,000 special record collections, including more than 30 for Reader's


Texas G.O.P. Ballot Will List All 6 Presidential Candidates
LEAD: Texas Republican officials say the names of all six of their party's Presidential contenders will remain on the March 8 primary ballot despite questions about the validity of some signatures on petitions submitted by four of the candidates.


ALLWASTE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLWASTE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,834,000
8,176,000
Net inc
1,007,000
505,000
Share earns
.13
.09
Shares outst
7,916,000
5,700,000


Is Austin the Next Silicon Valley?
LEAD: IF it were simply a matter of 800 new jobs by 1990, the arrival here of a much sought after experimental research consortium, Sematech, probably would not mean that much for Austin and its growth-conscious city fathers.
After all, the state government payroll alone grew by 2,000 in the Texas capital last year.


Waiting for Christmas
LEAD: Perhaps it had something to do with the uncertainty of United States funding for the anti-Sandinista rebels known as contras: Christmas cards sent to Washington from Miami by the contras' political umbrella group, the Nicaraguan Resistence, were postmarked Jan. 8.


Icahn Objecting to Part Of Texaco-Pennzoil Plan
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn, the financier who holds a 12.3 percent stake in Texaco Inc., filed a motion in Federal Bankruptcy Court yesterday to overturn an accord between Texaco and the Pennzoil Company in which they promise to support Texaco's $5.5 billion reorganization plan.


Confections With Taste and Spectacle, From Two Bakers
LEAD: SOME artists work with oils, some in watercolors.
But Sylvia Weinstock and Colette Peters prefer butter cream, a moist, tender cake and icing.
Although the two women work independently they share the same idea of what a cake should be: an edible extravaganza.


FAMILY DOLLAR STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAMILY DOLLAR STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
146,508,964
126,290,093
Net inc
4,756,312
5,658,575
Share earns
.17
.20


Harvard Leads Tight Race
LEAD: Colgate and Harvard each won twice on their home rinks; Maine captured two games in Colorado, and Plattsburgh State upset Providence.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD: Sky-High Crop Prices


MACHINE TECHNOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACHINE TECHNOLOGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,433,101
3,921,826
Net inc
b41,505
c896,003
Share earns
.01
-
b-After an extraordinary tax credit of $14,000.
c-Net loss


Martin Griffin Jr., Yale Dean and Historian
LEAD: Martin I. J. Griffin Jr., a historian and, for the last dozen years, dean of undergraduate studies at Yale University, died Sunday, apparently of a heart attack, at his campus residence in Saybrook College.
He was 54 years old.


Vikings-Redskins Gives No. 2 Passers Another Chance
LEAD: You don't have to look at the depth chart to find out who the backup quarterbacks are in the National Conference title game Sunday - they'll be starting.


WARNER COMPUTER SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARNER COMPUTER SYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,612,000
4,793,000
Net inc
608,000
307,000
Share earns
.10
.05
Yr sales
20,452,000
16,005,000
Net inc
2,266,000
1,401,000
Share earns
.37
.24


Pluto Reported to Share Atmosphere With Moon
LEAD: Observations of Pluto and its moon Charon, which can now be seen eclipsing each other every few days, are providing astronomers evidence that the two may be the oddest couple in the solar system: a double planet apparently enveloped in a single atmosphere.


U.S.-SOVIET ACCORD ON SCIENCE SIGNED
LEAD: The broadest Soviet-American accord on scientific cooperation in almost a decade was signed here today by the heads of the two countries' top scientific academies, paving the way for greater joint efforts in fields ranging from AIDS research to nuclear reactor safety.


Colombia Says U.S. Reprisals Weaken Support for Drug Fight
LEAD: Colombia has warned that the United States is indirectly aiding powerful cocaine traffickers by carrying out reprisals against Colombians over the release from prison of a reputed cocaine smuggler here in late December.


I.B.M. to Add Sales Agents
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation, seeking to revitalize sluggish sales of mid-sized computers, said today that it would recruit more independent companies to sell those machines.
The program is aimed at reaching the 4.5 million businesses that have fewer than 5,000 employees.
Even I.B.M.


A Day of Pledges, Praise and Skepticism
LEAD: The start of a new legislative session is the day that flowers bloom in plastic pots around the Capitol and Democrats and Republicans acquire a clear-eyed view of what lies ahead for the state.
The Governor delivers his


SUNTRUST BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNTRUST BANKS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
71,100,000
46,500,000
Per share
.55
.35
Yr net inc
282,800,000
242,200,000
Per share
2.17
1.83
Results for the latest and prior-year periods have been restated to comply with the Financial Accounting Standards Board statement concerning accrual of fees and costs associated with loans and leases; the company said the restatement reduced per share earnings by two cents in 1987 and three cents in 1986.


Feeding the Soul: A Lunch With a Religious Fervor
LEAD: Every Wednesday at lunch time - the dead center of the workweek - hundreds of office workers in lower Manhattan file into Mariners' Temple Baptist Church for a rollicking service aimed at lifting people's spirits at a time of the week when those spirits are most likely to be flagging.


PIONEER HI-BRED INTERNAIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIONEER HI-BRED INTERNAIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
53,495,000
47,820,000
Net loss
22,050,000
20,379,000


John H. Johnson Dies; Executive in Baseball
LEAD: John H. Johnson, who presided over the nation's 176 minor-league teams as president of the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues, died of chest cancer yesterday at his home in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
He was 66 years old.


Quintuplets Artificially Conceived Are Born
LEAD: The first birth of quintuplets conceived outside the womb in the United States occurred Monday, officials of the William Beaumont Hospital said today.


Dyncorp Board Sets Bid Deadline
LEAD: The board of Dyncorp said that it would terminate an agreement to be acquired by an investor group led by its chairman, Jorge E. Carnicero, unless the group increases its $216 million takeover offer within five days.
Dyncorp has received a second takeover offer from DME Holdings Inc., a group that includes several Dyncorp managers.


U.S. Legislators Warn Sandinistas on Peace Talks
LEAD: Members of a Congressional delegation visiting Nicaragua said today that they warned the Government here that Congress may approve more aid for rebels if the Sandinistas do not reverse their position and agree to begin direct cease-fire talks with the contras.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If we take fright and stop the processes we have begun, it would have the most serious consequences, because we simply could not raise our people to such a massive task a second time.''  - Mikhail S. Gorbachev, on revitalizing the Soviet Union.  [ A1:5. ]


Beyond New Jersey's Boom
LEAD: With an unemployment rate down to 3.6 percent and jobs increasing by 100,000 a year, New Jersey appears on an economic upswing.
But Governor Kean, in his State of the State Message yesterday, wisely spent less time crowing about the boom than assessing how to prolong it.
He's concerned with those it leaves behind, particularly the homeless.


A Coming Filipino Vote Divides Aquino Family
LEAD: Trucks stacked high with newly harvested sugar cane on the plantation of President Corazon C. Aquino have been flying tiny banners supporting the gubernatorial candidacy of her family's choice, Candido Guiam.


COATED SALES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COATED SALES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
38,040,114
25,374,017
Net inc
3,347,472
2,066,380
Share earns
.17
.11
9mo rev
84,119,490
59,866,469
Net inc
6,839,564
4,123,435
Share earns
.35
.23


TOTAL SYSTEM SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOTAL SYSTEM SERVICES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
13,773,000
9,962,000
Net inc
2,438,000
1,727,000
Share earns
.15
.11
Yr rev
46,285,000
36,353,000
Net inc
7,193,000
5,238,000
Share earns
.45
.33


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Lakers Win 15th Straight: Byron Scott had 30 points for Los Angeles, which scored 10 of its last 14 points on free throws last night in a 117-113 victory against the Golden State Warriors that extended the Lakers' winning streak to 15 games.


Dorsett to Be Traded
LEAD: Coach Tom Landry ruled out getting a first-round draft pick for Tony Dorsett but said yesterday he hopes the Dallas Cowboys can get a solid, journeyman player when they put their 33-year-old running back on the trading block soon.
Landry told Dorsett on Monday he will try to work out a trade for the 11-year veteran who lost his starting tailback job to Herschel Walker this season.


Little Change in Treasury Prices
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices were unchanged to slightly lower yesterday in aimless trading that reflected a widespread lack of conviction about the future course of interest rates.


Estimate Board May Face Limit In Making Deals
LEAD: Mayor Koch called yesterday for a curb on the deal-making powers of the Board of Estimate, of which he is a member, by limiting the board to a simple yes or no vote on land-use issues before it.


Savings Mergers Assailed
LEAD: House Speaker Jim Wright said in an interview published today that he was opposed to steps taken by regulators to merge small, ailing savings and loan institutions into larger institutions.


CITY NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITY NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b40,851,000
29,734,000
Per share
2.02
1.47
b-Includes non-recurring income of $5.4 million from the sale of Instant Teller, City National's automated teller machine business; its payroll processing service and two leveraged leases.


A Civilian President Named in Suriname To End Army Rule
LEAD: The National Assembly elected a civilian President today, paving the way for a return to democracy after seven years of military rule.


Gullickson Signs
LEAD: Bill Gullickson, who spurned a Yankee offer last week, signed a one-year contract today with the Yomiuri Giants.
Gullickson will receive $1.1 million for 1988 plus a contract signing bonus of $400,000 and at least $150,000 in expenses. ''I will try my best for the Giants as I did in the major leagues,'' Gullickson said at a news conference in Tokyo.


Judge Rules for Bush's Side In Michigan G.O.P. Dispute
LEAD: A Federal distjrict judge today dismissed a consi-tutional challenge to seven state laws, giving supporters of Vice President Bush a new legal victory over a coali-tion that controls the Michigan Repub-lican Party.


Energy Contracts Decline In Rumor-Driven Session
LEAD: Energy futures prices closed moderately lower yesterday after being whipsawed by rumors throughout the trading session.


Chase Appoints Citicorp Official
LEAD: Richard L. Huber, formerly an executive in Citicorp's investment bank, has joined the Chase Manhattan Corporation as sector executive for capital markets and foreign exchange.


Lendl, Navratilova Advance
LEAD: Ivan Lendl, seeking his first Australian Open singles title, and Martina Navratilova, going after her fourth, made quick work of second-round foes today.


What Texans Read
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gallup Poll Sees Rise in Support for Kemp in New Hampshire
LEAD: A poll taken by the Gallup Organization in New Hampshire shows growing support for Representative Jack F. Kemp's bid for the Republican Presidential nomination.


Mark Saxton, A Book Editor, Is Dead at 73
LEAD: Mark Saxton, an author and editor, died, apparently of a heart attack, last Thursday in his home in New York City.
He was 73 years old.


PAKISTANI LEADERS BACK COMPROMISE FOR AFGHAN PEACE
LEAD: Pakistan's two senior leaders have concluded that some members of the pro-Moscow Government in Afghanistan must be allowed to take part in a successor government as a condition for the withdrawal of Soviet troops.


State Dept. Adviser Says Shutting P.L.O. Mission Would Break Law
LEAD: Abraham D. Sofaer, the State Department legal adviser, says that closing the Palestine Liberation Organization observer mission to the United Nations, as Congress has mandated, would violate international law.


Rate Is Tied To Price Index
LEAD: Morgan Stanley &amp; Company is offering a new type of debt security on which the interest rate will be adjusted according to changes in the Government's Consumer Price Index.


AMERICAN HOIST &amp; DERRICK CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN HOIST &amp; DERRICK CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
65,929,000
54,631,000
Net inc
b1,413,000
c56,365,000
Share earns
.15
-
Yr sales
279,415,000
253,308,000
Net inc
b15,118,000
c70,289,000
Share earns
2.01
-


26 Twins to Get Shares of $85,581
LEAD: Twenty-six players from the champion Minnesota Twins will receive full shares of $85,581 each from the second-largest World Series pool, the commissioner's office announced yesterday.


History Has Become Retrospective Sociology
LEAD: To the Editor:


Debt
LEAD: Florida Department of Natural Resources is tentatively offering $25 million of tax-exempt ''Save Our Coast'' revenue bonds through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
The bonds, insured by the Municipal Bond Investors Assurance Corporation, yield from 5.60 percent for an issue due in 1989 to 8 percent in 2012; they are rated triple A.


North Korea Threat May Be on Wane
LEAD: The United States' two members of the International Olympic Committee and a senior State Department official said yesterday that the presence of many allies of North Korea, including the Soviet Union, would serve as a deterrent to the possibility of disruptive actions by North Korea during the Seoul Olympic


Getting Good Value For Research Dollars
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gerry Letourneau, Executive, 52
LEAD: Gerry Letourneau, president of Airstream Inc., a leading manufacturer of motor homes, died in a snowmobile accident Saturday.
He was 52 years old.


Rare Funerary Mask at the American Museum
LEAD: The solid gold ''Hoover Disk'' after it was installed in its case yesterday at the American Museum of Natural History's new Hall of the South American Peoples.
The face-size disk, from the Tiwanaku culture, A.D. 400 to 1000, is on loan from the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace at Stanford University.


GORBACHEV SEES CRUCIAL PERIOD FOR HIS CHANGES
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev said in an interview made public today that his domestic initiatives offer the current generation of Russians the last chance to reshape their country.


Donald S. Curtis, Investment Analyst, 78
LEAD: Donald S. Curtis, a financial analyst who retired as vice president in the investment research department of Marine Midland Bank in 1974, died Jan. 3 at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital after a long illness.
He was 78 years old and lived in Old Greenwich.


Dance: Ukrainian State Company
LEAD: IF one had to name the two great pioneering folk dance ensembles from the Soviet Union that became the model for all other professional folk companies in the world, they would have to be the companies founded separately by two choreographers, Igor Moiseyev and Pavel Virsky.


Portfolio Insurers Reject Blame
LEAD: Facing renewed criticism that they were to blame for the October market collapse, money managers offering portfolio insurance are instead pointing the finger at other market players.


Biden Gives Kinnock Copy of His Speeches
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., meeting Neil Kinnock for the first time, today presented the Labor Party leader with a bound copy of the Senator's speeches and told reporters: ''I told him he was welcome to use them whenever he liked, with or without attribution.''


Gladys Vaughan, 64, A Theatrical Director
LEAD: Gladys Vaughan, the first woman to direct a New York Shakespeare Festival production, died Dec. 30 in her home in Manhattan.
She was 64 years old.


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 13, 1988
LEAD:  International


Price's Extra Effort Paces Cavaliers
LEAD: Mark Price scored 9 of his career-high 29 points in the final four minutes tonight to help the Cleveland Cavaliers defeat the Knicks, 119-111.


2 Fire Doors Were Wedged Open In Building Where Smoke Killed 4
LEAD: The smoke that killed four residents of an apartment building on the East Side of Manhattan Monday night spread through the structure because two lobby-level fire doors had been wedged open in violation of the fire code, the authorities said yesterday.


Citicorp Unit Cuts 85 Jobs in London
LEAD: Citicorp Investment Bank Ltd. said it would cut 85 jobs in its London securities division, or just under 4 percent of its staff.
The investment bank has 2,200 employees.
Citicorp, based in New York, has a total work force of 4,500 in Britain.


Thriving on Currency Tumult
LEAD: For months, betting against the dollar seemed a sure thing to the global army of traders who ply the $200 billion-a-day currency market.
Going into the new year, most foreign-exchange traders expected the United States currency to fall even more.


Insurance Companies Also Need Some Reform
LEAD: To the Editor:


CAREERCOM CORP reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAREERCOM CORP (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
84,248,816
45,012,586
Net inc
4,398,075
2,450,226
Share earns
.56
.35
Shares outst
7,897,183
7,072,250


ELECTRO AUDIO DYNAMICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTRO AUDIO DYNAMICS INC
Qtr to Aug 1
1987
1986
Sales
34,185,000
760,000
Net loss
b1,014,000
c4,805,000
Yr sales
105,309,000
3,194,000
Net loss
b1,139,000
c8,326,000
b-Includes a loss of $229,000 and net of $1,486,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, both from discontinued operations; and the quarter also includes an extraordinary charge of $171,000 for reversal of an income tax credit.


FIRST EASTERN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST EASTERN CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,602,000
3,976,000
Share earns
.75
.53
Shares outst
7,484,010
7,435,000
Yr net inc
19,100,000
15,094,000
Share earns
2.56
2.06
Shares outst
7,453,880
7,326,176


Rise Sought In Cocoa Prices
LEAD: Emergency talks between cocoa-producing and consuming nations will open here on Wednesday in hopes of establishing mechanisms to support prices in a glutted market.


The Greed of the Notch Babies
LEAD: The Notch Babies: They are not babies at all but an angry special interest group of Social Security recipients in their late 60's.
Timothy Noah, writing in The New Republic, called them ''a parody of a special interest group.'' But as the Presidential candidates are learning on the campaign trail, the seven million Notch


Sihanouk Will Meet A Coalition Partner Before Peace Talks
LEAD: Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann, the leaders of the two non-Communist forces battling the Vietnamese-backed Government in Cambodia, are planning to meet in Paris on Monday, Mr.
Son Sann said today.


WESTWOOD ONE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTWOOD ONE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
27,876,000
16,606,000
Net inc
1,910,000
2,268,000
Share earns
.16
.18
Yr rev
87,214,000
59,297,000
Net inc
8,919,000
6,286,000
Share earns
.73
.62


Stargell to Cooperstown In First Year of Eligibility
LEAD: Willie Stargell, the longtime Pittsburgh Pirate slugger who struck a formidable pose at the plate and in the clubhouse, gained admission to the Baseball Hall of Fame last night in his first year of eligibility.


Israel Moves to Impose Curfew on Palestinians
LEAD: The Israeli Army, stunned by more than a month of protests in the occupied territories, is sealing off refugee districts and ordering Palestinians to stay in their houses, sometimes for days at a time.


Xerox Credit
LEAD: The Xerox Credit Corporation is offering $200 million of 8 5/8 percent notes due in 1991 at a price of 99.93 to yield 8.65 percent through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
Rated A-2 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp;P., the three-year notes yield about 67-hundredths of a percentage point more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


One Agency Clears Scientist Of Breaking Genetics Rules
LEAD: The National Institutes of Health concluded today that a scientist at Montana State University did not violate the agency's guidelines for research when he injected genetically modified bacteria into 14 young elm trees last spring.


Freedom of the Press in Frontier Days
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tax-Exempt Market Active With Three Large Offerings
LEAD: Activity in the tax-exempt market rebounded yesterday with three new issues of more than $120 million each.


MGM/UA COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MGM/UA COMMUNICATIONS (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
181,978,000
130,997,000
Net inc
b2,084,000
2,623,000
Share earns
.04
.05
b-Includes a pre-tax gain of about $3 million from the sale of the company's corporate headquarters building in September 1987.


MARYLAND FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARYLAND FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Net inc
861,000
986,000
Per share
.31
-
9mo net inc
2,242,000
2,344,000
Per share
.57
-
There are no per share earnings for the year-ago periods because the association converted to public ownership in June 1987.


Boy, 6, Handling Gun, Kills Brother, Who Is 7
LEAD: A 7-year-old boy was accidentaly shot to death by his 6-year-old brother, who was playing with a loaded revolver last night in their apartment in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, the police reported.


DESIGNCRAFT INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DESIGNCRAFT INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
17,435,000
19,990,000
Net loss
1,519,000
c361,000
Share earns
-
.14
9mo sales
48,153,000
47,426,000
Net loss
b26,000
c665,000
Share earns
-
.32


BEEBA'S CREATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEEBA'S CREATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
20,712,027
17,838,423
Net loss
b454,701
c375,346
Share earns
-
.10
b-Includes the effect of the company's $580,000 loss realized on the sale of marketable securities as a result of the Oct.


G.O.P. Battling Over Giuliani's Future
LEAD: The selection of a new Federal prosecutor in Manhattan has touched off a major behind-the-scenes confrontation between Rudolph W. Giuliani, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, according to Republicans close to both men.


SOUTHINGTON SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHINGTON SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
624,000
783,000
Per share
.35
.43
Yr net inc
2,591,000
2,589,000
Per share
1.42
-
The bank converted to stock ownership in July 1986.


2 Killed in Zimbabwe Blast
LEAD: Two people were killed and three were wounded when a car bomb wrecked a suburban villa used by the African National Congress, the outlawed South African rebel group, a Zimbabwe official said today.
The official said those killed may have been planting the bomb outside the house in Trenance, a suburb of Bulawayo.


Santa Fe Plans Staff Cutbacks
LEAD: The Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation said today that it would reduce its corporate staff to about 125 positions, from 371 positions, as part of a restructuring plan to sell its non-core businesses.
Separately, Olympia &amp; York


Advances; A Device To Assist The Heart
LEAD: EVERY year, cardiologists estimate, tens of thousands of Americans with heart disease are potential candidates for a heart transplant or an artificial device to assist the heart.
According to some estimates, at least half of them have a defect of the left ventricle, the part of the heart that often wears out first.


Wings' Yzerman Flourishes On Graceful Scoring Touch
LEAD: When he discusses the notable contributions of Steve Yzerman to the Detroit Red Wings this season, Jacques Demers, the coach, acknowledges them in the context of the split personality of professional hockey.


TV and Politics: 2 Cities Give Hint of the Impact
LEAD: Iowans besieged by politicians and their electronic messages since before 1988 began, are growing weary of the prolonged Presidential campaign.
In Texas, voters are still trying to sort out just who is running for the White House.


Driver Disputes Charge
LEAD: Rene Poulin, one of six drivers suspended by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board Dec. 2 for what the board termed ''lack of effort'' in a race Nov. 14, testified yesterday that his pacer could have won, instead of finishing third, if the horse, Handy Yankee, had not stretched his left hobble early in the fourth race at Yonkers


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A report in the Business People column yesterday characterized the Continental Illinois Corporation's business strategy incorrectly.
The bank is emphasizing investment banking and leaving retail banking, but it will continue other aspects of commercial banking, including trust services, lending and providing personal banking services for wealthy customers.


Jaguar in Pursuit of Porsche
LEAD: The British are coming.


Citicorp Auction
LEAD: Interest rates were mixed at Citicorp's regular weekly auction of commercial paper.
The bank holding company sold $50 million of 91-day paper at an average rate of 6.8845 percent, down from 6.908 percent last week.
Another $50 million of 182-day paper sold at an average rate of 7.073 percent, up from 7.0184 percent.


Robins Gets New Offer From American Home
LEAD: With the support of a committee representing shareholders in the A. H. Robins Company's bankruptcy proceedings, the American Home Products Corporation yesterday sweetened its takeover bid for the Richmond-based drug company.


World Military Spending Up By $50 Billion, Study Finds
LEAD: The nations of the world spent about $930 billion on their military forces last year, an increase of $50 billion over 1986, and the United States ranked first in such spending, a military and social researcher reported nan annual study made public this week.


Katherine Fenimore Cooper, Horticulturist, 92
LEAD: Katherine Guy Fenimore Cooper, a horticulturist and member of the boards of many charitable groups, died Friday at her home in Cooperstown, N.Y.
She was 92 years old.


Report Criticizes 2 Relatives In Child's Fall in Texas Well
LEAD: Jessica McClure fell into an abandoned well as a result of inadequate supervision by her mother and an aunt, a state official says in a letter.


Resorts Bid Withdrawn By Trump
LEAD: The developer Donald J. Trump withdrew his offer to buy control of Resorts International Inc. today and said he would probably be forced to halt construction of the huge Taj Mahal casino hotel.


Bridge: First Big Regional Tourney For 1988 Is Opening Today
LEAD: The first major tournament of 1988 for players in the New York metropolitan area, the Tri-State Regional, begins today at the Rye Town Hilton in Port Chester, N.Y.
This is the schedule: Today - Men's pairs and women's pairs, 1:30 and 8 P.M.


A Scholar Guides China's Food Policy
LEAD: WANG QING was 17 years old in 1967, when Red Guards surrounded her home here and placed her entire family under house arrest.


F.B.I. Study Hints Some Lied To Hide Ginsburg Drug Use
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation will forward information to the Justice Department indicating that associates of Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg lied to investigators when they denied knowledge of the judge's past marijuana use, law-enforcement officials said today.


Brazil Pays Creditor Banks
LEAD: Brazil's creditor banks said yesterday that they had received a $360 million payment of overdue 1987 interest.
With another interest payment on Dec. 31, the latest remittance brings to $1.46 billion the amount of 1987 interest that Brazil has paid so far.


Robert F. Kennon, 85; A Louisiana Governor
LEAD: Robert F. Kennon, who was Governor of Louisiana from 1952 to 1956, died Monday.
He was 85 years old.


Con O'Neill, Diplomat, 75
LEAD: Sir Con O'Neill, who led the intricate negotiations that took Britain into the European Economic Community, died Monday, his family said.
He was 75 years old.


CONSOLIDATED PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 23
1987
1986
Sales
21,543,029
19,909,930
Net inc
929,816
b502,192
Share earns
.28
.15
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $190,000.


BUSH RETREATING FROM DOLE BATTLE
LEAD: Vice President Bush retreated today from the recent verbal barbs at Senator Bob Dole, saying the sharp public sparring had been a ''mistake.''


Korean Oil Imports
LEAD: South Korea's crude oil imports this year are expected to drop 6.6 percent from last year, to 215 million barrels, the Energy and Resources Ministry said today.


Confusion In the Cockpit
LEAD: PATRICK EWING has a problem with aerodynamics, primarily and most deleteriously on defense.
He is often seen flying through the air when his wheels should be firmly on the floor.


Advertising; Over All, '88 Forecasts Are Bullish
LEAD: AMONG the upper echelons of Madison Avenue there is more optimism about the immediate future than you're likely to find among the mighty of Wall Street.


Aged Twins Slain in Illinois
LEAD: Elderly twin brothers who lived as recluses in a house filled with trash were beaten to death and the house set afire, the authorities said today. ''The fire was used to cover the crime,'' said Fire Chief Tom Anderson. ''The motive at this time is unknown.'' The bodies of the victims, Roy and Irl McNutt, 79 years old, were found Saturday in their living room.


G.M. Weighing Venezuela Sale
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said today that it was negotiating the possible sale of a stake in its Venezuelian operations to the Mendoza Group, a local conglomerate.


U.N. Envoy Rebuffed in the Gaza Strip
LEAD: Palestinian women in Gaza City pleading with Marrack Goulding, in car, a United Nations Under Secretary General, to intercede for relatives.
Mr.
Goulding was turned away from one refugee district by Israeli troops and from another by protesting Palestinians.
The army has imposed round-the-clock curfews in some areas.


Judge Orders Readjustment Of Allowances for Housing
LEAD: A New York State judge yesterday ordered a temporary halt to the eviction of all New York City families on welfare whose monthly rent is higher than the shelter allowance provided by the state.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about pedestrians walking on a plank bridge over a Manhattan street flooded by a water main break misidentified the location.
It was Park Avenue at 73d Street.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 13, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-13


Home Loan Banks
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Banks offered one-year and three-year bonds totaling $1.8 billion through various securities dealers yesterday.
For $690 million of bonds due on Jan. 25, 1989, the yield is 7.40 percent, while a $1.12 billion issue due on Jan. 25, 1991, yields 8.30 percent.
Both issues were offered at a price of 100.


Cuomo 'Wrestling' With State Budgeet
LEAD: Governor Cuomo and Wayne Diesel, the budget director, at right, as they reviewed the state budget in the Governor's office Monday night in Albany.
Below, in a light moment, the Governor took a scissors to the document and ceremonially stomped on it.
Mr.
Cuomo will present the budget to the Legislature today.


PAYLESS CASHWAYS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAYLESS CASHWAYS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
458,580,000
404,816,000
Net loss
b2,690,000
c10,945,000
Share earns
-
.32
Yr sales
1,768,130,000
1,525,648,000
Net inc
28,101,000
42,352,000
Share earns
.81
1.22


Blizzard Strikes the Northern Plains
LEAD: Pedestrians braving blizzard conditions yesterday in St. Cloud, Minn.


Canadian Jet Lands After Bomb Warning
LEAD: A Canadian jumbo jet bound from Amsterdam to Vancouver with 263 people aboard landed safely here today after a note was found in a washroom saying explosives were on the plane, the police reported, No explosives were found, the police and Federal officials said.


Democracy's Fair Weather Friend
LEAD: The new year has started with democracy in retreat in several countries, yet the Reagan Administration, quick to claim credit when there's good news, now prefers to ignore, or disguise, the bad.


TELECRAFTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELECRAFTER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,357,000
3,993,000
Net inc
297,000
526,000
Share earns
.04
.10
Shares outst
7,451,000
5,451,000


PREMIER RESOURCES LTD reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PREMIER RESOURCES LTD
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,828,000
3,863,000
Net loss
54,000
2,131,000


WESTERN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
925,000
974,000
Per share
.54
.56
Yr net inc
4,208,000
4,707,000
Per share
2.39
2.71


Remy Martin Bid
LEAD: The French brandy distiller Remy Martin said it would bid for a 60 percent stake in the venerable liqueur maker Benedictine.
Terms were not dis-closed, but based on its recent market price, Benedictine is valued at 854 million francs, or about $155 million.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Versatile Swayze


Wonderful Belgrade
LEAD: For a number of years, Belgrade has been considered one of the prize ambassadorial posts for those in the United States Foreign Service and when it opens up there is hot competition for it.


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: Highlights for Children magazine to McCaffrey &amp; McCall Direct Marketing.


The Coatroom Question: How Big a Tip?
LEAD: THE only time most of us give a second thought to coat checking is when the coat checker can't find our coats.
And that is part of the reason many people don't leave tips and others tip far too little, according to some coat checkers and their employers.


Triangle Package Unit Hires Chip Executive
LEAD: William N. Sick, executive vice president of Texas Instruments Inc., switched yesterday to packaging from electronics, announcing that he had been named chief executive of the American National Can Company.


Too Immature For Retirement
LEAD: Mack Lobell, the 1987 Harness Horse of the Year who was retired from racing in December to stand at stud, will return to competition as a 4-year-old, his owners announced yesterday.


Florence Knapp, Former Teacher, 114
LEAD: Florence Knapp, a retired teacher who was recognized by the Guinness Book of World Records as the world's oldest person, died Monday at the Dock Terrace nursing home here.
She was 114 years old.


Return New York City Transit Police to the Transit Authority
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Stargell Makes Hall of Fame


Yankees Still Hope To Bolster Pitching
LEAD: The Yankees' search for pitching help remains at a standstill, just five weeks before pitchers and catchers have to report for spring training.
Lou Piniella, the team's general manager, said yesterday that he was conducting talks with several teams, but that there was little chance a deal would be made soon.


Yanks Pursuing Boddicker
LEAD: Neither side is talking publicly, but it appears the Yankees and the Baltimore Orioles are involved in some serious discussions about a trade that could involve as many as seven players.


Psychiatric Test Is Ordered for Homeless Woman
LEAD: A State Supreme Court justice yesterday ordered an independent psychiatric examination of Joyce Brown, the 40-year-old woman whose involuntary hospitalization has become a test of New York City's powers to remove disturbed homeless people from the streets.


TAIWAN AT A GLANCE
LEAD:  People


DATA TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
25,644,000
17,345,000
Net inc
527,000
b839,000
Share earns
.05
.14
Shares outst
11,420,000
6,067,000
9mo rev
76,083,000
43,761,000
Net inc
2,517,000
b1,266,000
Share earns
.24
.21
Shares outst
10,657,000
6,067,000


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Ogden Phipps resigned as an active member of the New York Racing Association's board of trustees and was named a director emeritus.
Phipps, 79 years old, had served on the board since its inception in 1959.
Arthur F. Long, a member of the Jockey Club since 1981 and an owner of thoroughbreds for 23 years, has been nominated to replace Phipps on the board.


DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
2,782,252,000
2,271,842,000
Net inc
329,532,000
269,960,000
Share earns
2.48
2.02
6mo rev
5,312,025,000
4,310,309,000
Net inc
599,474,000
452,588,000
Share earns
4.50
3.39


Oilers and Interlopers
LEAD: The National Hockey League calls it an All-Star team, but the Campbell Conference starters who will face a group of Wales Conference stars in St.
Louis on Feb. 9 could just as well be called the Edmonton Oilers and a couple of friends.
Four of the six Campbell starters selected in balloting by fans are Oiler regulars.


Reagan to Speak on Jan. 25
LEAD: President Reagan will deliver his State of the Union Message before a joint session of Congress on Jan. 25, the White House announced today.
The nationally broadcast address will begin at 9 P.M., Eastern standard time.


Public Halts A Ballet By Bejart
LEAD: Maurice Bejart's second ballet presentation in his new home was marred on Tuesday night when spectators booed and complained they could not see.


Carefree Landscape
LEAD: WHEN the landscaping is finished George Walter will have plenty to see, hear, sniff and harvest.
Otherwise, he won't have a lot to do.
No pruning, weeding, spraying, mowing or fertilizing, and very little watering.


Rangers Beaten By Red Wings
LEAD: When last at the Garden, Jacques Demers, coach of the Red Wings, exited without the benefit of his eyeglasses, having hurled them across the ice in a fit of pique after a 4-3 loss to the Rangers.


Singer Backs Bid
LEAD: The Singer Company's board of directors approved a once-hostile $1.06 billion takeover bid by a group led by the Florida investor Paul A. Bilzerian, and it recommended shareholders tender their stock.
The Montvale, N.J., military electronics company said in a statement that its board considered the $50-a-share offer ''fair and in the best interests of the company.


Cat Out of the Bag
LEAD: Elliott Abrams and Lieut. Gen.


Bridge: Sometimes the Vital Card Is Hard to See in Advance
LEAD: A great many crucial contracts hinge on possession of some apparently trivial spot card that played no role whatever in the auction.
It would be hard to guess in advance which of South's cards is vital on the diagramed deal from the North American Swiss Team Championship in the Fall Nationals in Anaheim,


Texaco Facing Back Tax Claim For $6.5 Billion
LEAD: Texaco Inc., the nation's third-largest oil company, disclosed yesterday that the Federal Government might seek $6.5 billion in back taxes as part of Texaco's bankruptcy proceedings.


Shakespeare Troupe Eyes Weak Dollar
LEAD: Britain's financially troubled Royal Shakespeare Company is feeling the pinch of the weaker dollar and could face a fresh crisis as American theatergoers stay away, its artistic director warned today.


Murdoch to Petition F.C.C. on Property Rule
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch, trying to keep his media properties in the face of Federal legislation that might require him to give some of them up, is to file a petition today with the Federal Communications Commission, arguing that the legislation is unconstitutional, his lawyers said yesterday.


Recalling the Blizzard of 1888
LEAD: New Yorkers who are up to a slushy slog to Central Park West and 77th Street may sneer at the current messiness when they encounter an exhibition on the legendary Blizzard of '88 - 1888, that is.


Corrections
LEAD: The Personal Computers column in Science Times on Tuesday misstated the telephone number for Broderbund, the maker of Jam Session software.
Its correct number is (800) 527-6263.


Currents; The Cans and Caps of Furniture Art
LEAD: CREATING furniture and decorative objects from recycled materials has been an American tradition since the 1870's, when itinerant artists used discarded cigar, fruit and vegetable boxes to make things like lamps, picture frames and tables.
These carved pieces, known as tramp art, are widely sought today, and are often found at country fairs and flea markets.


BARNETT BANKS OF FLORIDA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARNETT BANKS OF FLORIDA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
52,400,000
39,300,000
Per share
.87
.66
Yr net inc
198,900,000
169,800,000
Per share
3.31
2.87
The company said earnings for the year-ago fourth quarter and all of 1986 were reduced by an extraordinary charge of $4.5 million related to a merger.


Katia Ricciarelli, Ill, Cancels Monday Recital
LEAD: A recital by Katia Ricciarelli scheduled for Monday at Alice Tully Hall has been canceled because the soprano is ill and cannot come to New York City, the concert hall has announced.


Objects Detected in Universe May Be the Most Distant Ever Sighted
LEAD: Astronomers, applying new technologies for looking deeper into time and space, have detected what they believe may be the oldest and most distant objects ever seen in the universe.


String Sinfonia Concert
LEAD: The New York String Sinfonia is to present a concert at Central Presbyterian Church, 593 Park Avenue, at 64th Street, tomorrow night at 8 o'clock.
The program is to feature Grieg's ''Holberg Suite'', Marcello's Oboe Concerto in C minor, Turina's ''La Oracion del Torero'' and Tchaikovsky's Serenade for Strings in C.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Cerus, Paris, a holding company controlled by the Italian financier Carlo de Benedetti, agreed to sell to News International, the British subsidiary of the News Corp., Rupert Murdoch's holding company, its 4.9 percent share in Pearson Group, owner of The Financial Times newspaper.


TOWN &amp; COUNTRY JEWELRY MANUFACTURING reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOWN &amp; COUNTRY JEWELRY MANUFACTURING (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
46,383,535
35,865,021
Net inc
b3,501,991
2,592,287
Share earns
.34
.31
Shares outst
10,519,751
9,094,290
9mo sales
109,036,492
76,443,146
Net inc
5,310,472
3,796,083
Share earns
.56
.44


Music: Juilliard Quartet
LEAD: AS if to test the mettle of its audience at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday evening, the Juilliard String Quartet programmed not two but three hefty works by Brahms from the 1870's -pieces in which the composer went out of his way to declare himself a creator of serious, large-scale music.
The concert wedged the huge B flat major Quartet (Op.


U.S. Says It Will Stay Firm in Arms Talks With Soviet
LEAD: The United States will stick to key elements of its position on reducing long-range nuclear arms when American and Soviet negotiators begin a new round of talks in Geneva on Thursday, Administration officials said today.


William Duff, Theater Investor, 58
LEAD: William Duff, a theater investor and actor, died of heart failure Tuesday at Danbury Hospital in Danbury, Conn.
He was 58 years old and lived in Redding, Conn.


Durban Journal; Apartheid's Guardians Yield Beachhead t0 Change
LEAD: As Mayor of Durban, Henry Klotz faces problems that are in many ways a microcosm of those confronting the country.


Bush, in a Shift of Strategy, Appeals to the Unregistered
LEAD: When Vice President Bush was bruised by a third-place finish in an Iowa straw poll last September, two aftershocks ensued.


Home Improvement
LEAD: WALLBOARD, prefabricated panels of gypsum sheathed in heavy paper, was first marketed in the United States after World War I. But it was not until the housing boom following World War II that wallboard really began to replace lath and plaster walls.


AMERICAN RECREATION CENERS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN RECREATION CENERS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 25
1987
1986
Revenue
6,244,000
6,214,000
Net inc
b49,000
363,000
Share earns
.01
.08
6mo rev
10,700,000
10,615,000
Net inc
b377,000
179,000
Share earns
.09
.04


To Freshmen, a Big Goal Is Wealth
LEAD: A record proportion of more than three-quarters of college freshmen surveyed around the country feel that being financially well off is an ''essential'' or ''very important'' goal.
At the same time, the lowest proportion of freshmen in 20 years, only 39 percent, put great emphasis on developing a meaningful philosophy of life.


Howard Beach Prosecutor Lectures at N.Y.U.
LEAD: Charles J. Hynes, special state prosecutor, speaking at Backman Auditorium in Manhattan.
Mr.
Hynes said he supported the formation of a commission by Governor Cuomo to meet and discuss race-related issues, proposed by David N. Dinkins, Manhattan Borough President. (The New York Times/Keith Meyers)


Bond Prices Moderately Higher
LEAD: Bond prices rose modestly yesterday, with all the gains coming after the dollar improved and oil prices fell from their morning highs.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JANUARY 14, 1988
LEAD: International A3-13, B7


A Renaissance in American Manufacturing Shops Is Coming
LEAD: To the Editor:


Growing Older: A Call for Self-Determination for Women
LEAD: Although women today are living longer and more vigorously than their mothers did, growing older in America can still be a series of blows to self-esteem.


Britons' U.S. Takeovers Up
LEAD: British spending on takeovers of United States companies more than doubled last year, according to a study published today.


August T. Baden, Toothpick Producer, 93
LEAD: August T. Baden, a drugstore owner who founded cinnamon-flavored Baden's Hot Toothpicks almost 40 years ago, died Sunday.
He was 93 years old.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the weather, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


New Alliances Seen in Computers; Ashton in Project With Microsoft
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Corporation and the Microsoft Corporation, two leading producers of personal computer software, said yesterday that they plan to jointly offer a new software product that manages data bases on computer networks.


Ralph H. Cutler Jr., Commodity Executive, 69
LEAD: Ralph H. Cutler Jr., a commodity executive, died of cancer Tuesday at his home in Morristown, N.J.
He was 69 years old.


Critic of the Caucuses Is an Unpopular Iowan
LEAD: There are times, Hugh Winebrenner says, when he has been made to feel like a traitor to the state of Iowa.


Rebirth of 1866 Manhattan Frame House
LEAD: FIFTEEN years ago, on her first day in New York, Karen Marcus - then 21 years old and fresh from West Virginia - explored her new East 50's neighborhood with a friend and spotted a narrow, four-story, clapboard town house.
With its wood frame, plain facade and simple mansard roof, it was as modest as it was rare.


NBC in Highest Rating For Week of Its Season
LEAD: NBC placed seven comedies and the movie ''The Ann Jillian Story'' in the top 10 last week to register the network's highest weekly rating this season, according to figures by the A. C. Nielsen company.


Domestic Vehicle Sales Up by 21.8% for Jan. 1-10
LEAD: Sales of new American-made cars and light trucks climbed 21.8 percent early this month from the sales in the comparable period a year earlier, the eight domestic manufacturers reported today.


Washington Talk: Arms Control and the Bureaucracy; Treaty Spurs Turf Struggles in U.S.
LEAD: Officials of the Reagan Administration have hailed the new accord on eliminating two classes of nuclear missiles as a precedent-setting agreement that provides for extensive on-site inspection to verify that its provisions are being observed.


C.P.A. Group Votes to Alter Membership Criteria
LEAD: In a development that will affect hundreds of thousands of accountants nationwide, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants said yesterday that its membership had approved a series of rule changes aimed at improving the quality of accounting practice.


A.M.A. Proposal On Malpractice
LEAD: The American Medical Association has proposed a new system to expedite malpractice claims and to insure that incompetent doctors are weeded out of the system.


A.T.&amp;T. Says U.S. Agency Aided Rivals
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company yesterday formally accused officials of the General Services Administration of leaking sensitive bid information to its competitors, enabling them to win Government telephone contracts at A.T.&amp;T.'s expense.


Donors to Neediest Honor Fatally Beaten Girl
LEAD: The tragic story of Elizabeth Steinberg, the 6-year old child who died of a fatal beating in Manhattan last November, has been remembered by a number of contributors to The New York Times Neediest Cases.


New Alliances Seen in Computers; Apple-Digital Deal Said to Be Close
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. is expected to announce Friday that it will enter into a joint development agreement with the Digital Equipment Corporation.


Batus Bids $4.2 Billion For Insurer
LEAD: Batus Inc., the American subsidiary of the British conglomerate B.A.T.
Industries, said today that it had offered $60 a share, or $4.2 billion, for the Farmers Group Inc., the nation's seventh-largest property and casualty insurer.


'Three Men and a Baby' Is Top Box-Office Film
LEAD: ''Three Men and a Baby,'' a comedy, was the top film at the box office last week, earning $8.1 million, nearly twice as much as the second-place movie.


Advertising; Drake Bakeries Account Is Awarded to Wyse
LEAD: Drake Bakeries of Wayne, N.J., which began an agency search in August, yesterday announced that Wyse Advertising of New York was its choice.


NATIONAL WESTMINSTER BANK USA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL WESTMINSTER BANK USA
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
46,565,000
b17,869,000
Yr net loss
212,008,000
b67,673,000
b-Net income  The latest periods included gains on sales of investment securities of $814,000 for the quarter and $4,926,000 for the year, compared with the year- ago periods of $3,702,000 and $7,890,000, respectively.


BAHAMAS LEADER TIED TO DRUG BRIBE
LEAD: A Government witness in the drug trial of a reputed leader in Colombian cocaine trafficking testified Tuesday that he had been told the defendant paid $88,000 a month in protection money to Bahamian Prime Minister Lynden O. Pindling.


Beatrix Potter Illustrations on Display
LEAD: Generations of children have been brought up on the tales of Peter Rabbit, but few know that his creator, Beatrix Potter, was a watercolorist and naturalist as well as a storyteller.


'Type A' Men Fare Better in Heart Attack Study
LEAD: In the continuing controversy about how much hard-driving ''Type A'' behavior may affect the risk of developing and dying of heart disease, a new study has found that men who were considered Type A were less likely to die after a heart attack than their more placid Type B counterparts.


U.S. and Soviet, in Gulf, Show Rare Cooperation
LEAD: In a rare display of Soviet-American cooperation in the Persian Gulf, the United States responded to a Soviet request last week to find a mine in gulf waters, according to an official with the Central Command in Tampa, Fla.


Korean Opposition Leader Meets President-Elect
LEAD: President-elect Roh Tae Woo, left, and Kim Young Sam shaking hands yesterday in Seoul.
They met for the first time since last month's election, in which Mr.
Kim was defeated by Mr.
Roh. ''The atmosphere was sincere and very good, and my position was that I would accomodate Mr.
Kim's demands as much as possible,'' Mr.


Soviet and Swedes Sparring Over Submarines
LEAD: The Soviet Prime Minister, Nikolai I. Ryzhkov, finished a three-day round of fence-mending in Sweden today with an agreement on fishing rights in the Baltic Sea, an accord on sharing information about nuclear accidents and a pledge to step up trade.


Advertising; President for Midwest Is Chosen by Bozell
LEAD: Ric Cooper, 41, has been named president of the Midwest division of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt.
He replaces Ron Anderson, who was recently appointed associate chief creative officer.


LEARONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEARONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
40,512,000
37,083,000
Net inc
2,347,000
2,021,000
Share earns
.25
.22
9mo sales
117,717,000
96,585,000
Net inc
6,334,000
5,629,000
Share earns
.68
.60


Grand Union's Chief In Key Buyout Role
LEAD: When Floyd Hall became the chairman and chief executive of the Grand Union Company in 1984, it was his first job as a supermarket executive.
He had sold sewing machines and had run the B. Dalton bookstore chain and the Target discount store chain for the Dayton Hudson Company.


Chiang Ching-kuo Dies at 77, Ending a Dynasty on Taiwan
LEAD: President Chiang Ching-kuo of Taiwan died of a heart attack yesterday, ending a four-decade era in which Chinese who fled the mainland in 1949 were the prime leaders of the island nation.


WESTPOINT PEPPERELL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTPOINT PEPPERELL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
480,951,000
422,688,000
Net inc
b25,593,000
c20,949,000
Share earns
.82
.72
Shares outst
31,128,997
29,225,602
b-Includes a gain on the sale of discontinued operations of $5,065,000.


BANK OF NEW ENGLAND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF NEW ENGLAND CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b13,200,000
54,700,000
Per share
.18
.81
Yr net inc
b140,500,000
209,600,000
Per share
2.04
3.15
b-Includes special provisions of $90 million and $197 million for the quarter and year, respectively, for loans to refinancing countries.


Garvey Retires After 17 Years
LEAD: Steve Garvey, the 17-year veteran first baseman who finished out his fifth season with the San Diego Padres on the disabled list, announced his retirement from major league baseball today.


UNITED CABLE TELEVISION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED CABLE TELEVISION CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
64,052,000
54,385,000
Net loss
b5,130,000
c1,408,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
125,093,000
106,698,000
Net loss
b5,797,000
c3,279,000
Share earns
-
.08


Jazz: Modern Quartet
LEAD: JOHN LEWIS opened the Modern Jazz Quartet's six-night stand at the Blue Note (131 West Third Street) with a dancing fragment of near-stride piano.
The vibraphonist Milt Jackson wove a wreath of a blues melody for counterpoint, and by the time the piece ended, the group had wandered through two of Mr.


Paterson Principal: A Man of Extremes
LEAD: Getting a measure of Eastside High School, the inner-city school whose principal, Joe Clark, patrols hallways with bullhorn and baseball bat in hand, isn't easy.
Last year a state monitoring team tried, and barely got in the door.


INTEREST RATE CUT PLEDGED BY JAPAN
LEAD: Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita told President Reagan today that Japan would work to reduce its interest rates, and both countries agreed to intensify efforts to halt the dollar's decline.


European Farm Income
LEAD: The average income of European farmers dropped by 5 percent last year and by 25 percent since the mid-1970's, the European Farmers Organization said today.
By comparison, the income in all other sectors of the European economy had increased by 1.5 percent, the group said.
The figures are based on early estimates from the statistical office of the European Community, the organization said.


Bush Recalls No Strong Dissent on Arms to Iran
LEAD: Vice President Bush said tonight that he had not heard strong objections voiced in meetings on the shipment of arms to Iran, even though he attended at least one session in early 1986 where such concerns might have been aired.


Lighthearted Classics Evoke Epochs Ancient and Archetypal
LEAD: LAST week, a visitor to Jerrystyle, a newly expanded East Village emporium that specializes in verdigris and well-patinated copper home furnishings, seemed disappointed. ''I must have that really old look,'' she said to Jeff Brown, who works there.
He responded: ''If you don't see anything here, bring in something and we'll oxidize it for you.


BLASIUS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLASIUS INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,017,000
11,606,000
Net loss
b3,742,000
c438,000
Share earns
-
.24
Shares outst
3,962,000
1,642,000
6mo sales
24,994,000
22,523,000
Net loss
b3,266,000
c636,000
Share earns
-
.34
Shares outst
3,965,000
1,654,000


Michael Jackson to Sing At Benefit in New York
LEAD: Michael Jackson's first solo concert in New York City will be a benefit to raise money for minority-group scholarships, according to a spokesman for the show's sponsor.


Oil Spill Boosts Interest in Liability Bill
LEAD: The diesel fuel spill in the Ohio River has given new impetus to legislation that would set liability for oil spills, a proposal that has languished through six previous sessions of Congress.


Michigan G.O.P. Is Split on Eve of Vote
LEAD: Michigan Republicans are preparing to cast the first ballots of the 1988 Presidential campaign on Thursday, but the party's precinct caucuses could be disrupted by angry walkouts and snarled in a tangle of litigation.


Copper Contracts Plummet Amid Computerized Selling
LEAD: Copper futures prices plunged yesterday to their lowest levels in more than a month on profit taking and computerized selling, but analysts remained optimistic about the metal.


Jacuzzi Whirlpool Creator To Oversee Hanson Unit
LEAD: Roy Jacuzzi, who developed the self-contained whirlpool bath, was named the president and chief executive yesterday of Jacuzzi Inc.
The company was among 100 businesses acquired on Dec. 31 by Hanson P.L.C. in its $1.7 billion buyout of Kidde Inc.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about increases in steel prices incorrectly described the types of steel affected.


WASHINGTON TALK: WORKING PROFILE: Theodore S. Greenberg; Prosecutor Who Knows How to Keep a Secret
LEAD: Last month, to the surprise of some Justice Department officials, a Manila businessman pleaded guilty to the charges of defrauding the Pentagon on a Philippine military contract.
Before a Federal judge in Alexandria, Va., he paid the United States $1 million in fines.


Corrections
LEAD: A table in Business Day yesterday with a London dispatch about currency trading reversed the figures for the pretax foreign-exchange income of Chase Manhattan and Chemical Bank.
The correct figures for Chemical were $55.5 million in 1982, $103.2 million in 1986 and $104 million in the first three quarters of 1987.


More Contra Aid, More Suffering
LEAD: The Government and people of Nicaragua want peace.
There have already been more than 50,000 Nicaraguan casualties in the war financed by the United States.
This includes 25,527 dead, the majority of whom are women, children and poor farmers.
For a small country with 3.5 million people, this is a staggering figure.


Pan Am Plan Gains As Teamsters Shift
LEAD: William F. Genoese, the leader of the teamsters' union at Pan American World Airways Inc., who only Tuesday had threatened to strike the carrier, notified the National Mediation Board yesterday that his union was willing to submit to arbitration.
The about-face by the teamsters improved the chances that Pan


Samuel LeFrak: A Donald Trump For Middle Class
LEAD: There is something very different about the view of lower Manhattan from New Jersey, at least from Samuel J. LeFrak's vantage point.


ELECTRO RENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTRO RENT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
28,290,000
28,752,000
Net inc
2,052,000
1,827,000
Share earns
.33
.25
Shares outst
6,180,000
7,314,000
6mo rev
55,647,000
55,446,000
Net inc
4,082,000
3,599,000
Share earns
.64
.48
Shares outst
6,397,000
7,549,000


Assault With a Tree
LEAD: This is shaping up as a season of troubles for Rod Strickland, the high-scoring DePaul guard.
Academic problems kept the 22-year-old junior out of action for the first three games of the sesason, and since then he has been held out of the starting lineup several times for missing practices and team meetings.


Redskins Stick With Rogers
LEAD: George Rogers, despite an uneven season, will start at running back for the Washington Redskins in the National Football Conference championship game Sunday against the Minnesota Vikings.
Today he said he was looking forward to the game without any loss of confidence.


Battle Looming Over a Nominee For U.S. Court
LEAD: In what may be another bitter fight over the Reagan Administration's judicial appointments, civil rights groups say they will vigorously oppose the nomination of a prominent San Francisco lawyer to the Federal District Court there.


Job Satisfaction Makes a Better Father
LEAD: Fathers of 5-year-olds do better in two key measures of their skills as parents if their jobs are involving and satisfying, a new study suggests.
But they may also have less time to spend with their children.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: THE picture of adult life parents paint for their children is filled with false colors.


Rolling Stone Magazine Begins a French Edition
LEAD: The first French edition of the rock magazine Rolling Stone went on sale today, with a cover story looking back at the last 20 years - ''From the Summer of Love to the Purple Decade.''


TV Review; Creator of 'Detective' Interviewed
LEAD: THE man is just about immobilized in a London hospital ward, his skin covered with psoriasis sores, his joints crippled by arthritis.
He feverishly drifts between present and past, jumbling the facts of his life with the cheap fiction of his detective novels.
He and the other characters periodically break into song, bizarrely miming the words from old 1940's recordings featuring everybody from Bing Crosby to Dick


COMPUTER DATA SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER DATA SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
16,801,900
12,994,600
Net inc
861,400
400,700
Share earns
.32
.14
6mo rev
33,003,200
24,833,800
Net inc
1,697,400
756,500
Share earns
.62
.26


Top Player Dismissed
LEAD: Angie McClellan, leading scorer and rebounder for the University of Illinois's women's basketball team, said she has nobody to blame but herself for being bounced off the team.
She was dismissed Tuesday for altering the date on a school medical form so she would have an excuse for missing a class on a day when an absence could have lowered her grade.


Market Place; Japan to Widen Futures Trading
LEAD: JAPAN expects to establish a separate futures market, possibly by the end of the year, that will offer trading in such financial instruments as currencies and deposits.


Winners Open Golf Tour
LEAD: The 1988 PGA Tour and the 1988 Senior PGA Tour will begin here Thursday with the MONY Tournaments of Champions over the La Costa Country Club.


Young Adults Show Drop in Cocaine Use
LEAD: The use of cocaine has declined substantially among high school seniors for the first time in more than a decade, according to an annual survey released today.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Simon Mellor, corporate development director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, has been named to the additional post of deputy chief executive of the communications group.


MARSHALL &amp; ILSLEY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARSHALL &amp; ILSLEY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
16,766,000
14,284,000
Per share
.92
.80
Yr net inc
57,907,000
55,018,000
Per share
3.16
2.95


Advertising; Environment Specialty Is Booming
LEAD: HAVING worked as a chemical and pharmaceutical company public relations man for the last seven years, Arthur C. (Buck) Benedict is now prepared to offer his services to other corporations facing problems with an environmentally aware public.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.In my windowless bathroom the wallpaper has some spots of mildew.
How can I get rid of the mildew permanently?


E-II Has Loss On Stock Fall
LEAD: E-II Holdings Inc., a publicly traded spinoff of the Beatrice Company, reported a $131.9 million loss in its third quarter today.


COURT, 5-3, WIDENS POWER OF SCHOOLS TO ACT AS CENSORS
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled 5 to 3 today that public school officials have broad power to censor school newspapers, plays and other ''school-sponsored expressive activities.''


Price Limits On Futures
LEAD: The Chicago Board of Trade set permanent daily price limits on its stock index futures today, becoming the first futures market to attempt to reduce the trading volatility that some experts have blamed for worsening the October market collapse.


Ex-Juror Tells of Car Offer If He Discussed Mob Trial
LEAD: A former juror testified yesterday that a man he knew at work had offered him a new car if he would reveal the jury's thoughts about the current racketeering and drug trial of Gene Gotti and other defendants.


Currents; Nothing Folksy About Folk Art Market
LEAD: FOLK art, a major ingredient of the American country look, is more popular than ever, according to museum curators, auction-house experts and gallery owners.


CUOMO PROPOSES 8.3% SPENDING RISE AND CUTS IN TAXES
LEAD: Governor Cuomo proposed a budget today that would begin a four-year tax cut while increasing spending for health care, housing and education.


Sam Raphling Dies; Composer and Pianist
LEAD: Sam Raphling, a composer and pianist, died Friday of heart failure.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Unlocking Contra Aid: 4 Men Called Key
LEAD: After six years of firm commitment to the Nicaraguan rebels, the Reagan Administration is now in the position of saying that, in the end, their fate rests in the hands of four Central American Presidents who have all said the contra program is a bad idea.


Officer's Catch Is a Life Saver
LEAD: A police officer caught a five-month-old boy dropped by a screaming woman from the third-floor window of a burning row house Tuesday, although he said all he could see was ''a big white Pamper.''


TV Review; On 'Currents,' 'Women in Prison'
LEAD: ''CURRENTS,'' Channel 13's weekly series, examines tonight a new problem in United States penology.
Women are incarcerated in growing numbers; more than 26,000 are now in prison. ''Currents'' does not say they shouldn't be there, but it does worry about some of the effects.
The program, ''Women in Prison,'' will be seen at 8:30 P


Labor Groups Assail E.P.A.'s Proposed Rules on Pesticide Use
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency is preparing to revise its rules governing the exposure of farm workers to pesticides, but its draft proposal is already under fire from labor groups.


Copiers by Kodak
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company, in a move to enter the growing color copier market, introduced two models.
The company said its Coloredge copier duplicator would produce color copies from color originals at speeds of 23 copies a minute, about four times as fast as any copier on the market.
The company said its Coloredge AC copier duplicator would make color copies from black and white originals at speeds of 23 to 70 copies a minute.


Pakistan Tied to Atom Shipping Plot
LEAD: The State Department was reported today to have sent a memorandum to President Reagan concluding that the Pakistani Government was probably involved in a plot by a Pakistani-born businessman to smuggle material for nuclear weapons out of the United States.


Piano: Angela Cheng
LEAD: THE opening phrases of Mozart's D major sonata, K. 576, are not especially difficult, but the poise and clarity with which Angela Cheng played them at the beginning of her Alice Tully Hall recital Monday evening immediately left the impression that nothing was going to be especially difficult for her.


Redford to Take Films To Moscow for Festival
LEAD: Robert Redford has accepted an invitation from the Soviet Film Makers Union to be the host of a festival of his movies in the Soviet Union.


Suffolk Officers Testify They Wiretapped Illegally
LEAD: Suffolk County narcotics officers conducted illegal wiretaps with the approval of their supervisor and the chief of the District Attorney's narcotics bureau, two former officers testified today as a state hearing on the Police Department began.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
A.T. &amp; E. Corp., San Francisco, said Dr.
Ronald F. Foerster had joined the company as president of its A.T. &amp; E. Laboratories Inc. subsidiary.


Arts Festival Gives Preview at U.N.
LEAD: Still five months away from opening night, the First New York International Festival of the Arts is already a full-time behind-the-scenes production as the final scheduling details are ironed out for the monthlong presentation of the performing arts.
And on Tuesday night at the United Nations, representatives of more than 50 delegations as well as several hundred artists and business leaders got a first preview of the festival, which its chairman, Martin E.


First China Stock Firm
LEAD: China has set up its first domestic securities firm, the official China News Service said.
It is in the Shenzhen special economic zone.
The agency, monitored in Hong Kong today, said the firm, in the Shenzhen special economic zone, would trade stocks and bonds and help underwrite shares issued by Chinese companies.


Vindication, Fearfulness On Decision
LEAD: Robert E. Reynolds, the principal at Hazelwood East High School, the suburban St.
Louis school where the student censorship case began, said today that he felt great about the Supreme Court ruling because it proved his judgment correct.


The Politician Shifts In Drive for Change
LEAD: The imperative of political accommodation has begun to reshape the policies and public posture of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, moving him increasingly toward the center of the Soviet political spectrum.


New York Officers Lose Bias Settlement Appeal
LEAD: An equally divided Supreme Court today turned aside, on procedural grounds, a challenge by white police officers to an affirmative action settlement intended to increase promotions of black and Hispanic officers in the New York City Police Department.


Reagan and Takeshita's Joint Statement
LEAD: Following is the transcript of the joint statement issued today by President Reagan and Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita of Japan on economic issues:


Quebec Defeats Devils
LEAD: First place in the Patrick Division eluded the Devils again tonight as they suffered their third consecutive loss at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, this time to the Quebec Nordiques.


No More Temporary Solutions to Homelessness
LEAD: To the Editor:


Laker Streak Ends at 15
LEAD: Quintin Dailey scored the tying basket and set up the game-winner by Larry Drew in the final 41 seconds of overtime tonight as the Los Angeles Clippers snapped the Los Angeles Lakers' 15-game winning streak and also ended the Clippers' 11-game losing streak with a 110-109 victory.


New York City Welcomes Proposed Rise in State Aid
LEAD: New York City is to receive an 8.1 percent increase in state assistance under Governor Cuomo's proposed 1988-89 budget, administration officials said today.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.50
6.75
5.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.78
5.62
5.33
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.28
6.29
5.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.67
8.73
6.94
30-YR.


ORION PICTURES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORION PICTURES (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
87,567,000
65,191,000
Net inc
1,137,000
b3,604,000
Share earns
.06
-
9mo rev
280,283,000
201,698,000
Net inc
8,386,000
1,493,000
Share earns
.48
-
Shares outst
20,909,000
12,135,000


Barge Knocks Out Causeway Linking Miami Beach to City
LEAD: A barge ferrying a construction crane rammed a heavily traveled causeway to Miami Beach, knocking the drawbridge out of commission for at least a week, officials said today.


Excerpts From Governor's Budget Message to the Legislature
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Governor Cuomo's budget message to the Legislature:  EDUCATION


Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux Has New Editor in Chief
LEAD: Roger W. Straus, president of Farrar, Straus and Giroux, has named Jonathan Galassi editor in chief and Pat Strachan associate publisher, effective immediately.
Both were formerly executive editors.


Navy Chief Suggests Forces in Europe Be Cut
LEAD: The Secretary of the Navy, James H. Webb Jr., called today for a thorough review of United States commitments to foreign nations and a re-examination of the deployment of American forces around the world, especially in Europe.


Veterinarian Backs Filion's Testimony
LEAD: Henri Filion's contention that he was driving a sick horse in the fourth race at Yonkers Raceway on Nov. 14 was supported yesterday in testimony before the State Racing and Wagering Board by a track veterinarian and the horse's present owner.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Remembering Iran, 1981
LEAD: About a dozen former American hostages in Iran who live in the Washington area will celebrate the seventh anniversary of their freedom next Wednesday at an annual reunion lunch at the Army-Navy Club.


HEALTH: Medical Insurance; Fate of the Newest Treatments Is Often Determined by Medicare
LEAD: Almost every month brings word of new miracles of medical technology that help diagnose illness, prolong life or overcome crippling disability.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Capital's Bumper Crop
LEAD: With diplomatic representations from 152 countries quartered in the capital, the presence of exotica is part of the scene.
Still, there are occasional surprises, such as the ultimate in bumper stickers on a car with diplomatic license plates parked outside an Arab embassy on Massachusetts Avenue: In green and red it announces: ''I  [ love ]  Oman.


INTEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTEL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
572,488,000
355,642,000
Net inc
b95,537,000
c16,422,000
Share earns
.55
-
Yr rev
1,907,105,000
1,265,011,000
Net inc
b248,055,000
c173,165,000
Share earns
1.38
-


Paul A. Cohen, Stockbroker, 79
LEAD: Paul A. Cohen, the former senior partner of Herzfeld &amp; Stern, a New York stock brokerage firm now owned by Gruntal &amp; Company, died of Alzheimer's disease yesterday at New York Hospital.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Comex Chief Will Give Up Chairman Post
LEAD: Alan J. Brody, the chairman of the Commodity Exchange, the nation's largest precious metals futures exchange, will give up the post on March 16, the Comex announced last night.


Reagan Checkup on Friday
LEAD: President Reagan said he felt ''pretty good'' today after being up much of the night with an upset stomach and nausea.
In what was called a coincidence, he will enter the hospital Friday for a six-month checkup to guard against a recurrence of colon cancer.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Gore Advantage
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr. has a peculiar advantage in his campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
His state, Tennessee, borders on eight other states, all of which hold their primaries on March 8, the day politicians call Super Tuesday.
Day after day, Senator Gore has told neighboring state audiences how happy he was to be in a state that borders on his own and remarked on how much the neighboring states have in common.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Celtics 143, Pistons 105: Kevin McHale, Larry Bird and Danny Ainge keyed a 43-point third period last night as Boston broke open a seesaw game and rolled to victory over Detroit.
It was the Celtics' 20th consecutive home-court victory over the Pistons. (AP)  Mavericks 110, Pacers 108: Mark Aguirre scored 35 points and Roy Tarpley grabbed a club-record 23 rebounds as the Mavericks defeated Indiana at Dallas and gave Coach John MacLeod his 600th N.B.A victory.


Gearing Up To Stay Home
LEAD: The couch potatoes are going to be cocooning in their families' personal oases this year.


Dr. Adam Munz, 60, Hospital Psychologist
LEAD: Dr.
Adam Munz, chief psychologist at the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center since 1962, died of cancer Monday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 60 years old and lived in Leonia, N.J.


SCOTTY'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCOTTY'S INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
133,557,000
125,614,000
Net inc
2,481,000
2,374,000
Share earns
.17
.16
6mo sales
257,207,000
244,264,000
Net inc
4,797,000
3,966,000
Share earns
.33
.27


Ice Causes Major Traffic Delays
LEAD: In Union, N.J., traffic on Interstate 78 waited as a truck spread salt after cars skidded on icy pavement.
At Newark International Airport, runways were closed when ''poor braking'' was reported.
Dozens of accidents were reported on the New Jersey Turnpike.
Today is expected to be windy and cold, with highs between 11 and 17 degrees.


Music: Woodwind Quintet
LEAD: THE opening number on the New York Woodwind Quintet's program Tuesday at Merkin Concert Hall predicted an evening of tense music-making.
Variety and richness emerged instead; perhaps the Mozart quintet (K. 452) simply found the guest pianist, Gilbert Kalish, out of his element.
He lacked the singing legato tone it wants, and there was some rhythmic unevenness in the ensemble.


Scientist Identifies Ancestor to All Life Forms
LEAD: An analysis of genetic material from many species has indicated that all of today's living things may have evolved from single-cell organisms that consumed sulfur and lived in near-boiling water, perhaps in hot sulfur springs.


Chambers Jury Hears of Flaws In Key Evidence
LEAD: A New York City detective conceded yesterday that an area in Central Park where several key pieces of evidence about Jennifer Levin's death were discovered was initially ignored by investigators and used as a parking lot on the morning of her death.


Innovative Illinois Bonds Benefit Savers for College
LEAD: To encourage saving for college education, officials in Illinois have turned to the tax-exempt bond market, where they attracted individual investors to an innovative issue that raised more than $90 million for the state.


Theater: 'The River'
LEAD: PETER LINK'S new musical, ''The River,'' is a collage of rock, rap and pop gospel, extolling water in spiritual and metaphorical terms.
In Mr.
Link's lyrics water falls, tumbles, rains and rushes in streams, rivers and oceans.
By the end of the show, which opened last night at the Promenade Theater, one has been inundated by images of liquidity.


New Families Are Barred From Hotel
LEAD: New York City officials have been barred from placing new people in a Chelsea welfare hotel.
State officials said the hotel failed to meet minimum living conditions.


Primark Plans Spinoff Of Its Michigan Utility
LEAD: The Primark Corporation of McLean, Va., said today that its board had recommended that its Michigan utility, which provided $1.4 billion of its $1.5 billion revenues in 1986, be spun off to shareholders.


ZIEGLER COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZIEGLER COMPANY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
13,093,000
11,929,000
Net inc
1,200,000
3,008,000
Share earns
.37
.90
Shares outst
3,261,832
3,331,455
Yr rev
43,272,000
38,713,000
Net inc
4,518,000
6,709,000
Share earns
1.37
1.99
Shares outst
3,295,671
3,376,090


American Students to Travel In Vietnam on a Study Tour
LEAD: Fifteen young Americans from Colby College in Maine, the first group of American students to visit Vietnam on a study tour, are planning to leave for Hanoi from here on Friday.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Fewer Youths Use Cocaine  The use of cocaine among high school seniors in the United States dropped last year for the first time in 13 years, an annual survey found.
Page A24.
Collegians Prefer Wealth  Record numbers of freshmen say being well off is important, a survey has found.


Prime Raises Bid for Its Rival
LEAD: Prime Computer Inc. sweetened its offer yesterday to acquire its rival the Computervision Corporation, to $15 a share, or a total of $433.5 million.
The company, which previously offered $13.50 a share for Computervision, said that it would not increase its offer again.


Steel Shelves Go Home
LEAD: HEAVY-DUTY industrial steel shelving is selling well at the New York Store Fixture Company.
William Cherkin, the store's president, said the shelves adapt easily to home use.


FEARS FOR TAIWAN: A NEW INSTABILITY
LEAD: Chinese and American specialists on Taiwan expressed concern yesterday about the future of the island after the death of President Chiang Ching-kuo, in their view the most significant political event there since 1949.


Japan Ruling on Death Opens Way for Transplants
LEAD: After years of painstaking study, the Japan Medical Association has decided to accept brain death as a valid definition of death, clearing the way for heart and other organ transplants that are now effectively banned.


Split in N.C.A.A. On Grade Standard
LEAD: Just a few hours after approving legislation that demands better grades from college athletes, Division I schools reversed themselves today and decided not to impose uniform standards.


4 Palestinians Linked to Protests Are Expelled to Lebanon by Israel
LEAD: Israel expelled four West Bank Palestinians today, taking them by helicopter to a lonely mountain road in southern Lebanon.


Japan Tourism Abroad
LEAD: The number of Japanese tourists going overseas rose by 23.3 percent, to 6.8 million, in 1987, mainly because of the strength of the yen, Japan Travel Bureau Inc., a leading Japanese travel agency, said today.


Beth Campbell Short, Truman White House Aide, 79
LEAD: Beth Campbell Short, who covered Eleanor Roosevelt for The Associated Press and held a top White House job in Harry S. Truman's Presidency, died of cancer Monday.
She was 79 years old.


China's Money Supply
LEAD: China's central bank announced plans today to reduce the money supply to help curb inflation, which rose above 7 percent last year.


One More (0-14) for the Road for Nets
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers showed the Nets tonight how to play just hard enough to win.
But it was something New Jersey could not relate to.
On nights like tonight, the Nets play their hardest and still can't win.


Dance: 2 Ballets by Jerome Robbins
LEAD: SWEET and sour ballets by Jerome Robbins were offered by the New York City Ballet on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater.


Ex-Nurse Indicted in Death
LEAD: A grand jury has indicted a former nurse, Richard J. Angelo, on murder charges, District Attorney Patrick Henry said today.
Mr.
Angelo, 25 years old, is charged with injecting a patient at Good Samaritan Hospital with a muscle-paralyzing drug, killing him.


Oil Output In U.S. Fell 4.5% in '87
LEAD: The nation's oil production dropped 4.5 percent last year to the lowest level since 1977, the American Petroleum Institute reported today.


GEODYNAMICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEODYNAMICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 27
1987
1986
Revenue
10,116,000
8,883,000
Net inc
752,000
608,000
Share earns
.26
.21
6mo rev
19,867,000
17,587,000
Net inc
1,479,000
1,188,000
Share earns
.51
.40


Robertson Set for Texas Vote
LEAD: Texas Republican Party officials today approved primary petitions filed by Pat Robertson for the state's Presidential primary but continued to check signatures on qualifying petitions filed by other candidates.
Federal agents are investigating reports that some of the people whose names are on the petitions said they did not sign them.


Critic's Notebook; 'Fashion and Surrealism,' And Influences on Ballet
LEAD: BECAUSE fashion design can be outrageous and Surrealism is a flamboyant art style, it is not surprising that Surrealist artists and trend-setting fashion designers often share a similar love of extravagance.
The relationship between the fields is examined in ''Fashion and Surrealism,'' the exhibition at the Fashion Institute of Technology through Jan.


Forecast: Bad Trade Data
LEAD: Financial markets are braced for tomorrow's report on the November foreign trade deficit - and it's sure to be misleading, once again.
Whatever it shows, the dollar figure will be wrong.
The Administration's failure to make the trade figures more accurate is irresponsible.


Advertising; Some Changes At Diamandis
LEAD: Roman Beyer has left Diamandis Communications and has been replaced by Winston Anthony (Tony) Johnson as vice president and publisher of Stereo Review, Car Stereo Review and Stereo Review Buyers' Guide.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''We hold that educators do not offend the First Amendment by exercising editorial control over the style and content of student speech in school-sponsored expressive activities so long as their actions are reasonably related to legitimate pedagogical concerns.''  - Justice Byron White, for a Supreme Court majority


More Music for the Money
LEAD: Long-playing recordings are getting longer.


Cornelius P. Mulder, Pretoria Aide Ousted in '78 Scandal, Dies at 62
LEAD: Cornelius P. Mulder, who was forced to resign as South Africa's Information Minister in 1978 amid revelations about his role in a scheme to buy influence in the United States and other Western countries, died Tuesday at the age of 62, his family announced.
He had been taken to hospital in Johannesburg on


New Compound Is Hailed as Boon to Ozone Shield
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company and a small company, Petroferm Inc., announced today that they had developed a compound that would permit reduced use of one of the most widely used chemicals blamed for depleting the earth's ozone shield.


How Television Saw News of 1968
LEAD: Twenty years later, the images retain their searing power: beefy Chicago policemen clubbing the inert bodies of long-haired demonstrators outside the Democratic National Convention, Country Joe and the Fish singing ''One, two, three, what are we fighting for?
Don't ask me, I don't give a damn; next stop is Vietnam,'' President Johnson cradling his beagle, Richard M.


COLT INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLT INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
424,121,000
416,853,000
Net inc
14,841,000
9,371,000
Share earns
.43
.21
Shares outst
34,805,000
46,097,000
Yr sales
1,641,596,000
1,616,267,000
Net inc
b75,045,000
89,270,000
Share earns
2.15
.66
Shares outst
36,127,000
135,233,000


What We Need Is a Gold Standard Time
LEAD: To the Editor:


FIRST OF AMERICA BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST OF AMERICA BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
23,100,000
15,100,000
Per share
1.77
1.52
Shares outst
10,337,345
9,185,879
Yr net inc
78,300,000
52,900,000
Per share
5.93
5.47
Shares outst
10,045,183
8,702,426


What We Need Is a Gold Standard Time; Resetting the Dog
LEAD: To the Editor:


Digital Net Up by 22%
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation reported late yesterday that earnings in its second fiscal quarter, which ended Dec. 26, rose 22 percent and revenues increased 22.5 percent.


Totem Poles for Traffic
LEAD: It's hard enough to find a parking space in New York City; often it's harder still to figure out if the space is legal.
The confusion encourages parking violations.
The city's Transportation Department, aware of the problem, has responded, though slowly, on some cross streets.
But it remains mystifyingly paralyzed about Manhattan avenues.


Vikings Stay Warm and Busy
LEAD: Welcome to the big time.
Within 12 hours of their arrival here, the Minnesota Vikings checked into two hotels, waited for a Mack Truck convention to leave their primary hotel and then, after team meetings and lunch, the offense walked through some plays on a dirt lot near several parked cars, a pickup truck and a bulldozer clearing debris.


Court Nominee Clarifies How He Differs From Bork
LEAD: Judge Anthony M. Kennedy, President Reagan's nominee to the Supreme Court, submitted written testimony to the Senate Judiciary Committee this week that further underscored the differences in his outlook and that of the Administration's first choice for the vacancy, Judge Robert H. Bork.


Surplus Goods Aid Social Agencies
LEAD: The Strycker's Bay Neighborhood Council, a housing and social service organization in New York, took two filing cabinets, a cart and three chairs from the warehouse.
Coney Island USA, a theater-museum group, picked up a desk, a filing cabinet and four walkie-talkies.
Neither organization paid for the items, but got them under a New York


A Variety of Plants to Suit Any Climate
LEAD: COMPLAINT plays an important part in almost every gardener's life.
We complain about problems we can solve with a little work, like chickweed or crabgrass in the flower beds.
We also complain about matters beyond our control, mainly the weather.
Chief among these meteorological complaints are those concerning the plants we cannot grow because we live in a climate they find too taxing or unfriendly.


School Officials Acclaim Decision as Appropriate Strengthening of Authority
LEAD: Administrators of public high schools greeted yesterday's Supreme Court decision allowing them to censor student newspapers as an appropriate strengthening of their authority.


School to Give Up Art Tied to Stock Scheme
LEAD: Duke University said yesterday it would turn over to a court-appointed receiver two paintings and $20,000 in cash donated to the school last year by David P. Bloom, a 23-year alumnus who was charged Tuesday with operating a fraudulent investment advisory scheme in New York.


Refund Is Sought for Owners Of 3-Wheel Off-Road Vehicles
LEAD: A public interest law firm filed a lawsuit in Federal court here today seeking refunds for owners of three-wheel all-terrain vehicles.


Big Navy Contract
LEAD: The Navy awarded a $4.38 billion contract to the General Dynamics Corporation and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation to develop its new Advanced Tactical Aircraft for delivery in the 1990's.
The joint program, one of the largest ever undertaken by the Navy, is expected to produce 450 attack aircraft, at an eventual cost of $45 billion, to replace the service's current A-6 attack planes.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, JANUARY 14, 1988
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL  Japan will work to reduce its interest rates, as the U.S. has wanted, Prime Minister Takeshita told President Reagan.
Both countries also agreed to intensify efforts to halt the dollar's decline.
The Japanese leader also made several conciliatory gestures on the trade disputes that have marred bilateral relations.


Science Whizzes Abound in a School and a City
LEAD: The 11 students from Benjamin N. Cardozo High School in Queens who were named semifinalists in the Westinghouse science awards competition.
From left, front row, were Wen Hsu, Mina Choi, Jina Chung and Sang Ha Chung; second row: Chen Chen Lin, Irene Eng, Bernard Lau and Girish Ananthanarayan; back row: Victor Chow, Jung Ho Kim and Lincoln Lee.


Cuomo Criticizes SUNY for Failing to Limit Budget
LEAD: Using unusually strong language, Governor Cuomo criticized the State University of New York today, calling its leaders irresponsible for not coming up with ways to limit budget growth.


Gore Opens a Campaign Headquarters in New York
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr. speaking at the opening of his New York State headquarters yesterday in Manhattan.
With the candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination were his wife, Tipper; former Lieut.
Gov.
Alfred B. DelBello, left, and Representative Thomas J. Downey of Long Island. (NYT/Jim Wilson)


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Currents; Unseasonable Dressing For an Empty Room
LEAD: THERE still may be snow outside, but the decor in one of the rooms at the cavernous Seventh Regiment Armory will resemble an Italian garden.
The armory's Tiffany Room is being prepared for preview parties that will herald the opening of the Winter Antiques Show on Jan. 22.


Jewish Women, Careers and Religion
LEAD: While many women still find themselves having to choose among marriage, career and childbearing, a significant number of Jewish career women seem to be juggling all three successfully, according to a recent study by a sociologist at Gratz College in Philadelphia.


Homes for the Homeless Are Resisted in Illinois
LEAD: A real-estate entrepreneur wants to provide work, neighbors and another chance to some of the nation's homeless people, using 19 houses he owns in this southern Illinois town of 5,400.


In Salvador, They Are Still Fleeing the Violence; A Nicaragua Strategy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Blank Ballots By Writers Burn Bunning
LEAD: IN slamming the doors of Cooperstown on Jim Bunning's fingers, nine Baseball Hall of Fame voters each signed and mailed a blank ballot in this year's election.
Had those voters chosen simply not to return a ballot, Bunning would be in the Hall of Fame with the slugger Willie Stargell.
But the 224-game winner, one of the few pitchers with more than 100 victories in each league, remains on the outside looking in.


To What End?
LEAD: In 20 years of occupation there have been waves of Palestinian protest, but none nearly so intense or extended.
Gaza has been in turmoil for more than a month now.
The shops in the West Bank and East Jerusalem have been closed for days.
And the protest goes on despite successive Israeli measures: deportations, arrests, detentions, at least 35


HEALTH: Personal Health
LEAD: A decade ago a 9-year-old girl I loved like a daughter developed rapidly progressive leukemia.
When potent drugs and radiation failed to control the cancer, there was only one possibility: a bone marrow transplant to replace her diseased blood-forming cells.
Unfortunately, no one in her immediate family was a good enough ''match'' to be a donor, and she died.


9-Year-Old Driver Is Injured In Fatal Crash During Chase
LEAD: The police chased a car driven by a 9-year-old boy at speeds of nearly 90 miles an hour today until it careened past a red light and struck another car, killing its adult driver, police officers said.


PENTAGON CALLED LAX ON CLEARANCES
LEAD: The Pentagon is ignoring its own rules by granting thousands of military security clearances to people born in nations of the Soviet bloc and other countries designated as ''adverse'' to United States interests, a Congressional report says.


Currents; He's Got Designs on These Plates
LEAD: DINERS at the newly restored Rainbow Room at Rockefeller Center musn't be so dazzled by the views or the beautiful 1930's-style architecture that they ignore what's on their plates or, for that matter, the plates themselves.


Books of The Times
LEAD: IN THE NEW WORLD.
Growing Up With America 1960-1984.
By Lawrence Wright. 322 pages.
Knopf. $18.95.


Job Offer from S.M.U.
LEAD: Forrest Gregg, coach of the Green Bay Packers, was offered the head coaching job at Southern Methodist University yesterday and said that the decision ''is not an easy thing.'' Doug Single, the S.M.U. athletic director, said that the offer was made in the afternoon and that Gregg said he would have an answer soon.


Petroleum and Plastics
LEAD: To the Editor:


S.E.C. Charges 2 as Insiders
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today charged two employees of a unit of Schlumberger Ltd., the giant oil services concern, with illegally purchasing the stock of the Texas International Company, while in the possession of confidential information about the discovery of a major oil field by Texas International in western Egypt in early 1985.


Katherine Fenimore Cooper, Horticulturist, 92
LEAD: Katherine Guy Fenimore Cooper, a horticulturist and member of the boards of many charitable groups, died Friday at her home in Cooperstown, N.Y.
She was 92 years old.


HEALTHVEST reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTHVEST (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,475,000
3,882,000
Net inc
b5,950,000
2,730,000
Share earns
.51
.45
Shares outst
11,661,000
6,014,000
Yr rev
35,778,000
-
Net inc
21,237,000
-
Share earns
2.01
-
Shares outst
10,567,000
-


In Salvador, They Are Still Fleeing the Violence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Costa Rica in Ultimatum to Contras
LEAD: In a surprise move, President Oscar Arias Sanchez has ordered Nicaraguan contra leaders living here to either resign from the rebel movement or leave Costa Rica.


RANSBURG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RANSBURG CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
51,411,000
50,123,000
Net inc
b1,045,000
cd2,652,000
Share earns
.13
-
Yr rev
194,874,000
177,428,000
Net loss
b15,792,000
d3,304,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $96,000 and $205,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and the year also includes a loss of $21,109,000 from discontinued operations which contains a reserve of $13,750,000 for loss on disposal of discontinued operations.


INTERNATIONAL PAPER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL PAPER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,000,000,000
1,900,000,000
Net inc
125,000,000
113,000,000
Share earns
1.14
1.06
Yr sales
7,800,000,000
5,500,000,000
Net inc
407,000,000
305,000,000
Share earns
3.68
2.89


Koch Skips Chance to Side With Angels
LEAD: ''Mayor'' (the musical) has come to City Hall, three years after its debut, two years after its closing, and in a version not likely to please its creator, Mayor Koch.


'Zhivago' Appears in Russia
LEAD: A Soviet monthly has begun publishing installments of Boris Pasternak's ''Doctor Zhivago,'' which had been banned since Mr.
Pasternak won the 1958 Nobel Prize for literature.


Calendar: A Look At History And Crafts
LEAD:  Discovering The Upper West Side


New York's Schools Move to Curb Power Of Custodian Union
LEAD: Amid new allegations that New York City's school custodians are guilty of waste and job abuse, officials of the Board of Education say they will try to use current contract talks to weaken the grip of the custodians' powerful union.


At P.S. 132, Members of a Comedy Club Learn as They Laugh
LEAD: IT'S show time at the Kids' Comedy Club in Washington


School Basks In Spotlight Of Contest
LEAD: For Benjamin N. Cardozo High School in Bayside, Queens, the celebrations yesterday had a familiar ring: 11 students were named as semifinalists in the prestigious Westinghouse science awards.


General Fund: How It's Grown Under Cuomo
LEAD: The size of the state's General Fund, as Governor Cuomo outlined in his budget presentation, will mean that in his first six years as Governor, state spending will have increased more than 50 percent.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Salute to Reaganism
LEAD: The dollar is down, Robert H. Bork's Supreme Court nomination has been defeated and the Iran-contra affair lingers on.
But it might as well have been 1981 Tuesday night when the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace, the research organization at Stanford that laid out many of the grand themes of Reaganism, brought together 300 of the faithful from the theological center of California and the power center of


This Heroin Fix Ought to Be the Law
LEAD: Heroin, a scourge of America's inner cities, is also an extremely effective painkiller that many physicians believe could help desperately ill cancer patients.
That's why Senator Daniel Inouye and Representative Henry Waxman are leading an uphill fight to allow treatment of terminal cancer victims with the drug.


Excerpts From Opinions in Ruling on Censoring High School Newspaper
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the opinion in the Supreme Court's decision today upholding censorship of a high school newspaper in Hazlewood, Mo.


No Peace for Central America
LEAD: A double-barreled reality leaps out of the Central American peace process: the Reagan Administration doesn't want peace, and the Sandinistas say they do but are unwilling to pay the necessary price for it.


Hugh A. Robertson, Film Maker, 55
LEAD: Hugh A. Roberston, a film maker who won an Academy Award nomination for editing ''Midnight Cowboy,'' died Sunday of cancer in the Wadsworth Memorial Center in Los Angeles.
He was 55 years old.
Mr.
Robertson also edited ''Shaft'' and was associate editor of ''The Miracle Worker'' and ''Lilith.'' He directed ''Melinda,'' a 1972 melodrama, and produced and directed ''Bim,'' a 1976 film on colonial Trinidad.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page picture caption yesterday about a United Nations official's attempt to visit Palestinian refugee districts in the occupied Gaza Strip misstated the circumstances of his departure from one.
He was turned away from one district by Israeli troops, but decided on his own against entering a second, where violence was occurring between residents and soldiers.


Trump Hints at Federated Stake
LEAD: Donald J. Trump, the New York developer, is seeking clearance to buy at least $15 million worth of Federated Department Stores Inc., the company said yesterday.


Super Bowl Loss Still Haunts Broncos
LEAD: The Browns have the memory of John Elway's magnificent 98-yard drive in the American Conference title game last year against the Broncos, but Denver has its own bit of history that refuses to fade, at least for its general manager, John Beake.
That is the loss in the Super Bowl to the Giants.


Yields Flat Or Down
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and bank money market accounts were flat in the week ended yesterday, while those of money market mutual funds slipped.


FIRST NATIONAL CINCINNATI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST NATIONAL CINCINNATI CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b8,611,000
c10,885,000
Per share
.70
.89
Yr net inc
b45,803,000
c40,089,000
Per share
3.72
3.27
b-After a loan-loss provision of $3.3 million for both the quarter and year.


Nets Lose to 76ers
LEAD: Gerald Henderson of the 76ers grabbing a rebound against the Nets' Mike Gminski in first half at Philadelphia.
Nets lost, 104-95.
Page B11. (AP)


Law Firm's Moscow Unit
LEAD: Seeking to expand its practice again, a Manhattan law firm, Coudert Brothers, announced yesterday that it would establish an office in Moscow.


CHAMPION ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAMPION ENTERPRISES (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 27
1987
1986
Sales
83,730,000
73,486,000
Net loss
1,038,000
b122,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
254,564,000
236,036,000
Net loss
432,000
b843,000
Share earns
-
.12


US TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*US TRUST (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
7,937,000
6,288,000
Per share
.78
.63
Yr net inc
34,354,000
29,864,000
Per share
3.34
3.01


AIRCOA HOSPITALITY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIRCOA HOSPITALITY
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,200,000
5,100,000
Net inc
147,000
1,000,000
Share earns
.03
.19
Yr rev
21,900,000
20,500,000
Net inc
2,400,000
3,500,000
Share earns
.43
.67


Edberg Advances; Mandlikova Romps
LEAD: Stefan Edberg and Hana Mandlikova, the defending champions, easily moved into the third round of the Australian Open tennis championships today.


France Agrees to Take Ousted Iranians Back
LEAD: France will allow seven Iranians expelled to Gabon last month to return ''for humanitarian reasons,'' and has arranged for the remainder of the 15 people expelled -five Iranians and three Turkish Kurds - to move to Spain, the Interior Ministry said tonight.


Richland Journal; Little Sentiment Here To Ban the Bomb
LEAD: Here in the desert of southeastern Washington, in a city built virtually overnight in the rush to create the atomic bomb, the question of the year is what to do with the mushroom cloud.


Providence Upsets Georgetown, 78-74
LEAD: Delray Brooks scored a season-high 28 points, including an important seventh 3-point field goal with 1 minute 17 seconds left, as Providence upset a Big East rival, Georgetown, 78-74, tonight.


Hoffman-La Roche Gets Bank Backing
LEAD: F. Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Compagnie, a Swiss drug producer offering $4.2 billion for Sterling Drug Inc., said yesterday that it had received a $4.2 billion commitment from a bank group headed by the Swiss Bank Corporation.
Swiss Bank will provide $1 billion while the rest will come from the Union Bank, Credit Suisse, the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, Banque Nationale de Paris and Deutsche


Slowing German Economy During 1987 Is Confirmed
LEAD: The West German economy slowed in 1987 to its lowest growth rate in five years, with almost no expansion in the last three months, official figures released today confirmed.


2 Hard-to-Quit Habits Sustain Trade Deficit
LEAD: Two deeply ingrained practices of American business are likely to prevent the nation's trade deficit from declining sharply in the 1980's and perhaps beyond, according to a number of economists and executives.


United Unit Sales
LEAD: The United Technologies Corporation said it had entered into separate preliminary agreements to sell two of its financial subsidiaries.
The company, with headquarters in Hartford, would sell the UT Credit Corporation and certain of its subsidiaries to Jet Florida Inc., Miami, and the MGC Leasing Corporation for an aggregate cash price of about $200 million.


NORTHEAST SAVINGS FEDERAL ASSOCIATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHEAST SAVINGS FEDERAL ASSOCIATION (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,929,000
c11,581,000
Per share
1.05
2.03
9mo net inc
b11,188,000
c25,741,000
Per share
.86
4.36
b-Includes extraordinary gains of $6,164,000 and $7,693,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Weekend Wood Squad Delivers
LEAD: DURING the week they wear suits, and the heaviest thing they carry is a briefcase.


Volatile Dollar Ends Mixed; Gold Prices Off in New York
LEAD: The dollar's value swung sharply yesterday and ended mixed against major currencies in hectic foreign exchange trading, influenced by conflicting rumors and apparently by coordinated central bank intervention.


Comedy: Colin Quinn
LEAD: COLIN QUINN, a comedian whose reputation for New York Irish streetwise humor has been described as Joycean, is a performer who relies more heavily than most comics on electrical communication with individual members of the audience.


Advertising Account Is Lost Over Responses to Feminist
LEAD: As a direct result of its flippant responses to a complaint from a feminist, one of the nation's hottest advertising agencies has lost an account billing about $10 million annually.


Judge Says 13 at Newspaper Cannot Be Paid for Overtime
LEAD: A Federal district judge ruled Wednesday that 13 editors and reporters at The Washington Post were artistic professionals and could not invoke the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act.


College Basketball; Late Temple Rally Overcomes La Salle by 59-56
LEAD: Mark Macon, a freshman guard, scored a field goal with 18 seconds remaining tonight to put Temple ahead to stay as the fourth-ranked Owls used a 12-2 rally in the final four minutes to beat La Salle, 59-56.


Rock Songwriters
LEAD: Richard Lloyd and Elliot Murphy, two rock songwriters, are playing a double bill Saturday at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M. at the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street at Mercer Street.
Tickets are $12.50.


On Legal Call to Meet Medical Emergencies
LEAD: The emergency room is a familiar place in any hospital: doctors, nurses, patients in acute need, medical crises competing for attention.
But medical emergencies can easily become legal emergencies, and then it is lawyers and a judge, along with the medical experts, who rush to another kind of emergency room.


Corrections
LEAD: The headline yesterday on an article about Governor Cuomo's proposed budget misstated the plan for tax cuts.
The budget would put into effect tax cuts agreed to last year.
It does not include further cuts.


Folk Music Trio
LEAD: Huxtable, Christensen and Hood, a folk trio, is to perform tonight at 8 P.M. at Greenwich House, 46 Barrow Street near Bleecker Street, in a concert sponsored by the Pinewoods Folk Club (718-426-8555).
Tickets are $8.


Nissan Official Sees Quota Cut
LEAD: The import quota on Japanese cars will probably be reduced in 1988 as a means of easing trade frictions with the United States, a top official of the Nissan Motor Corporation said today.


Advertising; Pen Account For Waring
LEAD: Waring &amp; LaRosa, of the Omnicom Group, is the new ad agency for the Montblanc line of premium writing instruments from West Germany.


Eastern Air to Cut 600 From Its Staff
LEAD: Eastern Airlines said it was eliminating 600 jobs, most of which will affect airport workers, like skycaps, represented by the machinists' union.
Eastern's management has been putting pressure on Charles E. Bryan, the leader of the International Brotherhood of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, to accept wage and benefit cuts in a new contract.


Ford Rebate Plan
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it had extended its buyer incentive program, which it began in late October, for another month.
It has added the Aerostar van with a $500 rebate, and certain Mustang car models, with a $400 rebate, to an enhanced program that runs through March 8.


Ex-New York Official Is Convicted of Perjury
LEAD: A former New York State official and a real-estate developer have been convicted of lying to a state panel about their business relationship in connection with the relocation of state offices from the World Trade Center in the early 1980's.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Refugees of Nixon Years
LEAD: In a capital in constant flux, the White House staff is one of the least permanent institutions of all, shifting kaleidoscopically with elections, Presidential whims, Government scandals and intramural political coups.


INTERNATIONAL MINERALS &amp; CHEMICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL MINERALS &amp; CHEMICAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
460,400,000
380,700,000
Net inc
b56,100,000
c600,000
Share earns
1.95
-
6mo sales
885,100,000
721,000,000
Net inc
b86,900,000
c2,900,000
Share earns
2.92
-


Word May Be 'Fraud' For Man Seen on TV
LEAD: A man described as the biggest winner in the history of televison's ''Password'' game show was arrested on fraud charges today by Federal agents when he arrived to pick up his $58,000 prize check, the authorities said.


Suspect Is Sought as Molester of 14 Girls in Queens
LEAD: A man with a mustache and a pock-marked face is being sought as a suspect in the molestation of 14 young schoolgirls in separate incidents over the last nine months in Queens, the police said yesterday.


AIDS Spurs Gifts to Help The Neediest
LEAD: Concern for people suffering from AIDS has inspired many donors to the 76th appeal of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


AUTOMATIC DATA PROCESSING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUTOMATIC DATA PROCESSING INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
376,697,000
334,162,000
Net inc
40,120,000
30,010,000
Share earns
.52
.41
6mo rev
738,002,000
655,272,000
Net inc
70,490,000
52,700,000
Share earns
.91
.72


About Real Estate; New Life for Jersey Garden Apartments
LEAD: In the center of Teaneck, N.J, stands a cluster of rundown three-story brick apartment buildings optimistically called Teaneck Gardens.
It is typical of hundreds of similar garden apartment developments that went up in a hurry in New Jersey shortly after World War II and by now are on the verge of decay.


4 Die in Freight Train Collision in Pennsylvania
LEAD: Rescuers carrying the body of a victim of a train crash yesterday morning in Thompsontown, about 40 miles west of Harrisburg.
Two Conrail freight trains, one carrying coal and the other truck trailers, collided head on and caught fire after the coal train, eastbound, apparently failed to halt at a stop signal.


Results Plus; N.B.A.
LEAD:  Bullets 136, Bucks 107: Moses Malone scored a season-high 36 points and grabbed 14 rebounds last night in Landover, Md., leading Washington to a lopsided victory.
The Bullets have won all three of their home games since Wes Unseld took over as head coach 12 days ago.
Washington broke the game open midway through the third quarter.


Plastic Tree Bags Are Ecologically Gauche
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Doubt About the Season
LEAD: Ducks seemed oblivious to the single-digit temperatures yesterday in Central Park as they swam in one of the few unfrozen ponds.
The thermometer dipped to 5 degrees, the lowest this winter.
Today should be warmer, with the temperature rising into the mid-20's. (NYT/Neal Boenzi)


MORTON THIOKOL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORTON THIOKOL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
584,779,000
460,328,000
Net inc
39,281,000
32,366,000
Share earns
.82
.68
6mo sales
1,008,702,000
909,582,000
Net inc
79,919,000
65,426,000
Share earns
1.67
1.38


Is Quality of Federal Work Force Deteriorating?
LEAD: Paul A. Volcker is concerned about the decline in the quality of the Federal bureaucracy, and he plans to do something about it.


Editors' Note
LEAD: A brief article on Monday reported that A. M. Rosenthal, columnist and former executive editor of The New York Times, would serve as an editor at large for G. P. Putnam, book publishers.


C.P.A. Lawsuit Is Ruled Moot
LEAD: A judge in New York State Supreme Court ruled yesterday that a lawsuit by a group of accountants to block a tally of votes on proposed rules changes by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants was moot since the institute had already counted the votes.
But the judge, Irma Vidal


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  A PLAGUE ON OUR HOUSE


SYNCOR INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYNCOR INTERNATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
25,542,000
24,634,000
Net inc
1,075,000
1,088,000
Share earns
.10
.09
6mo sales
51,226,000
48,622,000
Net inc
2,115,000
2,202,000
Share earns
.19
.20


Dole Sees Spending Freeze As Centerpiece of Campaign
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole said today that if he was elected President he would propose a one-year spending freeze that would save $150 billion over three years and slash the Federal budget deficit.


Film: 'For Keeps,' on Teen-Age Pregnancy
LEAD: THERE was a time when unwanted teen-age pregnancy meant missing the senior prom, to say the very least.
It was more of an inconvenience than it is in the thoroughly modern ''For Keeps,'' which stars Molly Ringwald as a bright young mother-to-be.
The problems created by adolescent pregnancy and early marriage are indeed set forth here, sometimes with the appearance of great candor.


Old Masters Sale Produces Mixed Results at Sotheby's
LEAD: The Old Master paintings owned by Linda and Gerald Guterman, described as the most valuable such selection ever auctioned in New York, brought mixed results in a record-breaking sale yesterday morning at Sotheby's.


Regan Supports Bush Assertion on Concern Over Iran Arms Sales
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, the former White House chief of staff, said through a spokesman today that Vice President Bush had voiced reservations on ''several occasions'' about aspects of the arms shipment to Iran.
The concerns were raised in the presence of President Reagan, the spokesman said.


A Waldbaum Trader Fined
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today charged Joseph Sierchio, a 36-year-old lawyer from Sea Cliff, L.I., with illegally buying shares of Waldbaum Inc., while possessing non-public information about an impending takeover of the food chain by the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company in November 1986.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: PARRILLADA is the Spanish term for mixed grill, which in the Argentine tradition ususally means a mini-charcoal barbecue presented at the table and heaped with T-bone steak, marinated skirt steak, morcilla (blood sausage), sweetbreads, kidneys, calf's liver and sausage.
At La Fusta, a popular neighborhood Argentine restaurant in Elmhurst, Queens, the lusty and well-cooked parrillada (sans kidneys and liver) comes with a jar of chimichurri, a piquant sauce made with garlic, parsley and olive oil.


City Ballet: 'Chaconne' With Maria Calegari
LEAD: MUSIC was the controlling impulse behind George Balanchine's choreography and two of his works at the New York City Ballet Wednesday night typified how wide-ranging that specific focus could be.


Our Towns; Getting the Truth About the Ways Of Streetwalkers
LEAD: How much to believe of what you hear on Broad Street?
Police Sgt.
Charles Whitner can't say.
The prostitutes tell him they make $300 a night on the street, but he always sees them in the same clothes, with the same holes in the same jackets - jackets too thin for the winter's cold.


Treasury Prices Increase Slightly
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices rose slightly yesterday, after trading in a relatively narrow range before the barrage of economic statistics to be announced today.


An Artists' Agent Who Left by Night
LEAD: Most of the photographers and fashion stylists whom Xavier Moreau represented had already quit his agency.
There had been lawsuits against his company, with more threatened.
And months ago, he had suddenly moved out of his Sutton Place town house.


PAPERBOARD INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAPERBOARD INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
122,400,000
20,500,000
Net inc
2,300,000
787,000
Share earns
.19
.13
Shares outst
12,100,000
6,000,000
The company said its latest quarter net includes the operations of recently acquired Belkin Inc.


U.N. Council Again Asks Israelis To Stop Deporting Palestinians
LEAD: With the United States abstaining, the Security Council adopted a second resolution today calling on Israel to cancel plans to deport Palestinians from the occupied territories and allow those already deported to return home.
All 14 other Council members voted in favor of the resolution.


STATE-O-MAINE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STATE-O-MAINE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
26,142,162
19,652,898
Net inc
2,367,014
1,433,820
Share earns
.99
.66
Shares outst
2,385,318
2,177,910
9mo sales
45,189,428
30,365,327
Net inc
3,712,241
1,846,865
Share earns
1.62
.85
Shares outst
2,293,778
2,175,093


University Given $20 Million By Perot for Medical Studies
LEAD: The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, one of the most respected medical schools in the nation, said today that it was receiving a $20 million gift from H. Ross Perot, the Texas businessman, to support its Nobel Prize-winning cholesterol research and to train medical scientists.


Drug Term for an Ex-Mayor
LEAD: Former Mayor Mike Roark, who admitted last year that he had possessed cocaine six times, was sentenced today to 179 days in prison, fined $5,000 and given a three-year suspended sentence.


Market Place; Why Hoffmann Wants Sterling
LEAD: SOME analysts say there was a lot of ego behind the decision of F. Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company to offer $72 a share, or $4.2 billion, to buy Sterling Drug Inc.


Mullin Works Out and Then Speaks Out
LEAD: In the early stages of the rest of his life as a recovering alcoholic, Chris Mullin today discussed what he had learned about himself in the past month.


Advertising; Enhancing A Bank's L.I. Image
LEAD: THE European American Bank, which was doing its own advertising, felt that its name didn't go with the image it wanted.
It doesn't really sound like Long Island's leading bank.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  CONVENTION ON ELIMINATION OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION - 10:30 A.M. and 3:00 P.M.


Riding the Black Market to Development
LEAD: The black market, long thought the enemy of third world economies, may instead indicate their surest path to development.
So argues Hernando de Soto, an iconoclastic Peruvian economist whose ideas have begun to attract interest in Latin America and beyond.


2 Events at Met Museum
LEAD: Elaborate historical analogies that elucidate the past while referring to the present have been a popular pastime of historians and pundits for centuries.
One of the best-loved epochs for such scholarly musings has been that of the Roman Empire, from the time of its greatest grandeur 2,000 years ago to its subsequent decline.


STOCK EXCHANGE SETS TEST TO CURB PROGRAM TRADING
LEAD: Reacting to criticism that computerized program trading was a major factor behind October's stock market collapse, the New York Stock Exchange yesterday announced a six-day experiment to curb the practice.


Bridge: 2 World Champions Capture Another Title at Tournament
LEAD: Two reigning world champions added to their large collection of titles when the tournament year began Wednesday in Port Chester, N.Y.


Consider Demilitarized Palestinian Democracies; Sharon's Move
LEAD: To the Editor:


Washington Talk: Briefing; Job for Bullhorn and Bat
LEAD: If the Board of Education in Paterson, N.J., is unhappy with Joe Clark, the school principal who maintains order with a bullhorn and a baseball bat, there could be a place for him in the Reagan White House.
Gary Bauer, Assistant to the President for Policy Development, has invited him to Washington to see if he wants a job.


Plastic Tree Bags Are Ecologically Gauche
LEAD: To the Editor:


NATO May Meet Before Reagan Soviet Trip
LEAD: Western officials are considering plans for a rare meeting of NATO leaders to review Western policy toward the Soviet Union and to demonstrate the alliance's solidarity before President Reagan visits Moscow this spring.


Randolph S. Brown, Executive, 35
LEAD: Randolph S. Brown, a former vice president and sales director of A.G.B.
Television Research, died of histoplasmosis last Dec. 30, according to the executor of his estate, Edward J. Kissko.
Mr.
Brown was 35 years old and lived in Manhattan.


MNC FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MNC FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
43,541,000
32,462,000
Per share
1.51
1.14
Yr net inc
148,827,000
122,788,000
Per share
5.19
4.35


Raphael L. Elias, Lawyer, 82
LEAD: Raphael L. Elias, a lawyer who specialized in probate cases and estate planning, died of cancer Tuesday at New York Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Judge Quits Myerson Case In a Dispute
LEAD: A Federal judge withdrew yesterday from the pending trial of Bess Myerson because of a bitter dispute with the United States Attorney in Manhattan, Rudolph W. Giuliani.


U.S. Seeks to Link Gotti Worker To Effort to Tamper With Jurors
LEAD: A Federal prosecutor yesterday tried to tie an investigator who worked for John Gotti and the investigator's attorney to an effort to tamper with a Federal jury in the current racketeering and drug trial of Mr.
Gotti's brother Gene and other defendants.


New York City Doesn't Develop Its Career Managers Enough
LEAD: To the Editor:


John D. Robilotto, 85, Real Estate Executive
LEAD: John D. Robilotto, a vice president of Helmsley-Spear and a life member of the Real Estate Board of New York, died of heart failure Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 85 years old and a lifelong resident of Manhattan.


Holiday Monday
LEAD: The birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., actually Jan. 15, will be observed on Monday.
Following are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post Offices: Special delivery and Express Mail delivery only; offices are open in Manhattan at 25 Broadway, 90 Church St., 909 3d Ave., Grand Central Terminal, 33d St.


Hanover Bank Sets Big Charge
LEAD: The Manufacturers Hanover Corporation said yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings would drop by almost 70 percent because of costs related to efforts to make itself a more efficient competitor.


To Recognize and Treat Dance's Drug Problem
LEAD: To the Editor:


Town Accepts Plan to Shelter The Homeless
LEAD: The Town of Greenburgh, which embraces several villages in central Westchester County, agreed today to the construction of 108 units of housing for the homeless in a wooded area between a country club and a community college.


Walkouts Disrupt Republican Caucuses in Michigan
LEAD: Michigan's Republican caucuses, the first of the 1988 Presidential campaign, were disrupted tonight by delegate walkouts, and the campaign of Vice President Bush charged that followers of Pat Robertson tried to confuse the process to deny Mr.
Bush a victory.


Strike and Boycott Are Urged in Haiti
LEAD: Four leading Haitian politicians called today for a national strike on Saturday and repeated their appeal for a boycott of the election that the army-dominated Government has scheduled for Sunday.


BANK OF NEW YORK CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF NEW YORK CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b45,874,000
38,450,000
Per share
1.34
1.23
Yr net inc
103,432,000
155,218,000
Per share
2.97
4.97
b-Includes a special pretax addition of $135 million to the allowance for loan losses.


Holiday for Dr. King Gaining Wider Observance
LEAD: When Congress approved a Federal holiday to honor the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., many who had fought for passage of the bill privately feared it might produce no more than another three-day weekend.
Backers of the holiday also believed it would take years to become widely accepted.


HARTMARX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARTMARX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
292,939,000
274,403,000
Net inc
15,660,000
10,505,000
Share earns
.77
.51
Yr sales
1,080,420,000
1,063,011,000
Net inc
41,265,000
24,775,000
Share earns
2.01
1.20


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''As a sitting judge on a very busy court, I cannot devote the time and energy I wish to public discourse.''  - Judge Robert H. Bork, resigning from the bench.  [ A1:4. ]


Chip Industry Enjoys Surge
LEAD: The United States semiconductor industry closed out the year with a surge as product orders for December reached the highest level in more than three years, industry officials said.


Bid for USG Stalls
LEAD: Two wealthy Texas oilmen, Cyril Wagner Jr. and Jack E. Brown, said they had been unable to obtain financing for a hostile takeover of the USG Corporation.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the men's investor group, called Desert Partners, said that it had been advised by an unidentified investment banking firm that subordinated debt financing for a hostile bid of USG was impossible ''under current market conditions.


Investor, 23, Charged in $10 Million Fraud
LEAD: Federal prosecutors in Manhattan yesterday charged a 23-year-old, self-styled money manager with mail fraud, saying he took $10 million from 100 friends and associates to invest in stocks and instead bought himself an art collection, two homes and expensive cars.


Jes Grew Orchestra
LEAD: Jemeel Moondoc, a saxophonist, is to lead his Jes Grew Orchestra tonight at 11 P.M. and 12:30 A.M. at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, at Mulberry Street (219-3055).
Admission is $6.


Art: 'Media Post Media,' A Show of 19 Women
LEAD: ''MEDIA POST MEDIA'' is the latest exhibition organized by the independent curators Tricia Collins and Richard Milazzo.
Their exhibitions, of which this is at least the eighth in a New York gallery, are well known in the art world as barometers of a sort, or of several sorts.
The duo's shows usually manage to indicate important directions in new art while remaining somewhat inconsistent and presenting a number of artists whose prominence will probably not exceed the proverbial 15 minutes.


Horse Racing Notebook; Odds Shift for Florida Tracks
LEAD: From all the fuss here Tuesday, one would think that the Fountain of Youth had been rediscovered, or at least that an extraterrestrial had arrived.


West End Jazz
LEAD: Harold Ousley, a saxophonist, is to lead a group tonight through Sunday at the West End Cafe, 2911 Broadway, at 114th Street (570-7037).
Sets begin at 9 and 10:30 P.M. and midnight, plus a 1:30 A.M. set tonight and tomorrow; there is a $6 cover and a $7.50 minimum.


AUCTIONS
LEAD: The Americana auctions at Sotheby's and Christie's every January are traditionally the largest and most important such sales of the year, and 1988 looks like it will be no exception, with Christie's presenting more than 400 works and Sotheby's about 2,000.


2 Students in New York Wounded by Gunfire
LEAD: Two New York City students were injured, one critically, by gunfire yesterday in incidents at the schools, the police said.


Man Held in Jet Crash Hoax
LEAD: A man was arraigned Wednesday on charges that he falsely reported a plane crash that led to a search by 100 people in a snowstorm.
The 28-year-old Laconia man, Mark Blair, pleaded not guilty in Laconia District Court on a misdemeanor charge of false public alarm.
He was ordered held on $1,000 bail, and a hearing was set for Feb.


Miller Brewing Fills Position of President
LEAD: Leonard J. Goldstein, senior vice president for sales at the Miller Brewing Company, has been named president and chief executive, succeeding William K. Howell, who took early retirement effective yesterday.


Plastic Tree Bags Are Ecologically Gauche
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 Witnesses Challenge Henri Filion Testimony
LEAD: Henri Filion's claims of innocence about having any knowledge about tampering involving a race at Yonkers Raceway last Nov. 14 were challenged yesterday in the final day of hearings before the State Racing and Wagering Board.


No Straight A's for the Law Schools
LEAD: Sometime before the turn of the century, a million lawyers will be practicing in this country. ''To some, that is an awesome thought,'' said Haywood Burns, dean of the City University of New York Law School at Queens College. ''To some, that is an awful thought.''


Beijing Extols Taiwan's Chief On His Death
LEAD: Zhao Ziyang, the head of the Chinese Communist Party, delivered a remarkable tribute today to Chiang Ching-kuo, the President of Taiwan and a fervent anti-Communist, who died Wednesday in Taipei.


Money Funds' 2d-Biggest Rise
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 414 money market mutual funds increased $7.62 billion, to $271.51 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.


Consider Demilitarized Palestinian Democracies; Homeland and Home
LEAD: To the Editor:


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Kenny Barron Quintet


Clara Mae Taylor-Olson, Professor, 89
LEAD: Dr.
Clara Mae Taylor-Olson, professor emeritus of nutrition at Teachers College, Columbia University, and a leading figure in the field of nutrition education, died after a long illness Jan. 6 in a Pittsburgh hospital.
Dr.
Taylor-Olson was 89 years old and lived in Pittsburgh.


A Rival for the Space Palace
LEAD: The space station NASA wants to build is a luxury sky hotel with a sky-high price tag, now at $32 billion.
Congress has at last decreed that the agency should also consider supporting a much smaller, privately operated space station that costs a mere $700 million and can do many of the same things.


AT THE BAR
LEAD: It's no longer a big deal when a key partner at a mojor New York law firm changes jobs.
But as the fate of Kenneth J. Bialkin unfolded this week, a profession that has almost entirely lost its capacity for suprise or indignation was jolted to attention.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the weather, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Citadel Makes Bid
LEAD: The Citadel Holding Corporation said it had made a $18.50-a-share, or $107.3 million, offer to buy Valley Federal Savings and Loan Association, the first hostile takeover attempt in California's thrift industry.
Valley Federal, based in Van Nuys, Calif., has $3.1 billion in assets and 47 offices.
Valley Federal, trying to avert a takeover by Citadel, is talking with other potential merger partners.


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Merrill/Norstar Bank, Portland, Me., to Arnold &amp; Company Advertising/Marketing, Boston.


STONERIDGE RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STONERIDGE RESOURCES (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
22,639,000
12,775,000
Net loss
461,000
b24,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Meese's Financial Manager Pleads Not Guilty
LEAD:  E. Robert Wallach, right, and his attorney, George C. Walker, arriving for arraignment yesterday at Federal Court in Manhattan on racketeer ing charges in the scandal involving the Wedtech Corporation, a South Bronx military contractor.
Mr.
Wallach, former lawyer and financial manager to Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, pleaded not guilty.


Woman Says She Put Bomb On a Korean Jet, Killing 115
LEAD: A woman suspected by South Korea of destroying a South Korean airliner with 115 people aboard in November said on television today that she was a North Korean agent and that she and an accomplice had planted a bomb on the plane.


Bonn Inquiry Hints Pakistan And Libya Got Atom Material
LEAD: The West German Environment Minister said today that a widening investigation into illegal cross-border transportation of nuclear wastes by a West German company has raised the possibility that nuclear materials may have found their way to Pakistan and Libya.


ONEOK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONEOK INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
111,100,000
143,500,000
Net inc
1,400,000
3,100,000
Share earns
.09
.22
Yr rev
554,700,000
707,300,000
Net inc
17,600,000
35,300,000
Share earns
1.23
2.53


Levin's Last Night Recalled by a Friend
LEAD: Jennifer Levin spent the last night of her life in a crowded bar filled with her friends, mostly recent high school graduates enjoying a final, emotional late-summer night together before starting college.
But her mind was on Robert E. Chambers Jr., a witness testified yesterday.


United Cable Talks Resume
LEAD: United Artists Communications Inc. and the United Cable Television Corporation said today that they had resumed merger talks.


VMX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VMX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,927,000
6,132,000
Net loss
3,636,000
504,000
6mo rev
12,332,000
12,987,000
Net loss
5,134,000
2,102,000


Dollar Down in New York In Day of Anxious Waiting
LEAD: The dollar finished lower against most major currencies in nervous trading yesterday as dealers anxiously awaited today's report on the United States trade deficit for November.


Black Plight Deplored
LEAD: John E. Jacob, president of the National Urban League, cited increases in black unemployment and poverty.
Page A10. (NYT)


Texaco Case Called Part Of Growing Crackdown
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service's pending claim against Texaco appears to be similar to those it filed in recent years against other multinational companies, including the Toyota Motor Corporation and the Nissan Motor Company, former Government tax officials said today.


TALMAN HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TALMAN HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b,4,225,000
c4,988,000
Per share
.44
-
Yr net inc
b21,025,000
c27,937,000
Per share
2.19
-
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $5,067,000 and $7,915,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Cuomo, Under Fire, Drops Bid for Supercollider Near Rochester
LEAD: Governor Cuomo has withdrawn a proposal to make Wayne County near Rochester the home of a $4.4 billion atom smasher.


Film: Liza Minnelli in 'Rent-a-Cop'
LEAD: THE cop for rent in ''Rent-a-Cop,'' which opens today at the Criterion and other theaters, is Burt Reynolds.
He is reduced to taking a job as a security guard in a Chicago department store after a $2 million drug bust ends with everybody except him being blown away.
It is during the busted bust, which starts things in brisk fashion, that he falls into the arms of Liza


Preston Grover, War Correspondent, 87
LEAD: Preston Grover, who covered World War II in Germany, the Mediterranean and North Africa as a correspondent for The Associated Press, died Monday.
He was 87 years old.
In a 38-year-career with The A.P., he headed bureaus in New Delhi, Moscow and Paris.


European Urges U.S. Rate Rise
LEAD: Despite Japanese-American progress in steadying the dollar, higher United States interest rates are needed ''to make the dollar an attractive currency,'' a high-level representative of the International Monetary Fund said today.


The Monthly Announcement That Makes Wall St. Sweat
LEAD: At 8:30 A.M.
Friday, or a split second later, a number representing the deficit in the nation's trade for November will flash across news-service terminals from Wall Street to Tokyo.
While other Government statistics have had their heyday, the trade figure is clearly the number to watch these days.


Memorials to Dr. King In an Array of Activities
LEAD: Unlike America's nine other designated national holidays, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday is less a day for celebration than one for reflection on both the achievements and the goals yet to be realized in this country's generations-long struggle for social justice.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Sniffing Out Terrorists
LEAD: The State Department has found a new tool to combat terrorists: a dishwasher-size explosives detector called the EGIS Mark II that will be installed in all United States embassies next fall.


Head of Troubled School Seeks Reassignment
LEAD: The principal of Park West High School, a school in the Clinton section of Manhattan where there has been an unusual amount of violence among students, has asked to be reassigned, according to the Board of Education.


Consider Demilitarized Palestinian Democracies; The State of Gaza
LEAD: To the Editor:


Malcolm Reybold, 77, Writer and Executive
LEAD: Malcolm Reybold, an author and retired advertising executive, died Jan. 7 in Glen Cove Community Hospital on Long Island.
He was 77 years old and lived in Locust Valley, L.I.


Sports of The Times; Purple Uniform, Green Bucks
LEAD: RON DAUGHERTY is planning a party for Sunday afternoon -his ''football cronies'' crowding into his Chicago apartment, and purple pompons everywhere.


Japanese Scientist Will Head World Health Organization
LEAD: A Japanese specialist in psychopharmacology, Dr.
Hiroshi Nakajima, was elected today to be Director General of the World Health Organization.


Chamber Music Society
LEAD: The Lincoln Center Chamber Music Society will perform the premiere of Peter Lieberson's ''Ziji'' tomorrow at 6 P.M. at the Paula Cooper Gallery (155 Wooster Street) and Sunday at 5 P.M. in Alice Tully Hall.
The program also includes works by Mozart and Brahms.
Tickets are $8 for tomorrow's performance, $18 for the Sunday concert.


First Amendment Lessons
LEAD: The Supreme Court has upheld in broadest terms the power of public school authorities to control the content of high school newspapers.
Now just about any educational reason will justify heavy editing and outright exclusion of student articles.
The Court reaffirms its 1969 decision that students may not be punished for non-disruptive political expression, like wearing black armbands in school to protest the Vietnam War.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  A Tribute for Montand


Sports People; Hall List Gets Shorter
LEAD: Mike Ditka, Al Davis and Bob Griese were among the survivors yesterday when the list of 1988 Pro Football Hall of Fame candidates was cut to 15.
Davis, the Los Angeles Raiders' managing general partner, was nominated as a contributor.
Other former players nominated were Fred Biletnikoff, Buck Buchanan, Jack Ham, Lee Roy Jordan, Leroy Kelly, Tom Mack, Alan Page, Lou Rymkus, Art Shell and Lynn Swann.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: Cellular Communications Inc. said it would begin a tender offer for up to 4.5 milion shares of common stock of American Cellular Network Corp. at a price of $15.50 a share, representing about 51 percent of the outstanding shares on a fully diluted basis.


Texaco Is Urging Approval Of an 'Anti-Greenmail' Plan
LEAD: Apparently fearing a takeover threat, Texaco's president and chief executive is recommending that shareholders approve an ''anti-greenmail'' provision in the company's charter.


Guggenheim Expansion Plan Upheld
LEAD: After a lively, standing-room-only hearing at City Hall, the Board of Estimate yesterday voted 8 to 3 to uphold a lower city agency's decision to approve a plan by the Guggenheim Museum to build a 10-story addition to its building at Fifth Avenue and 89th Street.


SHAWMUT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHAWMUT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
10,928,000
20,990,000
Per share
.69
1.31
Shares outst
15,789,000
16,084,000
Yr net inc
b33,465,000
78,642,000
Per share
2.10
5.07
Shares outst
15,952,000
15,507,000


As Arab Workers Stay Home, The Israeli Economy Suffers
LEAD: The past month of rioting in the occupied territories, which has kept thousands of Palestinians away from jobs in Israel, has been a bitter reminder to Israelis that the country's economy is largely dependent on its political foes.


SHL SYSTEMHOUSE reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHL SYSTEMHOUSE
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
46,000,000
33,800,000
Net inc
5,500,000
4,300,000
Share earns
.21
.18
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Emergency Rooms: The New Wards
LEAD: On a recent evening at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx, a woman who had undergone heart bypass surgery and had been readmitted with chest pain asked her doctor how long she must remain in the hospital's emergency room. ''Awhile,'' he answered. ''What you call awhile?'' she shot back.  ''Awhile,'' it turned out, might mean five days, depending on how quickly beds became available in the hospital's intensive care or cardiac units.


Tunesmith's '50 Years' Of Music
LEAD: ANYONE who has seen the movie ''Broadcast News'' is not likely to forget a nutty cameo featuring a pair of eager-beaver jingle writers auditioning their John Williams-ish ''evening news'' theme for a major network news department.
Amid office chaos, the unflappable duo, waving their arms and la-la-la-ing, present their theme song like the set piece from a comic operetta.


Stage: By A. R. Gurney, 'Another Antigone'
LEAD: SOMEWHERE - even if it's only Hollywood - there must be a school where all the teachers are as inspiring as Mr.
Chips, Miss Brooks, Miss Jean Brodie, Professor Kingsley and those other lovable fictional educators who lecture so often on screen or stage but somehow always seem to be on sabbatical in real life.


Tar Heels Stop Terrapins
LEAD: Coach Bob Wade and the Maryland Terrapins were reintroduced to the realities of the Atlantic Coast Conference tonight.
Riding high after two conference victories and a noticeable recovery from a disastrous 1986-87 season, the Terrapins were brought back to earth by North Carolina.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  PSEUDO-SCIENCE AND SOCIETY IN 19TH-CENTURY AMERICA.
Edited by Arthur Wrobel. 245 pages.
The University Press of Kentucky. $24.


Australian Open; Lendl Gains Easily
LEAD: Ivan Lendl overwhelmed Mark Woodforde of Australia, 6-4, 6-3, 6-1, today to advance to the fourth round of the $1.9 million Australian Open Tennis Championships.


G.S.A. Shifts Employee Tied to Leak
LEAD: The General Services Administration said yesterday that it had reassigned an official suspected of disclosing, in exchange for gratuities, secret bid information about a Government telephone contract.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Beneficial Corp. offered $200 million of 9 3/8 percent notes due in 1993 at a price of 99.7 to yield 9.451 percent through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
Rated Baa-2 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp;P., they yield 1.1 percentage points more than five-year Treasury notes.


Race Is Said to Be a Motive In 2 Incidents Under Inquiry
LEAD: Two incidents in the Bronx in which race is said to be a motive are under investigation, the police said yesterday.


VLSI TECHNOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VLSI TECHNOLOGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
47,028,000
34,327,000
Net inc
2,279,000
1,406,000
Share earns
.10
.06
Yr rev
171,984,000
111,698,000
Net inc
8,061,000
56,000
Share earns
.35
-


Honda Expansion
LEAD: Honda of Canada Manufacturing Inc. said it would spend about $62 million to expand its Alliston, Ontario, plant, and add the three-door hatchback version of the Civic car to the Accord cars it has manufactured since late 1986. .
Honda said the expansion would add 100 jobs by 1989.


Some Details Emerge On Squall at the Merc
LEAD: As the storm at the New York Mercantile Exchange began to subside yesterday, details emerged about the charges leveled against two of its highest officials.


Late Rally in Oil Contracts Gives Lift to Precious Metals
LEAD: A late, heavy flood of buy orders bolstered futures prices for crude oil and oil-related products yesterday, despite reports of widespread price cutting by Middle East producers.


Fate Brings a Police Recruit to His Deliverer
LEAD: Lieut.
Robert McLaughlin thought there was something familiar about the name of Adam Croom, right, a probationary police officer in a field training class.
Little did he know!
Page B1. (NYT/Ruby Washington)


Art: Fom Robert Morris, Images of Sex and Death
LEAD: FEW contemporary artists bite off more than Robert Morris.


Two Paul Taylor Works on 'Dance in America'
LEAD: IT'S difficult to tell who is getting better, Paul Taylor or the people in charge of ''Dance in America.'' Probably both.
In any event, Mr.
Taylor is returning to the public-television showcase for the fifth time since 1978, and his choreography has never been seen to better advantage on a television screen.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JANUARY 15, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-9


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Sports Pages on Jan. 13 with an article about the N.F.L. playoffs misidentified the Denver Broncos' backup quarterback.
He is Gary Kubiak.


San Francisco Journal; The Rush These Days Is Hardly for Gold
LEAD: San Francisco can boast of beautiful scenery, crusty sourdough bread and flaky white Dungeness crab, which is now bountiful and in season.
But when San Franciscans get together these days, the prime topic of discussion is the difficulty of simply finding a parking space.


Met Menagerie Tour With Steve Martin
LEAD: IF you've seen the comedian Steve Martin as a modern-day Cyrano de Bergerac in the film ''Roxanne'' or the bedeviled traveler in ''Planes, Trains and Automobiles,'' you might want to catch his more serious side at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Steve Martin, at the Met, you say?
Correct.
Mr.
Martin is narrator of an audio tour of ''Animals at the Met,'' which, in a sense, is a special exhibition of permanent works from the museum's collection that runs through Feb.


Film: 'Couch Trip,' With Aykroyd and Matthau
LEAD: IN ''The Couch Trip,'' Michael Ritchie's new farce about radio sex therapists and assorted southern California con artists, Walter Matthau plays a comparatively small role, but in the way he looks and behaves he defines the movie's laid-back, ramshackle charm.


Paine Webber Is Charged
LEAD: The E. F. Hutton Group Inc. and Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. have begun criminal proceedings in Switzerland against Paine Webber Inc. and four of its employees on charges that include stealing client records and brokerage business from Hutton, the investment firms said yesterday.


Israelis Detain 10 Palestinians Termed Moderates
LEAD: The Israeli authorities detained 10 Palestinians, most regarded as members of the moderate Arab establishment, in a continuing crackdown today as scattered disturbances continued in the occupied territories.


FRISCH'S RESTAURANTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 13
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRISCH'S RESTAURANTS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 13
1987
1986
Revenue
33,600,000
32,400,000
Net inc
1,090,189
462,997
Share earns
.21
.09
6mo rev
79,000,000
76,300,000
Net inc
2,494,722
1,549,798
Share earns
.49
.30


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article on Saturday about an award presentation and dinner to honor Luciano Pavarotti omitted the event's location and purpose.
It will take place tomorrow at the Metropolitan Club, 1 East 60th Street, as a benefit for Il Piccolo Teatro dell'Opera.
The ticket information telephone is (212) 722-3207.


A Pen Breathes Revenge; Stalin Is Steeped in Evil
LEAD: Less than two months after Mikhail S. Gorbachev delivered his official verdict on Stalin, Mikhail F. Shatrov made it clear the Soviet leader would not have the last word on the subject.


Japanese Are Targets Of Arizona Governor
LEAD: Gov.
Evan Mecham, who in the past has upset blacks and homosexuals, says Japanese get ''round eyes'' over Arizona's golf courses.


Mob Trial Witness Who Recanted Gets Suspended Sentence
LEAD: A former mob hit man who recanted his testimony in a key Mafia trial and then said he was coerced into doing so was spared a prison sentence yesterday for obstruction of justice.


Jose Zacarias Arza, Ex-Paraguay Official, 93
LEAD: Jose Zacarias Arza, former president of Paraguay's ruling Colorado Party, died Tuesday.
He was 93 years old.


Hospitals Lack Beds for Acute Patients, Aide Says
LEAD: The head of New York City's municipal hospitals said yesterday that the overcrowding crisis is so severe that she cannot guarantee there will be enough beds to take in all patients who need medical care.


On Eve of the Peace Parley, Costa Rican Is Pessimistic
LEAD: Looking and sounding extremely somber, President Oscar Arias Sanchez said today that the meeting of Central American leaders here Friday will be a ''very difficult'' negotiating session with no guarantee of success.


BURLINGTON NORTHERN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURLINGTON NORTHERN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,712,474,000
1,609,812,000
Net inc
99,000,000
76,000,000
Share earns
1.31
.95
Yr rev
6,620,857,000
6,941,413,000
Net inc
369,000,000
b860,000,000
Share earns
4.93
-


G.M. Ratings Cut
LEAD: Long-term debt ratings of the General Motors Corporation were reduced by Moody's Investors Service yesterday.
For senior debt issues of G.M. and its financing unit, the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, the new Moody's rating is Aa-3, down from Aa-1.
The lower rating also applies to various securities backed by pools of automobile loans, for which G.M.


ADVO-SYSTEM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVO-SYSTEM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
148,983,000
122,266,000
Net inc
2,836,000
b2,874,000
Share earns
.17
.19
Shares outst
16,846,340
15,241,082
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $515,000.


Film: Testing Poses in 'Patti Rocks'
LEAD: BILLY REGIS (Chris Mulkey) is a ladies' man who likes to boast about his exploits, and Eddie (John Jenkins) is the friend who has heard it all.
So when the two of them embark on an all-night drive to visit a girlfriend of Billy's in ''Patti Rocks,'' it's a very long journey indeed.
Billy describes his sexual adventures in rude, graphic detail; meanwhile, the more sensitive Eddie laments the breakup of his marriage.


Oreo Thief Gets 3-Year Term
LEAD: A transient has been sentenced to three years in prison after pleading guilty to breaking into a church nursery school and eating Oreo cookies and drinking Kool-Aid, officials said.
David Deskin, 25 years old, drew the sentence Tuesday because he was already on probation for another burglary.
The Rev.


Group Sets Plan For Stop and Shop
LEAD: The Stop and Shop Companies said that a partnership controlled by Herbert Haft, the chairman of Dart Group, planned to buy more than $15 million of Stop and Shop stock.
Stop and Shop, which operates 171 Bradlees discount stores in addition to 114 Stop and Shop supermarkets, said it had received a letter from Mr.


Sports People; Guerrero Back at Wheel
LEAD: Only four months after a crash nearly ended his life, Roberto Guerrero was back in a race car yesterday, feeling ''100 percent.'' The 29-year-old driver from Colombia suffered critical head injuries in a crash last Sept. 10 during a test of tires at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
He spent more than two weeks in a coma after the accident.


In Bullish Britain, One Big Worry
LEAD: THE British are feeling good about their economy.
The latest official forecast of the Treasury, prepared soon after the October stock market collapse, put the growth rate for the national economy in 1988 at 2.5 percent.
Inflation is expected to remain low.
And unemployment, still at the high level of 9.4 percent, has come down from 13 percent and is still declining.


Paul E. McKeever, Theologian, 64
LEAD: The Rev.
Paul E. McKeever, professor of moral theology at St.
John's University and a former editor of The Long Island Catholic, died of cardiac arrest Sunday at the Seminary of the Immaculate Conception in Huntington, L.I., where he lived.
He was 64 years old.


Chemical Net Climbs in Quarter
LEAD: The Chemical New York Corporation, the corporate parent of the Chemical Bank, reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter net income more than doubled.
Much of the increase, however, resulted from special, one-time factors rather than the company's main operations.


ON STAGE
LEAD:  Is It the Last of 'Tango'?


Gregg Takes S.M.U. Job
LEAD: Forrest Gregg left his head coaching job with the Green Bay Packers today, returned to Southern Methodist University with a $200,000 cut in pay and vowed to rebuild his alma mater's scandal-rocked football program.


AMERICAN MEDICAL INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MEDICAL INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,025,452,000
931,849,000
Net inc
b39,204,000
28,597,000
Share earns
.45
.33
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $33.9 million, a gain of $50.7 million from the cumulative effect of an accounting change, restructuring charges of $23.3 million, and a $48 million loss provision for sale of Pacific Appliance operations.


TODD-AG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TODD-AG CORP
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,022,000
6,109,000
Net inc
482,000
724,000
Share earns
.24
.37


Retail Sales Climbed 0.7% In December
LEAD: The nation's retail sales rose seven-tenths of 1 percent in December over the November level, the best performance in four months, spurred in great part by higher auto sales, the Commerce Department said yesterday.


U.S. Condemns Haiti on Its Plan For Election, Terming It Flawed
LEAD: The Reagan Administration today described the election scheduled for Sunday in Haiti as ''flawed,'' and called on Haiti's Government to prevent violence.


A Different East-West Rivalry?
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev has openly admitted that his system failed to deliver on its promises and no longer appeals as a model.
Scarcely news in the West, but it is a signal of great importance in the East.
The search for self-renewal requires an attempt to divert human as well as material resources away from the only field in which the


Film: 'El Sur,' From Spain
LEAD: ''EL SUR'' (''The South''), opening today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, is the second feature by Victor Erice, the Spanish director whose first film, ''The Spirit of the Beehive,'' was one of the critical hits of 1976.


Pakistan's Afghan Moves Perplex U.S.
LEAD: The Reagan Administration appears to have been thrown off balance by Pakistan's recent statements that members of the pro-Moscow Government in Afghanistan should be retained as part of a government that would take office as a condition of a Soviet troop withdrawal.


Judge Bork Is Stepping Down To Answer Critics and Reflect
LEAD: Judge Robert H. Bork will resign from the Federal appeals court here next month, freeing himself to respond to what he says was ''an essentially unanswered campaign of misinformation and political slogans'' that led the Senate to reject his nomination to the Supreme Court.


The New Afghan Struggle
LEAD: The Afghan resistance movement has achieved one historic victory and is fighting hard for another.


Recruit, Born in a Radio Car, Meets the Midwife (His Boss)
LEAD: Scanning the roster, Lieut.
Robert McLaughlin thought there was something familiar about the name of the new recruit from the Police Academy, but he could not quite put his finger on it.


STATE STREET BOSTON reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STATE STREET BOSTON (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
22,384,000
b21,701,000
Per share
.60
.59
Yr net inc
83,133,000
b71,395,000
Per share
2.23
1.97
Shares outst
37,263,000
36,178,000
b-Includes a non-recurring gain from accounting for leveraged leases brought about by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 of $3,572,000, or 10 cents per primary share outstanding.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Supercollider Plan Dropped  Bowing to local opposition, Governor Cuomo has withdrawn a proposal to have Wayne County, N.Y., chosen as the site of a $4.4 billion superconducting supercollider.
Page B1.
Republican Caucus Protest  Michigan's Presidential caucuses were disrupted by walkouts.


Film: Lahti in 'Stacking'
LEAD: ''STACKING,'' opening today at the Public Theater, is somewhat better than its title, which evokes nothing before one has seen the movie and not much more after.
It refers to the operation by which bales of hay are collected and stacked together in one part of the field with the use of a large, tractorlike vehicle equipped with a forked scoop.


Kidder, Peabody Is V.A.'s Adviser
LEAD: Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company has been named financial adviser to the Veterans Administration, which plans to sell an undisclosed amount of home mortgage loans from its portfolio this year.


Sports People; Floyd Fined, Suspended
LEAD: Eric (Sleepy) Floyd of the Houston Rockets was suspended for one game and fined $5,000 for his part in a fight Wednesday night with Jeff Hornacek of the Phoenix Suns, the league announced last night.
Floyd sat out Houston's 103-98 victory over Portland as part of his punishment.
Floyd's suspension and fine was issued by Rod Thorn, the leauge's vice president of operations.


New Polish Voting Laws Bar Candidates From Opposition
LEAD: The Polish Communist Party today categorically ruled out a role for opposition candidates under new voting laws that the party has vaunted as part of its design for broader democratization of Polish political life.


U.S. TO WITHDRAW 72 JET FIGHTERS FROM SPANISH BASE
LEAD: The United States, after months of negotiations with Spain, has decided to accede to Spanish demands and withdraw 72 F-16 jet fighters based there, Defense and State Department officials said today.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JANUARY 15, 1988
LEAD:  MARKETS  The New York Stock Exchange will curb program trading in a six-day experiment.
Reacting to criticism that the enormous computerized trades were a major factor in October's stock market collapse, the exchange asked the firms that engage in it to refrain from using the exchange's computer system on any day when the Dow Jones industrial average climbs or falls by 75 points or more.


ROWAN COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROWAN COMPANIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
46,783,000
28,174,000
Net loss
b15,453,000
17,367,000
Yr rev
143,129,000
167,163,000
Net loss
b65,645,000
42,147,000
b-Includes a non-cash writedown of about $4.8 million of the carrying value of oil and gas properties in compliance with SEC guidelines.


Harold Kennedy, Producer, Dies
LEAD: Harold J. Kennedy, a jack-of-all-theatrical-trades and for nearly half a century a champion of the summer theater circuit, died of cardiac arrest on Sunday at Doctors Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Music Before 1800
LEAD: Music Before 1800 will present a concert of viol music on Sunday at 4 P.M. at Corpus Christi Church (121st Street, east of Broadway).
Tickets are $9, $6 for students and the elderly.
Information: 666-0675.


Playoff Matchups; Strike Didn't Destroy Harmony
LEAD: If good intentions helped, the Giants would be defending their National Football Conference championship Sunday and not watching the Washington Redskins and the Minnesota Vikings play for it.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Reggie Jackson said yesterday that he was considering an offer to play baseball in Japan.
Jackson, currently on the Oakland Athletics roster, indicated last season that he was playing for the last time, but never formally announced his retirement. . . .
Jerry Rice of the San Francisco 49ers, the wide receiver who set National Football League records of 22 touchdown receptions and at least one in 13 straight games this season, has been voted the Maxwell Football Club's Bert Bell Award as pro player of the year.


Brooklyn Fire Kills One; 27 Families Are Displaced
LEAD: One woman was killed, six people were injured and 27 families were forced to leave their homes when a four-alarm fire blazed through a city-owned building yesterday at 583 Franklin Street in Prospect Heights.
The building was ''believed to be a crack house,'' a police officer said.
The cause of the fire was termed suspicious.


Beethoven Society
LEAD: The Beethoven Society will present a program of familiar Beethoven sonatas performed by five pianists -Jacob Lateiner, Ursula Oppens, Seymour Lipkin, Ralph Votapek and Lee Luvisi - tomorrow at 3 P.M. in Alice Tully Hall.
Tickets are $17.50.
Information: 874-6770.


Big Board Expanding
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange will expand its floor space more than 20 percent next Monday by opening a new area, it announced yesterday.
The $20 million project, begun in 1985, will add 7,000 square feet to the Big Board's present 30,000 square feet.


From Ping Chong, a Human Multimedia Bouquet
LEAD: Ping Chong, who has been creating multimedia theater works since the early 70's, has discovered that he returns to certain ideas again and again. ''I remain always interested in the idiosyncrasies of the human race and the themes of time and mortality,'' he said in a recent interview. ''So I keep doing variations on those themes.


Sports People; Tests for Bergeron
LEAD: Michel Bergeron, the coach of the Rangers, will remain at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y., at least until today, the team said yesterday.
Bergeron entered the hospital Tuesday night complaining of abdominal pains.
A statement said Bergeron had undergone extensive testing in the last two days but the results were inconclusive.


Horner Signs With Cardinals
LEAD: Bob Horner, the former Atlanta Braves infielder who spent last season playing in Japan, reached agreement with the St.
Louis Cardinals yesterday on a one-year contract for a base salary of $950,000.
He is expected to fill the void created by the Cardinals' loss of Jack Clark as a free agent to the


RESTAURANTS
LEAD: DAVID KEH'S idea of a fine French dinner, those who know him attest, might be navarin of lamb or a hearty bouillabaisse, with a stop on the way home for some ''real food'' - a plate of spicy pork dumplings, steamed fish or crispy orange beef at a Chinese restaurant.
Mr.
Keh, the indefatigable Manhattan restaurateur, has apparently never felt comfortable with Western food, which is why it came as no surprise when he pulled the plug on his two experiments in Occidental cuisine - the California-style Safari Grill and the Mexican restaurant Cafe Marimba - and turned them back into


Music: An Andre Watts Celebration
LEAD: CAN it really be a quarter of a century since a 16-year-old pianist named Andre Watts made his spectacular debut with the New York Philharmonic as the substitute for an ailing Glenn Gould?
Evidently so, for there was Mr.
Watts striding onto the stage of Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday night to mark the silver anniversary of that celebrated event.


Dining Out Guide: With Fireplaces
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
ARIZONA 206, 206 East 60th Street (838-0440) - **(Nov. 15, 1985) The ultimate winter fantasy is to dine near a fireplace, and finding such a setting in the city is a search worthy of any explorer.


ART PEOPLE
LEAD:  Picasso Repainted


Administration Calls Law on Aliens Effective
LEAD: The Reagan Administration says the new immigration law is working, as shown by a drop in apprehensions of aliens at the border, by a steady rise in applications for legal status and in broad employer compliance.


Then Turned Into Now But 60's Music Lives On
LEAD: TWO decades after the fact, the 1960's really have a hold on us.
We're surrounded by its images and echoes, in a wash of revisionism and nostalgia.
Historians and film makers try to sort out the Vietnam War; academics defend or disparage 60's ideas.
Television characters sling 60's references to prove they're fun-loving folks; fashion plates wear tie-dye and mini-skirts.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Sweets Edison and Trio


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.83
6.72
6.01
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.86
5.78
5.36
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.27
6.28
5.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.65
8.67
6.91
30-YR.


Nets Put Distractions Aside
LEAD: The Nets came up with one of their rare victories tonight, defeating the Sacramento Kings, 90-87, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The victory was their seventh in 36 games this season.


E.P.A. Critic Enters the Lion's Den And Is Showered by Wild Applause
LEAD: It was as if the Christians led into the Colosseum for slaughter had suddenly turned on the Roman mob, or like Daniel's attacking the lions in the den.


U.P.I. Accuses 3 Ex-Top Editors Of Defamation
LEAD: United Press International filed a lawsuit charging defamation and breach of contract Wednesday against three former top editors who left the news agency last November after saying they could not assure its ''quality and integrity.''


Washington Talk: Briefing; That Presidential Bug
LEAD: Representative Thomas S. Foley, the House majority leader, insists he is not likely to come down with a case of Presidential fever, even if Democrats try to recruit him for the Presidency.


Irving A. Greene, Securities Executive, 89
LEAD: Irving A. Greene, a Wall Street executive who worked in the securities industry for 75 years, died Tuesday in Manhattan after a brief illness.
He was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan.


ALLEGHENY INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec. 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEGHENY INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec. 27
1987
1986
Sales
256,249,000
257,942,000
Net inc
b7,246,000
c165,716,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $2,400,000.
c-Net loss and includes a loss from discontinued operations of $71,411,000.


Fund Rise Barred For Use of TPA
LEAD: A Government advisory panel has decided not to recommend a special increase in Medicare reimbursements to hospitals that treat heart attack victims with tissue plasminogen activator, the new drug from Genentech Inc.
The decision could discourage some hospitals from using TPA.
Under Medicare rules, hospitals receive a set payment for a particular disease.


Suffolk Man Indicted In Slaying of His Wife
LEAD: A grand jury indicted Matthew Solomon today on a murder charge in connection with the strangling of his bride of two months, the District Attorney said.


CHEMICAL NEW YORK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEMICAL NEW YORK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b229,600,000
102,400,000
Per share
3.83
1.92
Yr net loss
c853,700,000
d402,400,000
Per share
-
7.57
b-After pre-tax gains of $126.4 million from the purchase of an annuity contract in settlement of a portion of the company's pension obligations and $25.6 million from the sale of the company's factoring business; results also reflect increases in net interest income, fees for other services and foreign exchange and bond trading activities an


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on the Education page on Wednesday carried incorrect tuition figures provided by the State University of New York at Binghamton.
The figures shown were for a semester; yearly tuition is $1,350 for state residents and $3,200 for nonresidents.


Steps a la Carte: A Dancegoer's Menu Has Something to Suit Every Taste
LEAD: MERCE CUNNINGHAM has frequently compared the art of choreography with the art of cooking.
George Balanchine did, too.
And if dance-making could be compared to the perfect steaming of a parsnip or the celestial balancing of elements in a blini, then this dance weekend in New York City would be a rugged winter stew with enough meat, vegetables, spices and sauce to fill a kitchen.


Film: 'Return Of Living Dead Part II'
LEAD: YOU can't keep a gooey ghoul down.
That's the message of ''Return of the Living Dead Part II,'' which revives the creatures who enlivened (that may not be the right word) ''Return of the Living Dead'' but which has nothing to do with George Romero's 1968 cult favorite ''Night of the Living Dead.''


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


FIRST WACHOVIA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST WACHOVIA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b39,900,000
51,200,000
Per share
.73
.95
Yr net inc
b176,600,000
c193,800,000
Per share
3.24
3.59
b-Includes charges from provision for losses on loans to developing nations of $18.2 million for the quarter and $38.2 million for the year, net of an $8.9 million equity security gain.


Consider Demilitarized Palestinian Democracies
LEAD: To the Editor:


Islanders Beat Nordiques, 8-5
LEAD: For Denis Potvin, his goal meant history.
For Randy Wood, his meant the promise of at least a brighter future.
In the locker room after the Islanders had outlasted the Quebec Nordiques 8-5, the two stood separated by a handful of stalls and more than a dozen years of National Hockey League experience.


Canadians Rally Over Team USA
LEAD: The United States Olympic hockey team's 11-game unbeaten streak, cultivated in weeks of confrontation with lesser opponents, ended tonight at the Met Center with a 6-4 loss to the Americans' rugged Canadian counterparts.


China Is Going To the Olympics
LEAD: Three days before the deadline, China announced today that it would send a team to the Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea.


ABBOTT LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABBOTT LABORATORIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,234,000,000
1,063,000,000
Net inc
190,000,000
161,000,000
Share earns
.84
.70
Yr sales
4,388,000,000
3,808,000,000
Net inc
633,000,000
540,000,000
Share earns
2.78
2.32


Army Sergeant Is Arrested on Espionage Charges
LEAD: An Army instructor at a major weapon-testing center was arrested today on espionage charges and accused of attempting to sell military documents to the Soviet Union, Federal law-enforcement officials said.


MAN IN THE NEWS: Lee Teng-hui; Taiwan's Leader and Son of the Soil
LEAD: There is little dispute here that Taiwan's new President, Lee Teng-hui, is a man of sincerity and scholarship, a soft-edged man who associates say virtually exudes moral rectitude.
But there is a question about whether those exemplary attributes will be enough to keep him in office for long.


Consider Demilitarized Palestinian Democracies; Holy Places
LEAD: To the Editor:


Key Dole Aide Leaves to Calm Queries on Fund
LEAD: The national finance chairman of Senator Bob Dole's Presidential campaign stepped aside today as Mr.
Dole sought to distance himself from the growing political controversy over the aide's financial dealings with his wife, Elizabeth Hanford Dole.


Miller Fires Eagle
LEAD: Johnny Miller scored the first eagle of the 1988 PGA Tour today with a shot that brought back memories of his deadly iron play during his winning days in the 1970's.
His 8-iron effort of 140 yards at the par-4 13th hole took one short bounce into the hole for a deuce.


Urban League Says Blacks Suffered Loss Over Decade
LEAD: The economic and social status of most black Americans did not significantly improve in the last decade and may actually have worsened, the president of the National Urban League said today.


B.P. Bids for Britoil, But Offer Is Rejected
LEAD: Despite major obstacles, the British Petroleum Company formally offered $:2.27 billion in cash today for Britoil P.L.C., which quickly rejected the bid.


TRANSTECTOR SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSTECTOR SYSTEMS
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,306,279
2,573,039
Net inc
66,173
180,911
Share earns
.02
.05
9mo sales
6,551,758
6,683,388
Net inc
128,380
91,832
Share earns
.03
.02


MEDITRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDITRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,839,000
5,031,000
Net inc
3,139,000
3,442,000
Share earns
.29
.32
Shares outst
10,720,859
10,720,859
Yr rev
25,529,000
10,713,000
Net inc
13,308,000
6,483,000
Share earns
1.24
1.17
Shares outst
10,720,859
5,529,948


TV: 'Pulaski,' on A&amp;E, New Detective Series
LEAD: Pay attention.
This gets complicated. ''Pulaski: The TV Detective'' is an eight-episode BBC series that starts tonight at 10 o'clock on the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network.
It is about a character named Larry Summers, an American actor who plays the title role in a British action series called ''Pulaski.


Ron and Noboru: A Good Start
LEAD: The first meeting of President Reagan and Prime Minister Takeshita of Japan showed promise - a friendly spirit at the top of what is otherwise a difficult economic relationship.
With Japan's power swelling steadily, and American supremacy no longer unchallenged, relations still will be poisoned by stand-offs over trade and finance.


BROKEN WATER MAIN FLOODS BUILDINGS AND KNOCKS OUT UTILITIES ON UPPER WEST SIDE
LEAD: A 90-year-old water main broke underneath Broadway between West 84th and 85th Streets in Manhattan early yesterday, sending a cascade of water flowing westward in the frigid darkness into basements of apartment houses and stores.


Alfred Easton Poor, Architect, 88
LEAD: Alfred Easton Poor, a New York architect who designed many government buildings, banks and institutional headquarters, and who was part of a group that designed the restoration and extension of the East Front of the United States Capitol in the early 1960's, died Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.


TEMTEX INDUS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEMTEX INDUS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,694,000
7,809,000
Net inc
b692,000
b76,000
Share earns
.28
.03
b-Includes a tax credit of $221,000 and $33,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


L&amp;N HOUSING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*L&amp;N HOUSING (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,388,000
2,013,000
Net inc
1,629,000
1,239,000
Share earns
.74
.56
Yr rev
6,031,000
6,667,000
Net inc
4,363,000
4,915,000
Share earns
1.98
2.23


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The figures are unambiguous on the improvement in exports.


Reagan Waiver for Pakistan
LEAD: President Reagan invoked a waiver today to assure continued aid to Pakistan despite American concerns that Pakistan may have been involved in smuggling nuclear-weapons materials from the United States.
The waiver was invoked on a law that requires a cutoff of aid to any nation believed to be exporting restricted materials from the United States that can be used to make nuclear weapons.


Sports of The Times; The Heart of Pistol Pete
LEAD: TOO many times, said Atlanta Hawks Coach Richie Guerin in 1970, Pete Maravich gets himself ''stuck up there in the air.'' It's a great trait for a moon, but not necessarily for a basketball player.


POP: HOT CLUB RE-CREATES REINHARDT-GRAPPELLI SOUND
LEAD: Few sounds in modern pop are more archetypally jazzy than the lilting string-band music of Django Reinhardt, the Belgian gypsy guitarist, and his Hot Club of France.
Led by the guitarist, who died in 1953, and Stephane Grappelli, the violinist, who will turn 80 this year, the group refined a propulsive, accelerated dance music that, savored in the context of today's electronic jazz-fusion, seems quintessentially pure and simple.


Concert: Marc-Andre Hamelin Plays Ives
LEAD: The ''Concord'' Sonata by Charles Ives is one of those pieces that rarely makes its way onto piano recital programs but invariably steals the show when it does.
It appeared as the welcome entry on the first half of Marc-Andre Hamelin's concert in Carnegie Hall Wednesday evening.
Mr.
Hamelin won first prize in the Carnegie Hall International American Music


Your Money; Franchises Offer Profits and Risks
LEAD: JAMES Goodman, executive vice president of the Morehouse School of Medicine in Atlanta, recently decided to leave his position and go into franchising.
So he bought the Seattle-area rights to open franchises of Jiffy Lube International Inc., a fast oil-change and lubrication system for automobiles.


Pyongyang as Outlaw
LEAD: North Korea, a political and economic failure, hates and envies successful South Korea.
Recently that envy has grown as Seoul reaches for new prestige by playing host to the 1988 Summer Olympics.
Now it appears that despite the new and positive foreign policy signals Pyongyang has been emitting in recent months, its policy still comes down to nastiness, terror and murder.


Plenty for Jews and Catholics to Discuss
LEAD: To the Editor:


NAKED IGNORANCE
LEAD: Happy 100th birthday to the National Geographic Society.


Output in 1987 Up 5.2%, Biggest Gain Since 1984
LEAD: The nation's industrial output climbed 5.2 percent in 1987, almost five times the previous year's gain and the best showing for American industry since 1984, the Government reported today.


Levin Friend Testifies Of Drinks and Diet Pills
LEAD: Jennifer Levin was not intoxicated when she left an Upper East Side bar with Robert E. Chambers Jr. just after 4 o'clock on the morning of her death, a witness at Mr.
Chambers's murder trial testified yesterday.


ENVIRONMENTAL TECTONICS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENVIRONMENTAL TECTONICS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,742,000
2,801,000
Net inc
90,000
b25,000
Share earns
.03
.01
9mo sales
10,361,000
9,092,000
Net inc
251,000
b435,000
Share earns
.09
.16


SHELDAHL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHELDAHL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
19,576,000
20,645,000
Net inc
453,000
b648,000
Share earns
.10
.16
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $67,000.


More Glasnost Needed on Soviet Prison Camp
LEAD: To the Editor:


Little Federal Office Has Big Role in Art Tours
LEAD: Last year, an art exhibition in the United States commemorating the 750th anniversary of the City of Berlin was postponed, not because of the usual artistic or political problems but because Federal officials declined to provide a form of insurance to protect the lenders against possible loss.


Judgment Stage for Central American Peace Accord
LEAD: Leaders of the participating Central American countries at the opening ceremony of a conference yesterday in San Jose, Costa Rica, to judge the results of the regional peace treaty.
From the left were Presidents Jose Azcona Hoyo of Honduras, Jose Napoleon Duarte of El Salvador, Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica, Vinicio Cerezo of Guatemala and Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 16, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Bank Board Plan Near On Texas Savings Units
LEAD: Federal regulators are expected to adopt soon a plan to close or merge by year-end 104 savings institutions in Texas and 42 in neighboring states, the chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, M. Danny Wall, said today.


ROSS, A.J., LOGISTICS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROSS, A.J., LOGISTICS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,133,864
11,449,994
Net inc
189,725
287,863
Share earns
.02
.03


PRIVATE BRANDS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIVATE BRANDS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,114,000
3,533,000
Net inc
365,000
251,000
Share earns
.04
.03
Shares outst
10,105,000
9,000,000
The company changed its fiscal year from Sept. 30 to a calendar year.


U.S. and Spain Announce a Limited Military Accord
LEAD: The United States and Spain announced new military arrangements today that would sharply curtail the American presence here and terminate American aid to Spain under the existing 35-year-old treaty between the two countries.


Knicks Fall to 1-15 on Road
LEAD: The Knicks suffered a second-half collapse tonight on the way to their 10th consecutive loss on the road, a 119-104 decision against the Philadelphia 76ers.
New York had played an outstanding first half at the Spectrum, leading by as many as 13 points, and holding a 58-50 lead at the half.
Then came the third period.


CLAYTON HOMES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLAYTON HOMES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
49,406,000
43,695,000
Net inc
2,904,000
2,028,000
Share earns
.23
.15
Shares outst
12,768,000
13,052,000
6mo rev
99,759,000
87,666,000
Net inc
6,128,000
4,218,000
Share earns
.48
.32


Mother and 2 Children Die in Jersey House Fire
LEAD: Firefighters working early yesterday at a home in the Browns Mills section of Pemberton Township.
Coralie Diane Rahner; her 13-year-old daughter, Elizabeth Anne, and son Eugene Jr., 6, were killed in the blaze.
Mrs.
Rahner's husband, Eugene, was listed in critical condition at a hospital.
Their son James, 14, was treated and released.


SOLITEC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOLITEC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,510,000
4,481,000
Net inc
b4,000
c1,615,000
Yr sales
13,483,000
13,237,000
Net inc
b202,000
c6,485,000
Share earns
.06
-
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $47,000 and $124,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


New York City Has Record Rise In Assessments
LEAD: The taxable value of property in New York City is now $65.7 billion, reflecting a $6.4 billion increase that is the largest annual rise in the city's history, tentative city figures showed yesterday.


Conner Is Still Fuming
LEAD: Dennis Conner took an opportunity yesterday to lash out at Michael Fay, the New Zealand merchant banker and yachtsman, charging that Fay's unorthodox challenge for the America's Cup amounts to a ''legalized ambush'' of the 137-year-old trophy.


Strike Disrupts Ports in Northwest
LEAD: A 38-hour work stoppage by 3,800 longshoremen that shut down docks in all ports of the Pacific Northwest ended today, but labor leaders hinted of further disruptions in the coming weeks.


Bergeron Released
LEAD: Three days after he checked himself into a New York hospital complaining of stomach pains, Coach Michel Bergeron of the Rangers was released yesterday after undergoing a final examination.
Bergeron promptly flew to join the team in Montreal and planned on coaching when the Rangers play the Canadiens at the Forum tonight.


STATE O' MAINE reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STATE O' MAINE
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
26,142,162
19,652,898
Net inc
2,367,014
1,433,820
Share earns
.99
.66
9mo sales
45,189,428
30,365,327
Net inc
3,712,241
1,846,865
Share earns
1.62
.85


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Celtics 122, Kings 86: Kevin McHale and Larry Bird led Boston in a 14-0 surge to take a 34-11 lead after one quarter and rolled to a victory last night over visiting Sacramento.
The Kings were never in the game after the midpoint of the opening period.
The closest they came in the last three quarters was 63-44 with 10 minutes 3 seconds left in the third quarter.


Stage: Ping Chong's View Of History in 'Maraya'
LEAD: In theater, Ping Chong discovers the same kind of freedom of abstraction that others utilize in dance, music and the visual arts, all of which are inextricably intertwined in his innovative work.
His new performance piece, ''Maraya - Acts of Nature in Geological Time'' (at the Apple Corp Theater), is a mysterious investigation of world history, as studied on Mr.


Broncos Lose Johnson
LEAD: Vance Johnson, the Broncos' leading wide receiver and an extraordinary playoff performer, will miss the American Conference championship game on Sunday against the Browns.


SUNSTAR FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNSTAR FOODS
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
16,393,000
19,183,000
Net inc
b409,000
b301,000
Share earns
.33
.25
b-Includes a gain on the disposal of discontinued operations of $295,000 for the latest quarter and includes for the year-ago period a loss from discontinued operations of $28,000.


BALLISTIC RECOVERY SYSTEMS reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALLISTIC RECOVERY SYSTEMS
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
407,599
395,826
Net loss
639,901
20,827


Joe Albany, 63, Dies; Master of Jazz Piano
LEAD: Joe Albany, a jazz pianist who first emerged in the be-bop era, died of upper respiratory failure and cardiac arrest on Tuesday in the Roosevelt Hospital Division of St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 63 years old and lived in Manhattan.


NBC Rules Out TBS Stake As Talks With Turner Fail
LEAD: NBC and Turner Broadcasting System Inc. have halted negotiations that would have given NBC a minority interest in Ted Turner's cash-hungry television enterprise, officials of the two companies said yesterday.


AMERICAN BIONETICS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN BIONETICS
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
888,451
502,783
Net loss
246,291
307,924
6mo sales
1,655,524
869,008
Net loss
510,723
805,889


Raimondo Manzini, Editor, 86
LEAD: Raimondo Manzini, editor of the Vatican daily L'Osservatore Romano for 18 years and a former member of parliament, died Thursday.
He was 86 years old.


Trio With Trombone
LEAD: Ray Anderson, a trombonist, is to lead a trio Sunday at Visiones, 125 Macdougal Street (673-5576).
Sets begin at 9 and 11 P.M.; there is a $3 cover and a two-drink minimum.


Newark Bill on Testing Of Prostitutes Is Vetoed
LEAD: Mayor Sharpe James today vetoed a city ordinance that would have required convicted prostitutes and their customers to be tested for AIDS, saying it was unconstitutional.


FIRST TEAM SPORTS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST TEAM SPORTS
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
51,024
44,002
Net loss
131,032
35,797
9mo sales
511,033
397,829
Net loss
235,086
11,908


AEP INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AEP INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
20,875,000
18,208,000
Net inc
1,275,000
1,119,000
Share earns
.42
.38
Shares outst
3,007,051
2,882,962
Yr sales
69,981,000
62,395,000
Net inc
3,253,000
2,756,000
Share earns
1.08
.96
Shares outst
3,007,051
2,883,962


Manhattan Office Vacancies Rose in Last Quarter of 1987
LEAD: Office vacancy rates in Manhattan rose in the fourth quarter of 1987, to 11.5 percent in the downtown area and 10.2 percent in midtown, according to a study by a leading real estate concern.


DATA MED CLINICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA MED CLINICAL
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
168,395
97,757
Net loss
599,076
333,346
9mo rev
544,785
189,994
Net loss
1,061,983
710,881
Year-ago 9-month loss reflects results after the company's inception Feb.


HOTEL INVESTORS TRUST-HOTEL INVESTORS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOTEL INVESTORS TRUST-HOTEL INVESTORS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
17,021,000
8,873,000
Net inc
b2,301,000
1,581,000
Share earns
.19
.17
b-Includes a gain of $520,000 on the sale of land.
The company said the increased revenue and net income were a result of the expansion of the trust and corporation, including the acquisition by the trust of Hotel Properties Inc.


Frederic Karoly, 95, Abstract Painter, Dies
LEAD: Frederic Karoly, a painter whose abstract oils are in the collection of the Metropolitan, the Guggenheim and the Whitney museums, died on Dec. 15 at the Inter-Continental Hotel in Manhattan, where he had made his home for many years.
He was 95 years old.


Abercrombie Chain Bought
LEAD: The Limited Inc., the diversified chain of women's apparel stores, and Oshman's Sporting Goods said yesterday that the Limited had agreed to buy the Abercrombie &amp; Fitch division of Oshman's for $47 million in cash.


INTEGRATED DEVICE TECHOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTEGRATED DEVICE TECHOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
32,054,000
19,511,000
Net inc
3,261,000
423,000
Share earns
.13
.02
9mo sales
83,812,000
55,714,000
Net inc
7,284,000
1,469,000
Share earns
.29
.06


Sakharov Meets With Gorbachev And Hands Leader a Prisoner List
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the most powerful symbol of authority in the Soviet Union, met in the Kremlin today with Andrei D. Sakharov, the Nobel laureate once made an outcast here for defending the rights of the individual.


GREEN TREE ACCEPTANCE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREEN TREE ACCEPTANCE (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,714,000
12,828,000
Share earns
.19
.68
Yr net inc
b39,582,000
44,719,000
Share earns
2.15
2.20
b-Includes an accounting change credit of $7,212,000.


RADIANT TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RADIANT TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,074,800
4,867,800
Net inc
b122,900
c655,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $40,000.
c-Net loss and includes income from discontinued operations of $175,000.


Some Doubts About New Cosmetics for Tanning
LEAD: Tan accelerators, the newest cosmetics for sunning, are intended to provide the maximum tan with minimum exposure.
For winter travelers who are planning short vacations in the sun, the products sound ideal.
But some dermatologists are dubious.


Muller Scores 3 Goals Again
LEAD: Kirk Muller drew the penalties and capitalized during the manpower advantages tonight in leading the Devils with three goals to a 7-3 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs in Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Deaver on the Block: Auction Helps Pay Legal Fee
LEAD: Shortly after the doors opened, the hand-painted Chinese screen from Michael K. Deaver's lucrative lobbying business was sold this morning for the asking price of $3,500.


Teen-Age Girl Killed in Nevada Storm
LEAD: A house in Reno, Nev., was left without a roof Thursday as a storm with winds gusting up to 87 miles an hour swept through the city, knocking down power lines.
Officials said that an automobile accident in which a teen-age girl was killed was caused by the storm. (AP)


Texaco to Ease Takeover Defenses
LEAD: Concerned that their bankruptcy reorganization plan might be rejected by shareholders, executives of Texaco Inc. agreed in principle yesterday to demands by a shareholders' committee to ease restrictions on an unfriendly takeover.


ROCKY MOUNTAIN CHOCOLATE FACTORY reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCKY MOUNTAIN CHOCOLATE FACTORY
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,056,664
1,428,692
Net inc
61,663
b82,003
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
2,945,647
3,308,337
Net loss
39,299
535,072
b-Net loss


Group Plans Boycott as Protest Over Racism
LEAD: A coalition of labor leaders, ministers and heads of professional organizations have called for an economic boycott Feb. 19 against racism in New York City.


SALICK HEALTH CARE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SALICK HEALTH CARE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,188,000
4,930,000
Net inc
975,000
815,000
Share earns
.18
.15


Better Ways to Clean New York's Dirty Streets
LEAD: To the Editor:


Met Opera: Debussy's 'Pelleas,' With Von Stade
LEAD: Debussy's ''Pelleas et Melisande'' is less an opera than an anti-opera.
His setting of the Maeterlinck play rarely raises its voice above a somber hush but can draw the susceptible listener deep into a world of gauze and shadow where hazily defined characters move as if in a trance and where almost everything important is left unsaid.


At Latin Parley, Charges of Bad Faith
LEAD: The leaders of five Central American countries opened a final stage of peace negotiations here today amid accusations of bad faith and strongly differing interpretations of the regional treaty they signed five months ago.


Schools Should Teach Us of Other Cultures
LEAD: To the Editor:


Leader of Army Revolt Escapes in Argentina
LEAD: The leader of an army revolt last April that threatened Argentina's democratic Government escaped from house arrest today, shortly before he was to be taken to jail, officials said.


Arizona Governor May Be Impeached
LEAD: A special counsel retained by the Arizona House of Representatives to investigate Gov.
Evan Mecham asserted today that the Governor had violated numerous state laws and suggested that there were grounds for impeachment.


2 Officers Suspended In Separate Incidents
LEAD: Two New York City police officers were suspended yesterday after they were arrested in separate incidents.
One was arrested during a raid on a Manhattan social club and the other was charged with buying crack on Long Island, the police said.


FOR SANDINISTA, A STRONG LITERARY ESCORT
LEAD: The five Central American presidents who met today in Costa Rica were accompanied by aides and advisers, but the delegation traveling with President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua carried the greatest literary weight.


Hyundai Price Rise
LEAD: Hyundai Motor America said it had raised the base prices of Excel car models by $200, with the exception of the three-door hatchback, whose price rises $100, to $5,395.
The company attributed the increase to the depreciation of the dollar against other currencies and to other business costs.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article last Saturday about the annual Ascap Musical Theater Workshop identified the sponsoring organization incompletely.
It is the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, the musical licensing organization.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.85
6.86
5.34
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.87
5.86
5.34
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.25
6.27
5.38
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.43
8.65
6.86
30-YR.


NO CANCER IS FOUND IN TEST ON REAGAN
LEAD: Doctors who examined President Reagan today found ''no recurrence of cancer'' in his colon and none of the nonmalignant growths that have been discovered on the four other checkups he has had over the past two years, the White House said.


Three Laboratories Are Chosen to Determine Age of Shroud of Turin
LEAD: Three laboratories have been chosen by the Roman Catholic Cardinal of Turin to test fragments of the shroud of Turin in an effort to determine its age.


Bridge; Four Groups Capture Titles In Tri-State Regional Event
LEAD: Four championships were decided Thursday, on the second day of play in the Tri-State Regional Championships in Port Chester, N.Y.
The winners of titles were: Men's teams - Miles Storfer of Jamaica, Queens, Irving Ingwer of Brooklyn, Dave Greenwald of Manhattan, and Gene Prosnitz of Brooklyn.


Faldo Shoots 7 Birdies In a Row
LEAD: Nick Faldo of England, winner of last year's British Open, posted seven consecutive birdies today to fall just one short of the American PGA Tour record of eight birdies in a row.


TCS ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TCS ENTERPRISES
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,124,000
1,449,000
Net loss
23,000
c93,000
Yr rev
5,323,000
3,598,000
Net inc
b319,000
211,000
Share earns
.11
.07
b-Includes an accounting loss of $110,000 incurred when the company transferred proceeds from the sale of a GNMA mutual fund into a GNMA security.


LOJACK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOJACK CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
450,645
153,946
Net loss
362,049
361,943
9mo sales
1,507,892
279,402
Net loss
641,486
1,869,984


TSR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TSR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,148,000
6,351,000
Net inc
180,000
206,000
Share earns
.08
.09
6mo rev
12,406,000
12,387,000
Net inc
348,000
392,000
Share earns
.15
.16


MEDCHEM PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDCHEM PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,839,176
1,712,598
Net inc
449,323
414,109
Share earns
.18
.17


Coping: With Self-Help Books
LEAD: For every New Year's resolution, there now seems to be a companion book.
Feeling blue? ''Letting Go'' promises, on its jacket, to help readers ''erase painful memories'' within three months.
Shy? ''Stand Up!
Speak Out!
Talk Back!'' has, the jacket states, ''liberated thousands from anger, guilt and self-denial.


CORRECTION
LEAD: The Sports of The Times column on Thursday omitted identities for five of the nine members of the Baseball Writers Association of America who returned blank ballots in the Hall of Fame election.
They were Michael Martinez of The New York Times, Fred Down and Fred Lief of United Press International, Bob Oates of The Los Angeles Times and Ken Nigro, a former baseball writer who works for the Baltimore Orioles.


Security Tightened in Haiti as Election Nears
LEAD: A driver being searched in Port-au-Prince.
Soldiers tied up traffic for miles as security was increased for the Government-run national election tomorrow.
In violence that accompanied aborted vote Nov. 29, at least 34 people were killed.
Opposition leaders claim that the Government is attempting to force participation in the voting.


Thatcher Uses Muscle to Retain Secrets Law
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher used personal lobbying and parliamentary tactics today to defeat the latest effort to rewrite Britain's Official Secrets Act.


INTERMARK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERMARK INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
126,668,000
113,015,000
Net loss
864,000
d1,018,000
9mo rev
436,557,000
375,264,000
Net loss
b6,220,000
cd1,057,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-After a loss of $7,000,000 on the extinguishment of debt.


F.C.C. Reinstates Rule On Minority Ownership
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission has reinstated policies meant to increase the opportunities for women and minorities to own radio and television stations.


A Clean Bill of Health
LEAD: President Reagan leaving the White House yesterday.
A medical examination earlier found ''no recurrence of cancer.'' Page 7. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


How About Verification?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jerusalem Police, Firing Tear Gas, Fight With Palestinians at Mosque
LEAD: The Israeli police, firing tear gas and wielding night sticks, fought today with stone-throwing Palestinians around the Dome of the Rock mosque, one of Islam's holiest sites.


HALMI, ROBERT, INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HALMI, ROBERT, INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,804,000
11,413,000
Net inc
1,091,000
2,115,000
Share earns
.05
.10
6mo rev
15,557,000
17,431,000
Net inc
2,094,000
3,093,000
Share earns
.09
.14


3 Seminars on Dance
LEAD: Movement Research Inc. will present seminars on aspects of dance on Feb. 14 and March 5 and 20 at the Ethnic Folk Arts Center, 179 Varick Street.
The seminars are part of the organization's series, ''The Studies Projects.'' Kei Takei, Kumiko Kimoto and Yoshiko Chuma will take part in ''From Japan to New York: Three Japanese Choreographers,'' moderated by Wendy Perron, on Feb.


Leon Seltzer, 69, Dies; Led a University Press
LEAD: Leon E. Seltzer, a national figure in university press publishing and a lawyer, died of cardio-respiratory arrest Monday at Stanford University Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived on the Stanford University campus in Stanford, Calif.


Student Discipline, Principal Discipline
LEAD: Can Joe Clark, the two-fisted school principal in Paterson, N.J., survive the conflict with his Board of Education?
The White House says it wants him for a full-time position, but he has agreed only to an unpaid consultancy.
Whatever games are being played on that front, Mr.
Clark need not lose his job as principal unless he forces the board to dismiss him.


Broader Waste Cleanup Seen
LEAD: The nation may have to spend an estimated $22.7 billion cleaning up hazardous waste sites that were supposedly operating under strict environmental regulation, a Congressional study says.


Moves to End Digital Tape Dispute
LEAD: Record companies and consumer electronics manufacturers have begun moving toward resolving a dispute that has kept a new tape recording technology - digital audio tape - out of the hands of American consumers, industry and Government officials say.


Battling the Radar Busters
LEAD: When Geico decided to deny automobile insurance to drivers who said they owned radar detectors, it expected no controversy. ''It made sense,'' said August P. Alegi, vice president and deputy general counsel for the company. ''People own detectors for one reason only: to avoid speed limits.
That makes them unacceptable risks.


Bush Seeks to End Iran Questions
LEAD: Vice President Bush said today that he had answered all questions on his role in the Iran-contra affair and that he believed the issue was closed.


GERIATRIC &amp; MEDICAL CENTERS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GERIATRIC &amp; MEDICAL CENTERS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
26,575,000
21,774,000
Net loss
970,000
b924,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo rev
52,607,000
43,512,000
Net loss
1,266,000
b1,972,000
Share earns
-
.21


Ida Betzak, Painter, 78
LEAD: Ida Betzak, a painter, died Sunday of a cerebral hemorrhage at her home in Manhattan.
She was 78 years old.


Amid Cold Winds, Many Do Remember the Neediest Cases
LEAD: Recent cutting winds and merciless cold have stirred increased concern for the plight of the homeless among many donors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Democrats Gentle as Hart Joins Debate
LEAD: The seven Democratic Presidential hopefuls tonight attacked large corporations, Republicans and President Reagan in a nationally televised debate here tonight.
But they were far gentler with each other, and spoke not an ill word of Gary Hart, who joined them in a face-to-face exchange for the first time since he re-entered the campaign last month.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


'Crazy Horse' Author Is Upheld in Libel Case
LEAD: A Federal District Court in Minnesota has dismissed a four-year-old libel suit brought against Peter Matthiessen, author of ''In the Spirit of Crazy Horse,'' and his publisher, Viking Penguin.
The ruling, which is subject to appeal, upholds the right of an author ''to publish an entirely one-sided view of people and events.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, the ''Moscow Journal'' article yesterday about the Soviet political playwright Mikhail F. Shatrov omitted a paragraph in some editions.
The paragraph, 12th from the end, at the top of the last column, should have read:


SUPERTEX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUPERTEX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,796,000
2,663,000
Net inc
b829,000
c610,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo sales
13,006,000
8,624,000
Net inc
b1,751,000
c1,701,000
Share earns
.14
-
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $349,000, or 3 cents a share, and $740,000, or 6 cents a share, for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


COLLAGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLLAGEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,136,000
5,978,000
Net loss
688,000
b434,000
Share earns
-
.06
6mo rev
11,597,000
11,033,000
Net loss
1,083,000
b563,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


DOLE AIDE CAUSED CONCERN IN CAMP
LEAD: Aides to Senator Bob Dole now say they expressed concern among themselves about the financial dealings of David Owen, the national finance chairman of Mr.
Dole's Presidential campaign who stepped aside Thursday after questions arose about his handling of investments for Elizabeth Hanford Dole.


STATUS GAME reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STATUS GAME
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,332,028
2,294,173
Net loss
171,339
b2,628,758
6mo rev
5,615,757
3,192,219
Net loss
23,650
b2,934,448
b-Includes a loss of $2,746,101 and $3,096,909 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, from discontinued operations.


Town in Georgia Has A Government Again
LEAD: In a jubilant ceremony, this small eastern Georgia town swore in its first government in 55 years today.


SILICON GRAPHICS COMPUTER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILICON GRAPHICS COMPUTER (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
35,465,000
13,352,000
Net inc
2,731,000
c2,286,000
Share earns
.21
.18
Shares outst
13,268,000
12,475,000
6mo rev
64,345,000
34,654,000
Net inc
b5,687,000
c4,021,000
Share earns
.43
.34
Shares outst
13,375,000
11,701,000


Joyce Brown Obtains a Ban On Medicine
LEAD: A judge yesterday blocked the Koch administration's efforts to force medication on Joyce Brown, a homeless woman whose involutary hospitalization is testing the city's policy to removed disturbed homeless people from the street.


Broad Soviet Effort Seen to Use Marines as Spies
LEAD: After administering polygraph exams to 259 marines stationed in American embassies around the world, counterintelligence officials believe they have uncovered extensive attempts by Soviet intelligence to compromise the guards, Administration offficials said today.


Soviet Pressing Limits on 'Star Wars' Tests
LEAD: Soviet officials presented a formal proposal today underscoring Moscow's refusal to reduce long-range nuclear arms unless the United States agrees to strict limits on the scope of ''Star Wars'' tests.


CAPITAL ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPITAL ASSOCIATES (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,929,113
9,547,309
Net inc
1,420,010
4,663,069
Share earns
.15
.60
Shares outst
9,393,310
7,717,066
6mo rev
29,406,660
14,390,146
Net inc
2,835,357
5,850,128
Share earns
.30
.75
Shares outst
9,404,105
7,717,033


Stopping Car Alarms
LEAD: To the Editor:


XSCRIBE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XSCRIBE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,496,000
9,974,000
Net inc
138,000
1,173,000
Share earns
.03
.30
Shares outst
5,182,000
3,944,000
9mo rev
24,494,000
22,735,000
Net inc
1,290,000
1,323,000
Share earns
.28
.34
Shares outst
4,609,000
3,945,000


ISC SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ISC SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Revenue
41,799,000
34,797,000
Net inc
2,155,000
29,000
Share earns
.14
-
6mo rev
85,921,000
75,020,000
Net inc
4,378,000
2,838,000
Share earns
.28
.18


3 LINKED TO ARMY IN MEXICO INDICTED IN U.S. DRUG PLOT
LEAD: Three men identified as senior officers in the Mexican Army and nine others have been charged in San Diego in connection with a plot to smuggle tons of Bolivian cocaine into the United States, Federal law enforcement officials announced today.


Germany Finds No Illegal Nuclear Shipment
LEAD: The West German Environment Minister said today that no hard evidence had surfaced to support an informant's assertion that nuclear materials might have been illegally shipped to Pakistan or Libya.
Officials of international regulatory agencies also said they had found no such illegal diversions.


CAMERON IRON WORKS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAMERON IRON WORKS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
132,239,000
120,024,000
Net loss
1,525,000
10,080,000
6mo sales
239,379,000
252,649,000
Net inc
1,266,000
b13,450,000
b-Net loss  In the latest 6-month period preferred dividend requirements exceeded net income.


KUSTOM ELECTRONICS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KUSTOM ELECTRONICS
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Sales
3,037,000
2,607,000
Net inc
224,000
b171,000
Share earns
.12
.09
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $23,000 and a tax credit of $60,000.


O'Sullivan Won't Retire
LEAD: One week after a lopsided defeat for the vacant North American Boxing Federation welterweight title, Shawn O'Sullivan ended speculation that he might end his boxing career by announcing yesterday that he would continue with a new sense of commitment. ''There's no debate in my mind, I will not retire,'' O'Sullivan said at a news conference in Toronto.


Agent Surrenders
LEAD: Jim Abernethy, a former Atlanta sports agent, turned himself in to Alabama authorities Thursday on misdemeanor charges stemming from his admitted payments to an Auburn defensive back, Kevin Porter.
Abernethy was released on a $1,000 cash bond after he was booked at the Lee County Jail in Opelika, Ala.


Sterling Drug's Stock Up Sharply
LEAD: Shares of the Sterling Drug Company, target of a hostile takeover bid from Switzerland's Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company, rose sharply yesterday as investors bet that Sterling would find a friendly partner to outbid the European pharmaceutical giant.
Sterling rose $2 a share on the New York Stock Exchange to close at $74.125.


Congress and Critics Eye Army-Mormon Rift
LEAD: Congress says the Army is not providing adequate religious facilities for workers at a remote weapon-testing facility in Utah where Mormon Church officials were denied land to build a church.


Politics at the Grass Roots On Icy Michigan Night
LEAD: Rich Bond, Vice President Bush's deputy national campaign manager, stood in the street outside Elmer's Steak Pit Thursday night, bundled against the arctic cold in a blue loden coat, his face creased in anger, and shouted at the bolted door in front of him, ''Let our people in!''


Luck Runs Out for a Winner As TV Publicity Boomerangs
LEAD: Kerry Ketchem may have won the biggest one-game prize in the history of television's ''Super Password,'' but it paled in comparison with a string of illegal jackpots he has scored in recent years, authorities across the country said today.


BANCTEC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANCTEC INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
24,700,000
22,400,000
Net inc
b1,600,000
1,000,000
Share earns
.26
.18
9mo rev
70,200,000
62,700,000
Net inc
b4,200,000
2,300,000
Share earns
.76
.42


CENTURY COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTURY COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
39,484,000
19,043,000
Net loss
2,327,000
b481,000
6mo rev
79,174,000
37,732,000
Net loss
4,347,000
b552,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


Gardner Cox, Portraitist, 81
LEAD: Gardner Cox, an artist known for his portraits of prominent Americans, died of heart failure on Thursday in a hospital in Cambridge, Mass., his city of residence.
He was 81 years old.


Frigid Northeast Setting Records In Power Levels
LEAD: Extreme cold across the Northeast has sent demand for electricity soaring to record levels this winter as businesses, industries and millions of residential users have turned up thermostats, plugged in space heaters and switched on lights in the late afternoon twilight.


DEKALB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEKALB CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
75,200,000
70,700,000
Net inc
5,500,000
b6,200,000
Share earns
.46
.52
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $600,000.


CUBANS TURN THEIR BACK ON THE SEOUL OLYMPICS
LEAD: Cuba said yesterday that it would not participate in the Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea, this summer unless North Korea, one of its allies, could be co-host of the Games, and the safety of its athletes could be guaranteed.


Guidepost
LEAD: Borrowing Costs  After months of see-sawing interest rates, American consumers enter the new year facing moderately higher borrowing costs than in January 1987.
The uncertainty has led people to postpone purchases, and indeed the outlook remains clouded as the Federal Reserve adjusts for changing economic conditions.


For Dr. Green, an Education On a Complex New Domain
LEAD: Dr.
Richard R. Green started on the path of self-education in the intricacies of New York City's public schools and politics this week, learning along the way about the bureaucracy, the custodians and the value of being a new face in town.


A New Way to Shed Bad Loans
LEAD: A growing number of banks are utilizing a novel approach to shed their bad loans: They are putting them into a separate unit and then spinning the unit off to shareholders.


Seoul Threatens North Korea After Confession on Jet Bomb
LEAD: South Korean officials threatened today to retaliate against North Korea for the bombing of a Korean Air Lines plane in which 115 people died in November.


Football Cardinals Settle on Phoenix
LEAD: William Bidwill, the owner of the St.
Louis Cardinals, told the National Football League yesterday that he wanted to move the team to Phoenix before the start of next season because ''we can be more competitive there.''


ENTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENTRONICS CORP
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
439,583
4,014,624
Net inc
32,482
922,173
Share earns
.01
.24
6mo rev
917,112
8,543,594
Net inc
49,314
2,017,828
Share earns
.01
.52
The company said last year's second quarter and first half results included major shipments to Southland Corp.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 50.


SOUTHEASTERN PUBLIC SERVCE reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHEASTERN PUBLIC SERVCE
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
50,814,000
47,685,000
Net loss
36,000
cd12,000
9mo rev
152,143,000
149,396,000
Net inc
b3,497,000
d675,000
Share earns
.30
.06
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $703,000.


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, JANUARY 16, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 2-5, 28  Tardiness on an Iran arms embargo by Moscow was charged by Secretary of State George P. Shultz.
He said that despite public statements in support of sanctions, the Soviet Union was moving too slowly.
Page 1  Israeli police fought Palestinians around the Dome of the Rock mosque, among Islam's holiest sites.


Gooden Files for Arbitration
LEAD: Dwight Gooden of the Mets, Eric Davis of Cincinnati and George Bell of Toronto, the American League's most valuable player, were among 104 players who submitted their names for arbitration yesterday and could have their 1988 salaries determined by an arbitrator.


Dollar Posts Big Rise; Gold Slumps
LEAD: Bolstered by a stronger-than-expected trade report, the dollar's value surged yesterday to its highest level in about two months.


ROBERT-MARK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROBERT-MARK INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,473,000
2,421,000
Net loss
755,000
b519,000
Share earns
-
.13
9mo rev
8,173,000
8,094,000
Net inc
297,000
1,860,000
Share earns
.06
.46
c


ADAMS EXPRESS reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADAMS EXPRESS (NYSE)
As of Dec 31
1987
1986
Assets
427,225,965
468,344,507
Share earns
15.92
19.51
Shares outst
26,833,996
24,004,882
Assets represent net assets.
The company said net asset value per share is after a capital gain distribution of $2.66 paid in 1987 and $3.74 paid in 1986.


Death of Chiang Will Be No Bar To Democratic Change, Aide Says
LEAD: A senior ruling party official said today that planned democratic changes would be carried out on schedule over the next few months despite the death this week of President Chiang Ching-kuo.


RAI RESEARCH reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAI RESEARCH (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,043,197
2,019,505
Net loss
100,308
b268,110
Share earns
-
.11
6mo rev
1,988,508
4,294,653
Net loss
206,990
b622,350
Share earns
-
.25
b-Net income


Show Producer Kills His Wife And Is a Suicide
LEAD: The producer of the long-running Broadway show ''Oh!
Calcutta!'' stabbed his wife to death and then jumped to his death from the roof of his Riverside Drive apartment yesterday afternoon, the police said.


Reagan Is Reported to Seek Budget Increase for NASA
LEAD: The Reagan Administration, seeking a budget increase for space programs, plans to ask for more money for the space station, space shuttle improvements and research into new technologies useful for missions to the Moon and Mars, according to an aviation industry magazine.


Inventories Jumped 0.8% In November
LEAD: Business inventories jumped eight-tenths of 1 percent in November, the second big monthly increase, while total sales fell, the Commerce Department said today.


Precious Metals Off Sharply; Energy Prices in a Retreat
LEAD: Prices of precious metals futures tumbled on the Commodity Exchange in New York yesterday as traders reacted to a stronger dollar, which was bolstered by a sharp drop in the nation's trade deficit.


Yes, Traffic in Midtown Is a Little Less Crowded
LEAD: For the first time since the gas lines of the 1970's - and one of the few times since motorists had steering wheels to slide behind - the number of cars, taxis and trucks entering mid- and downtown Manhattan has declined.


DESIGNATRONICS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DESIGNATRONICS (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,080,000
5,241,000
Net inc
322,000
b14,000
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss


CHARGES OF RACISM JAR A CONNECTICUT TOWN
LEAD: ''We've got the sandbags and the barbed wire up around headquarters,'' Police Chief Philip H. Schnabel was telling callers today.


EPSILON DATA MANAGEMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EPSILON DATA MANAGEMENT (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,530,000
13,121,000
Net inc
575,000
320,000
Share earns
.19
.11
6mo sales
22,921,000
24,926,000
Net inc
475,000
407,000
Share earns
.17
.15


ACME PRECISION PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACME PRECISION PRODUCTS (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
21,767,836
24,481,002
Net loss
601,446
b910,906
Share earns
-
.99
Yr sales
48,827,469
54,348,696
Net loss
3,176,403
b3,557,088
Share earns
-
3.81


CHECKROBOT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHECKROBOT INC
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Net loss
1,129,800
646,700
6mo net loss
2,022,200
1,306,300


Down and Out
LEAD:  GREYHOUND FOR BREAKFAST.
By James Kelman. 230 pages.
Farrar, Straus, Giroux. $15.95.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article yesterday about observances for the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. misattributed a quotation about the level of participation by white Americans.
The statement was by Lloyd Davis, executive director of the King Federal Holiday Commission, not by Alan Jackson, its deputy director.


CONERT: GUARNERI QUARTET
LEAD: Erich Wolfgang Korngold was the center of interest when the Guarneri String Quartet played at Alice Tully Hall on Wednesday night.
Korngold, who began as a Viennese child prodigy and ended his days in Hollywood, endured the first half of the 20th century without ever finding a comfortable place in it.


Nofziger Jury Chosen
LEAD: A jury of seven men and five women was selected today for the conflict-of-interest trial of Lyn C. Nofziger, a former aide to President Reagan.
The jury was selected from a panel of 60 prospective jurors that had been screened in questioning that began Monday.
Mr.
Nofziger, 63 years old, is charged with improperly lobbying former White House colleagues after he resigned from the President's staff in early 1982.


WATERHOUSE INVESTOR SERVCES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WATERHOUSE INVESTOR SERVCES (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,450,754
2,885,946
Net inc
232,987
260,664
Share earns
.09
.16
Shares outst
2,572,002
1,572,002


NU HORIZONS ELECTRONICS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NU HORIZONS ELECTRONICS (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,016,326
4,424,452
Net loss
157,759
b76,996
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
21,102,341
12,711,495
Net inc
219,777
390,374
Share earns
.05
.09


Pop: Culture, Rockers Reggae Band
LEAD: The raw-edged lead vocals of Joseph Hill, melodies like pop hymns and lyrics that meld current observations with biblical prophecies made Culture one of the most important Jamaican reggae bands of the late 1970's.
Its first LP, ''Two Sevens Clash'' from 1976, is a landmark reggae album that helped shape steadfast, mid-tempo ''rockers'' reggae.


A New System for Nasdaq
LEAD: The Nasdaq over-the-counter market began using a new automatic trading system today for large stock orders.
The change is intended to reduce reliance on telephone lines, which became clogged during the October market turbulence.


Mr. Cuomo Promotes Housing Crisis
LEAD: New York needs desperately to encourage housing production, especially housing for rent.
What a disappointment, therefore, that Governor Cuomo's first 1988 bill will discourage any sane builder from creating it.


UNITEL VIDEO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITEL VIDEO (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,181,000
6,463,000
Net inc
b696,000
c567,000
Share earns
.30
.26
b-Includes a pretax charge of $18,000 from equity in earnings of a 50 percent-owned affiliate.


MIDWEST COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDWEST COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
26,300,000
23,600,000
Net inc
23,809
487,540
Share earns
.01
.20
6mo sales
54,300,000
43,700,000
Net inc
652,446
728,305
Share earns
.19
.30


DATATRAK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATATRAK INC
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
498,817
430,332
Net loss
66,314
153,475
6mo sales
975,426
902,900
Net loss
121,398
222,717


Treasury Prices Advance Sharply
LEAD: Treasury bond and note prices rose sharply yesterday after the Government reported an unexpectedly sharp drop in the nation's trade deficit for November.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond rose by more than two and a half points, its biggest one-day increase since October.


TCBY ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TCBY ENTERPRISES (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,172,000
11,594,000
Net inc
2,802,756
2,040,949
Share earns
.11
.08
Yr rev
69,183,000
40,193,000
Net inc
13,011,589
8,031,134
Share earns
.49
.31


LEXICON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEXICON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,981,394
4,663,533
Net loss
b779,339
c166,953
Share earns
-
.02
b-After a tax credit of $597,000.
c-Net income and after income from discontinued operations of $259,672.


Sean MacBride of Ireland Is Dead at 83
LEAD: Sean MacBride, an Irish revolutionary who went on to win the Nobel and Lenin peace prizes, died after a short illness yesterday at his home in Dublin.
He was 83 years old.
In a 70-year career that took him from street battles with the British in Dublin to the international award-ceremony podium in Oslo, Mr.


E.P.A. Considers Sanctions Against Oil Company in River Spill
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency, after inspecting the site of a huge oil spill from an Ashland Oil Company storage facility in Pennsylvania, is considering legal action against the company for violations of the Clean Water Act, agency officials said today.


Apple in Pact With Digital
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. and the Digital Equipment Corporation, as expected, formally announced a joint development effort aimed at developing products to connect Apple Macintosh machines and Digital VAX computers.


Harvard Stops Columbia, 64-57
LEAD: Ralph James scored 20 points and triggered a second-half surge last night that helped Harvard beat Columbia, 64-57, in an Ivy League game.


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: The birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., actually Jan. 15, will be observed on Monday.
Following are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post Offices: Special delivery and Express Mail delivery only; offices are open in Manhattan at 25 Broadway, 90 Church St., 909 3d Ave., Grand Central Terminal, 33d St.


STAGE II APPAREL reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STAGE II APPAREL (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
28,776,000
13,772,000
Net inc
1,930,000
981,000
Share earns
.50
.30
Shares outst
3,883,851
3,302,192
6mo sales
45,760,000
25,551,000
Net inc
2,723,000
1,584,000
Share earns
.76
.48
Shares outst
3,593,022
3,302,192


SORG INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SORG INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
16,837,000
18,455,000
Net loss
1,642,000
b316,000
Share earns
-
.19
Shares outst
2,355,696
1,618,765
6mo sales
35,652,000
33,764,000
Net loss
1,913,000
b620,000
Share earns
-
.38
Shares outst
2,329,129
1,618,765


Another Judge Selected to Preside In Federal Case Against Myerson
LEAD: A new Federal judge was selected yesterday to conduct the trial of Bess Myerson, the former New York City Cultural Affairs Commissioner, on charges that include obstruction of justice.


Traffic Cameras Installed
LEAD: New York City placed the first of three cameras on traffic lights yesterday as part of an experiment to capture people who go through red lights.
The first light was installed at 86th Street and Third Avenue and will be in operation for three months.
Set on poles, the cameras would be tripped after a car ran a red light.


Wells Fargo to Buy Barclays in California
LEAD: Wells Fargo &amp; Company said today that it had agreed to acquire Barclays Bank of California for about $125 million in cash.
A subsidiary of the London-based Barclays Bank P.L.C., Barclays Bank of California is the 17th-largest bank in the state, with 1987 year-end assets of about $1.3 billion.


AVAir Halts
LEAD: AVAir Inc., which operates the American Eagle commuter airline service, has suspended operations indefinitely, officials said.
American Eagle, which serves airports in North Carolina, Virginia and Washington, D.C., is owned by Dallas-based American Airlines.
AVAir is a franchisee, with headquarters in Raleigh, N.C.


U.S. May Return Boy, 9, To Africa, Court Rules
LEAD: The United States Supreme Court today cleared the way for the State Department to return to Zimbabwe a 9-year-old boy who was taken from his father, a diplomat, last month amid accusations that he beat the boy.


Hong Kong Charges May Grow
LEAD: Ronald Li, the former chairman of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange who was charged Thursday with accepting $352,000 from a Japanese company in return for listing it on the exchange, could face further charges as the colony's Government continues its investigation, a prosecutor said today.


James Marcus, Ex-Water Chief
LEAD: James Lewis Marcus, a former New York City Water Commissioner who pleaded guilty to Federal charges in a kickback conspiracy involving a city reservoir contract, died of leukemia yesterday at Maricopa County Medical Center in Phoenix.
He was 57 years old and had moved to Arizona from Manhattan last year.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Cuba Says No to Olympics


Decision for Sears in Sex Bias Suit is Upheld
LEAD: A Federal appeals court in Chicago this week upheld a ruling against the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in its nine-year-old sex discrimination suit against Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the weather, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


N.H.L. Suspends Two
LEAD: Calling one incident ''potentially very dangerous'' and another ''totally irresponsible,'' Brian O'Neil, the executive vice president of the National Hockey League, issued suspensions yesterday totaling 12 games to Steve Konroyd, the Islanders' steadiest defenseman this season, and Randy Cunneyworth, the Pittsburgh Penguins' free-swinging left wing.


Grand Met Makes Final Martell Bid
LEAD: The British liquor and hotels giant Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. today made what it said was its last raise in the bidding against the Seagram Company for the cognac house Martell.


Mexico City Journal; Season of Smog in 'Makesicko City'
LEAD: To a large extent, the 20 million people in the world's largest metropolis have reluctantly adapted to living with the pollution that fouls the air here.


MERIDIAN NATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERIDIAN NATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,657,000
7,817,000
Net inc
42,000
b141,000
Share earns
.01
.03
9mo rev
19,856,000
20,630,000
Net inc
543,000
232,000
Share earns
.13
.06
b-Includes a tax credit of $36,000, or 1 cent a share.


Hutton Announces Big Loss
LEAD: The E. F. Hutton Group yesterday reported an after-tax loss of $112.7 million for October and November.


About New York; A Man's Career: Opening the Door At 1125 Park Ave.
LEAD: Sixty years ago today, Paul Wallahora, then a 16-year-old high school dropout, was prowling the Upper East Side looking for a job.
He found one and never let it go.
He has spent his life opening and shutting the door at 1125 Park Avenue.


ADVANCED MIRCO DEVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANCED MIRCO DEVICES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
262,545,000
197,738,000
Net loss
2,642,000
16,342,000
Yr sales
997,080,000
828,613,000
Net loss
b48,068,000
c94,004,000
b-Includes a one-time charge of $40,985,000 related to the acquisition of Monolithic Memories Inc.


Answers to Quiz
LEAD: Questions appear on page 17.


Novel Promotion Idea: Letting a Movie Sell Itself
LEAD: How do you sell a movie with no major stars, no car chases, a bland title, articulate characters who can't stop talking and a heroine who won't sleep with the leading man because she doesn't like his ethics?


Chorus to Give Free Programs of Spirituals
LEAD: A performance of spirituals, many sung a cappella by a 16-member chorus with soloists, will be offered tomorrow night in a most appropriate setting: a church.
The concert will take place at Christ and St.
Stephen's Church, 120 West 69th Street, at 7:30.


XEBEC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XEBEC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 2
1987
1986
Sales
8,800,000
33,300,000
Net loss
b4,595,000
c215,000
Share earns
-
.02
Yr sales
69,300,000
115,500,000
Net loss
b41,552,000
d3,524,000
b-Includes an unusual charge of $523,000 and $1.6 million for the quarter and year, respectively, and a charge of $986,000 and $9.6 million for the same periods, respectively, related to discontinued activities.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A chronology from The Associated Press on Dec. 30 about recent mass killings in the United States misstated the number of people slain by a gunman July 18, 1984, at a McDonald's restaurant in San Ysidro, Calif.


6 Freeze to Death in New York
LEAD: At least six people, three of them homeless, have frozen to death in New York City in the last week and a half of bitter winter cold, city officials said yesterday.


Political Marketing; Cable TV Is Becoming an Integral Player in Advertising Strategies for 1988
LEAD: Political operatives are making cable television an integral part of their advertising strategy for the first time in a Presidential race.
They are buying spots on cable for their candidates and exploring other ways of using the nation's 5,000 cable television systems.


New York Area Store Sales Up
LEAD: Sales at several of New York City's largest department stores rose by an average of 8.8 percent in December from the period a year ago, according to a monthly spot-check.
The stores posted average sales gains of 7.3 percent in the metropolitan area.


No Headline
LEAD: The cargo ship American Maine being moved by tugboats up the Hudson River to Pier 92 yesterday as chunks of ice from upstream headed for the ocean.
The ship, which was moved from Maher Terminal at Port Newark where it underwent repairs, is one of 12 cargo ships of the bankrupt United States Lines that are docked at various berths in New York Harbor.


Racial Remarks Cause Furor
LEAD: Jimmy (the Greek) Snyder, the longtime CBS Sports commentator, provoked a controversy yesterday when he told a local television interviewer in Washington that blacks make better athletes than whites because they were ''bred to be that way.''


LACANA MINING reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LACANA MINING (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
36,310,000
-
Net inc
b11,360,000
-
Share earns
.57
-
b-After a $1,019,000 tax credit.
The year-ago figures are not comparable because the company has changed its fiscal year-end from Dec.


U.S. TRADE DEFICIT NARROWS SHARPLY AS EXPORTS SURGE
LEAD: In a surprisingly favorable development, the United States trade deficit tumbled by 25 percent in November, to $13.2 billion, as exports surged to a record for any month.


2 Mob-Trial Jurors Say They Can't Be Objective
LEAD: Two of the 12 jurors in the Federal racketeering and drug trial of Gene Gotti and nine co-defendants told a judge yesterday that they they could no longer be objective about the case.


TAYLOR DEVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TAYLOR DEVICES
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,007,620
1,060,796
Net inc
13,282
54,435
Share earns
.01
.02
6mo sales
2,076,210
1,788,005
Net inc
16,768
42,300
Share earns
.01
.02


LINEAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINEAR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,007,000
14,241,000
Net inc
400,000
823,000
Share earns
.11
.27
6mo sales
25,687,000
27,929,000
Net inc
1,291,000
1,853,000
Share earns
.40
.62


Australian Open; Shriver and McNeil Coast to 4th Round
LEAD: Pam Shriver and Lori McNeil of the United States scored straight-set victories today to advance to the fourth round of the Australian Open tennis championships.


UNIVERSAL HEALTH REALTY INOME TR reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSAL HEALTH REALTY INOME TR (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,029,000
-
Per share
.27
-
Yr net inc
8,701,000
-
Per share
1.05
-
No comparative figures are available because the company became publicly owned in December 1986.


Green Expected to Play for Redskins
LEAD: Coach Joe Gibbs of the Redskins indicated today that Darrell Green, his injured cornerback, would play Sunday in the National Conference championship game here against the Vikings.


NATIONAL MICRONETICS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL MICRONETICS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
7,933,000
7,876,000
Net loss
b224,000
c888,000
6mo sales
16,684,000
14,999,000
Net loss
b68,000
c2,704,000
b-After a gain of $31,000 for the quarter and 6 months from disposal of discontinued operations.


AUTODIE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUTODIE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
14,702,437
17,257,248
Net loss
189,146
b1,777,982
Share earns
-
.35
b-Net income


RESEARCH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RESEARCH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,506,000
5,394,700
Net inc
215,800
300,000
Share earns
.13
.18


Fadeyev Retains Lead
LEAD: Aleksandr Fadeyev of Soviet Union during men's short program at European figure skating championships in Prague.
Page 48. (AP)


ADVANCED MARKETING SERVCES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANCED MARKETING SERVCES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
48,822,000
29,575,000
Net inc
2,352,000
1,146,000
Share earns
.47
.30
9mo sales
85,874,000
53,879,000
Net inc
3,006,000
1,320,000
Share earns
.65
.35


Concert: Philharmonic Plays Reich
LEAD: Commissioned by the San Francisco Symphony, Steve Reich's latest orchestral score, ''The Four Sections,'' was first performed by that orchestra in October.
Kent Nagano led the New York premiere with the Brooklyn Philharmonic the following month, and now Zubin Mehta is conducting the score for the current round of New York Philharmonic subscription concerts at Avery Fisher Hall.


David Bromberg, 61; Served on Judicial Unit
LEAD: David Bromberg, a lawyer who was a member of the New York State Commission on Judicial Conduct, an agency that investigates complaints against judges, died of a heart attack Thursday in Grand Central Terminal after a day of hearings at the commission.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.


CONCEPT 90 MARKETING reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONCEPT 90 MARKETING (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
987,064
750,949
Net loss
381,587
95,813
9mo rev
2,736,817
2,241,303
Net loss
1,106,448
310,968


California and Connecticut Seek Funds for AIDS Tests
LEAD: Health officials in California and Connecticut are seeking Federal funds for testing newborns for antibodies to the AIDS virus as part of their efforts to track the spread of the infection.


SHULTZ IS CHIDING RUSSIANS OVER IRAN
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz complained today that the Soviet Union was not moving quickly enough toward a Security Council resolution imposing an arms embargo on Iran.


Another Water Main Break
LEAD: Consolidated Edison workers on Broadway between West 84th and 85th Streets after a 90-year-old, 36-inch water main ruptured early yesterday.
Basements were flooded, electricity and telephone service was disrupted and traffic and subways were re-routed.
It was the second major break this week.
Page 31.


ARCO's Britoil Stake
LEAD: Los Angeles-based ARCO, competing with the British Petroleum Company for shares in Britoil P.L.C., said today that it had increased its stake in the North Sea producer to 23.83 percent, from 23.73 percent.
ARCO has said it was seeking to acquire a 49.9 percent holding in Britoil.
On Thursday, Britoil rejected B.P.


Collegiate Swan Song
LEAD: For many of the college stars in the East-Shrine game today in Palo Alto, Calif., their next football game will be in the National Football League.
For Lorenzo White, that's a long way off. ''I've been on the road for the last month,'' said White, the running back who starred for Michigan State in the Rose Bowl victory over Southern California and then went to Japan for an all-star game.


JOHNSON PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSON PRODUCTS (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,947,000
6,963,000
Net inc
b79,000
c256,000
Share earns
.02
.06
b-After a tax credit of $15,000.
c-After net from discontinued operations of $182,000 and a $34,000 tax credit.


Divestment's Success
LEAD: To the Editor:


Australia Marks Settlement
LEAD: A fleet of tall ships re-enacting the 1788 settlement voyage by convicts from England made landfall today, and celebrations went ahead despite fears of a huge protest by aborigines.
The police said that they had expected about 2,000 aborigines to protest what militants call a celebration of invasion but that only a handful had turned up.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article on Monday about Rudolph W. Giuliani, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, and his views on political corruption included an incomplete quotation.
Asked whether political corruption was pervasive, he said, '' No, I don't think so,'' and then added: ''I think that where political power remains in somebody's hands for a very long period of time, it's the rare individual who doesn't become personally corrupt.


Producer Prices Post 0.3% Drop
LEAD: Prices at the producer level declined three-tenths of 1 percent in December, reflecting new rounds of automobile rebates and lower oil prices, the Labor Department said today.


Post Office Hours to Be Cut in Austerity Move
LEAD: The United States Postal Service said tonight that post offices around the country would begin to close a half-day a week to absorb budget cuts.


FIRST FEDERAL MICHIGAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL MICHIGAN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b21,931,000
cd9,114,000
Share earns
-
.82
Yr net inc
b33,448,000
d73,023,000
Share earns
3.01
6.58
b-Includes extraordinary charges of $7,961,000 and $3,224,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


RIPLEY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RIPLEY CO
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,414,027
1,188,579
Net inc
67,901
61,609
Share earns
.12
.10
9mo sales
4,425,976
3,792,556
Net inc
257,527
255,222
Share earns
.44
.43


Postings; 32,000 Square Feet of Designer Discounts: A New Loehmann's for the Bronx
LEAD: The store's unofficial motto is: ''If you're going to Loehmann's, you better not go with someone your size.'' Famous for offering designer women's clothing - sans label - at discount prices and infamous for provoking fights among aggressive bargain hunters, the 80-store chain, a division of May Department Store Companies, plans to open a new outlet in the Kingsbridge section of the Bronx in March.


RENEE GREENSPAN, C.P.A., IS TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Dawn Renee Greenspan to Charles Heller Brownman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold L. Brownman of Watchung, N.J., has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Greenspan of Beaumont, Tex.
A September wedding is planned.


Dance: Ann Law Company
LEAD: IT is not the easiest thing in the world to balance words and movement in a dance character study.
But Janice Bourdage did so impressively in the first performance of ''Joanna Burden,'' presented Thursday in a program of new and recent dances by Ann Elizabeth Law, performed by the Ann Law Dance Company at the Dia Foundation theater, 155 Mercer Street.


STRIKE PARALYZES THE HAITI CAPITAL ON EVE OF ELECTION
LEAD: On the eve of Haiti's second attempt at presidential elections in seven weeks, a general strike brought the usually teeming capital to a virtual standstill today.


Walking Made Easy With Snowshoes
LEAD: THEY are not numerous, but they are out there, traveling along woodland trails, across meadows and beaches, up and down hillsides and around backyards.
They are the people who fasten frames of ash or aluminum to their feet and go snowshoeing.


Are They Statistics or Guesswork?
LEAD: I DON'T know about anyone else, but I'm very impressed with all the information we get from the Government in Washington.
I'm especially impressed with statistics about the Gross National Product, the percentage of unemployment, the trade deficit, personal income and the like.
Just think about the amount of work it takes to compile those figures and the number of people who must be involved.


Country Life Is Just A Matter of Adjustment
LEAD: PETER constantly reminds me that I'm the first line of defense against the forest.
It's been that way since we moved here.


TV
LEAD: Look to the stars in choosing films on both cable and broadcast TV this week.
Bravura performances highlight a cross-section of offerings.
On cable, women have the edge.
Elisabeth Bergner, the German-born actress, makes a memorable Empress of Russia in the British biographical drama, ''Catherine the Great'' (1934) - Monday at 9 P.M.


The Weed That Won't Go Away
LEAD: DOUGLAS GINSBURG (the Supreme Court candidate who withdrew from consideration after an admission that he had smoked marijuana) was the topic of conversation.
The occasion was a large family party that followed a traditional christening.


Ordeal of Son's Auto Injury Spurs Father to Seek a Recall
LEAD: Larry Garrett is mild-mannered and friendly, traits reflected in his son Jimmy, who is paralyzed from the waist down because of a 1985 car accident.


Du Pont, Citing Fraud, Asks To Be Left Off Texas Ballot
LEAD: Former Gov.
Pete du Pont of Delaware asked today that his name be pulled off the ballot for the Republican Presidential primary in Texas, saying his campaign was a victim of ''a nasty fraud'' involving forged signatures on petitions.


CELEBRATING BY DONATING TO NEEDIEST
LEAD: Engagements, weddings, the birth of a child or grandchild and enduring friendship are reasons for celebration, and many people share their joy with The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: Sure . . . just as much as Andre Dawson, the National League's most valuable player in 1987, made the Chicago Cubs the favorites.
KARL HAMILTON
West Point, N.Y.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, JANUARY 17, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-15


Cuba's Decision to Stay Home Could Be Costly
LEAD: Cuba's decision not to attend the 1988 Seoul Olympics could result in its loss of the 1991 Pan American Games, which were awarded to Havana two years ago.


Bagpipes In Spotlight In Hartford
LEAD: BAGPIPES, ballads and poetry will be in the spotlight Thursday as the South Congregational Church in Hartford celebrates Robert Burns Night.


Zero-Coupon Bonds and the 'Kiddie' Tax
LEAD: Below are answers to some recent questions from readers of the Personal Finance column.


AUGUST WEDDING FOR CAROLE BALIN
LEAD: The engagement of Carole Beth Balin to Michael Eric Gertzman, a son of Dr.
Gloria B. Gertzman and Arthur A. Gertzman of Bridgewater, N.J., has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore G. Balin of Andover, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Balin is a second-year rabbinical student at the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion in New York.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  HONORS FOR DR. KING


Plea From Nurses: Wages, Wages
LEAD: A NURSE at Waterbury Hospital, Barbara Chavez, said there were three answers to solving the nursing shortage: ''wages, wages and wages.''


Borderline 'Village': Condos
LEAD: The Federal-style apartment building fills the sharply angled southeast corner of Hudson Street and Ninth Avenue.
It is in the West Village, but just barely: Chelsea is across the street.
Still, the building's developer, Alan B. Friedberg, chose to emphasize the geographic distinction and named the 49-unit condominium Village Pointe.


ELIZA WEBB IS AFFIANCED
LEAD: Eliza Ordway Webb and Craig Robert Faulks, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Faulks of Rocky River, Ohio, plan to marry in May, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Gaynor Webb of New Canaan, Conn., have announced.


A Real Sign of a Bargain Says, 'Made in America'
LEAD: Akami Ueno, who lives near Tokyo, flew across the Pacific and bought a camera with a familiar label: Made in Japan.


Lawyers Argue Over Key Count In Assault Case
LEAD: Prosecutors last week disputed defense arguments that the verdict in the Howard Beach trial of four white teen-agers requires the dismissal of a key charge pending against seven other youths.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: Jack Clark makes the St.
Louis Cardinals the favorites.
The Cardinals have given up a spoiled, injury-prone and unfaithful player who will not be able to handle New York, Billy Martin, George Steinbrenner, or the expectations of the New York fans and the news media.
THOMAS HELLER
Summit, N.J.


Nets Send Gminski, Coleman to 76ers
LEAD: While Mike Gminski chugged up and down the court in the fourth quarter of the Nets' 103-96 loss to the Boston Celtics tonight, the team's front office traded him to the Philadelphia 76ers.


PUT LIFE IN DEAD-CAR COLLECTION
LEAD: American cities are awash in a tidal wave of hulks - abandoned cars.
They could be reducing the tide and making money in the process.
Instead, notably in New York, they are sinking.


JERI BITTERMAN TO WED MICHAEL ALAN KARPEN
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard M. Bitterman of Parsippany, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jeri S. Bitterman to Michael Alan Karpen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Karpen of Passaic, N.J.


Correction
LEAD: A picture on page 26 on Dec. 27 with an article about Chinese writers and artists carried an incorrect caption.
The playwright pictured was Wu Zuguang, not Liu Jinyuan.


From 3-D to Baking Bread
LEAD: A NUMBER of other eye-popping items were displayed at the show.
Toshiba showed a three-dimensional video camera.
Available in early summer for $2,850, it will require viewers to wear special glasses attached by a cable to an electronic adapter. . .
Panasonic showed off its automatic bread baker, already a hot item in Japan.


Ski Inflation
LEAD: To the Editor:


MY SIX YEARS ON THE COUCH
LEAD: With regard to Dan Wakefield's article, I am enclosing a poem I wrote some time ago, which I think you will find appropriate.
I told him my anxieties,  Confessed some improprieties,  Revealed a dozen vices too  (Well, at these prices, wouldn't you?)  I thought that he'd have prodded me,  He didn't even nod at me,  He never showed a mild concern,  Yet meekly, weekly, I'd return.


Going to Pieces
LEAD: FINDING SOLUTIONS TO PROBLEMS may be difficult enough these days without someone like Steve Richardson, whose active trade is obfuscation.
He's the owner of Stave Puzzles in Norwich, Vt., an enterprise dedicated to state-of-the-art vexatiousness.
Stave's hand-painted and custom-cut wooden jigsaw puzzles go beyond the ruses that other puzzlemakers have long employed as tools of confusion - monochromatic designs, say, or pieces painted back and front.


Islanders Beat Devils
LEAD: Devils' Jack O'Callahan, left, battling Bryan Trottier for puck.
In Montreal, the Rangers lost, 4-3. (The New York Times/Ray Stubblebine) Page 4.


2 BRITISH PARTIES TRY MERGER ANEW
LEAD: To the delight of Labor and Conservative leaders, the attempt by the Liberal and Social Democratic parties to merge into a new party has veered toward becoming a ritual of self destruction.


WHO PAYS FOR MEXICO
LEAD: To the Editor:


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Barrel-Organ Balderdash


Towns That Want Radioactive Waste
LEAD: MENTION plans for a radioactive waste dump, and most communities recoil in horror.
Not Needles, Baker and Trona, three small towns in the Mojave Desert of California.


DOLE POLISHES HIS 'POOR BOY' ROLE AGAINST 'PREPPIE' BUSH
LEAD: STANDING before a rally the other night in an airport hangar in Ottumwa, Iowa, Senator Bob Dole began speaking at length about the differences between himself and Vice President Bush. ''I don't want to get into class, but all of us have different backgrounds,'' he said. ''I didn't start at the top and stay at the top.


'Vladimir's Carrot'
LEAD: To the Editor:


SUSAN ELIZABETH TELLIER, AN EXECUTIVE, MARRIED TO JOSEPH JAMES PERTICONE JR.
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of the Immaculate Heart of Mary in Scarsdale, N.Y., Susan Elizabeth Tellier, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Tellier of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married yesterday to Joseph James Perticone Jr., a son of Mary C. Perticone of Baltimore and the late Mr.
Perticone.
Msgr.


Finger Exercise
LEAD: THEY look like overgrown calculators, but they do much more than math.
A variety of handheld electronic devices can now do everything from keeping track of appointments to choosing lottery numbers.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  East Brunswick  $182,000
11 Thompson Road
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old contemporary; deck, hardwood floors, fireplace, above-ground pool; taxes $3,024.
Hackettstown  $145,000
18 Laurel Terrace
3-bedroom, 1 bath, 26-year-old contemporary; family room, newly renovated kitchen, fireplace; taxes $2,110.


MY SIX YEARS ON THE COUCH
LEAD: It is worth noting that Dan Wakefield was strongly advised by his analyst not to marry a woman he thought he loved.
I can testify that a very similar episode took place in my own analysis.
When, years later, the analyst began to have second thoughts about his earlier judgment, he brushed the matter off.


MAYBE A FENCE IS NEEDED
LEAD: ALTHOUGH deer are beautiful to watch as they bound across open fields with their white tails raised, many homeowners, nurserymen, farmers and orchardists are changing their views about them.
Once supportive, they are now part of the so-called anti-Bambi lobby.


ORDINARY LIVES, EXCEPTIONAL CHILDREN
LEAD:  SAM'S BOOK  By David Ray. 81 pp.
Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press.
Cloth, $18.
Paper, $9.95.
THE GLASS CHILDREN  By Richard Cole. 49 pp.
Athens: The University of Georgia Press.
Cloth, $13.95.
Paper, $6.95.
KINGDOMS OF THE ORDINARY  By Robley Wilson Jr. 89 pp.
Pennsylvania: University of Pittsburgh Press.


PILOT FATIGUE ENDANGERS PASSENGERS ON INTERNATIONAL FLIGHTS
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Right Against Reagan
LEAD: ONE MORNING just before Congress took its Christmas recess, President Reagan and eight key Senate Republicans gathered around the polished table in the Cabinet Room.
The President's goal was to recruit them for his campaign to win quick approval of the arms-control treaty he had just signed with the Soviet leader Mikhail S.


NOT THE SAME OLD SHEARLING
LEAD: Shearling coats, which have seen their wearers through some cold times, are getting the chance to do so again this frigid winter.
Simple, honest, rugged - these are the words that come to mind in describing the sturdy and functional shearling.
They still apply to this hardy perrennial, but now some new descriptions can be added to the shearling coat lexicon, such as sophisticated and fashionable.


Ikle Leaving Pentagon as Carlucci Realigns Aides
LEAD: Fred C. Ikle, the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, said today that he was resigning from the top-level Pentagon post, essentially completing a realignment of senior military officials under the new Secretary of Defense, Frank C. Carlucci.


Irving Hochstadter; Chemical Engineer, 100
LEAD: Irving Hochstadter, a chemical engineer who founded Hochstadter Laboratories Inc., died Jan. 8 at the Valley Nursing Home in Westwood, N.J., where he lived.
He was 100 years old.


Reagan to Wind Down Mostly by Summing Up
LEAD: As the Reagan Administration starts its final year Wednesday, senior White House officials say President Reagan is planning no major initiatives and instead will spend his last months in office cleaning up unfinished matters, large and small.


Work Begun to Protect Bombers From Birds
LEAD: Two B-1B bombers assigned to Dyess Air Force Base here are the first to undergo modification in a $40 million program intended to make the aircraft less vulnerable to birds, officials said.


Trends in Art History
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jarrell's Death, Jarrell's Poems
LEAD: To the Editor:


Men's Style; UNDER COVER
LEAD: EVEN THEIR WIVES DON'T ALWAYS KNOW for sure.
So while some men talk breezily about coloring their hair, most stop short of candor.
One case in point concerns an investment banker, who asked not to be identified.
A man in his 30's, he admits he touched up his gray just before his marriage because, as he put it, ''I didn't want to look like an old fogy in my wedding pictures.


L.I.U. Is to Shift Its Emphasis To Work-Study Curriculum
LEAD: Trustees of Long Island University approved a plan last week to shift its academic emphasis to a work-study program.


The Real Revelation In Pollock's Floor
LEAD: I fail to see how the uncovering of Jackson Pollock's studio floor reveals evidence of his working process  [ ''Studio Floor Yields a New Look at Polock's Art,'' Dec. 20 ] .
The real revelation coming from Pollock's studio floor is the fact that he was a very messy painter who liked to walk around in wet paint.


Mayor of Newark Proposing 12% Increase in Property Tax
LEAD: Residents face an average property-tax increase of 12 percent this year, most of it attributable to sharply higher costs for garbage disposal, Mayor Sharpe James announced this week.


THE WORLD: With India and Pakistan; U.S. INTEREST IN SOUTH ASIA IS DEEPENING, CAUTIOUSLY
LEAD: A NEW wariness has crept into the relationship between the United States and each of the two South Asian rivals, India and Pakistan, but there is also opportunity for Washington to extend its authority.
Both the wariness and the opportunity are a result of deepening American involvement in an area that often receives less attention than the neighboring Persian Gulf but may be no less critical to Washington's interests.


On Language; Beware the W-Word
LEAD: THE WASHINGTON Post was bewailing the reluctance of candidates to mention the dread word taxes. ''They've been Mondaled,'' the editorialist wrote, making a verb out of the name of the last candidate to suggest that a rise in taxes was inevitable, ''you say the T-word and you die.''


IT'S THE ONLY FED WE'VE GOT
LEAD:  SECRETS OF THE TEMPLE  How the Federal Reserve Runs the Country.
By William Greider. 798 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.95.


The Guggenheim's Man
LEAD: The Guggenheim Museum of Art has appointed a man described as ''the Clint Eastwood of the art museum director's world'' to direct its expansionist fortunes.


New England
LEAD: To the Editor: One does not expect Marian Burros to traverse the length and breadth of New England in order to write an article on great New England restaurants (''Nouvelle New England,'' Travel, Nov. 8), but not to include a few of New Hampshire's elegant eating places - in fact not to include New Hampshire at all!


LATE NIGHTS WITH THE KAMA SUTRA
LEAD:  DR.
GRUBER'S DAUGHTER  By Janice Elliott. 159 pp.
North Pomfret, Vt.: Hodder &amp; Stoughton/ David &amp; Charles. $18.95.


HOURS TO BE CUT FOR POST OFFICES
LEAD: The United States Postal Service said Friday night that post offices around the country would shorten their lobby hours by an average of half a day a week to absorb budget cuts required by Congress.


Early Salvo: Moynihan Begins TV Campaign Ads
LEAD: In what political analysts view as a pre-emptive strike, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan is taking his 1988 re-election campaign public with a series of television advertisements that begin in New York City on Monday.


PANAMA'S CHIEF DEFIES U.S. POWERS OF PERSUASION
LEAD: WHEN RICHARD L. ARMITAGE, an Assistant Secretary of Defense, embarked on a secret mission to Panama two weeks ago, he carried a harsh message.
In a lengthy meeting, he told Gen.
Antonio Manuel Noriega, the de facto leader of the military-controlled regime, to get out of politics within three months so that the country could have a cushion of civilian rule before elections next year.


Photography
LEAD: It sometimes seems that there are two competing schools of contemporary photography.
One, usually called street photography, aspires to capture the textures of life itself.
The other, generally known as art photography, is less literal and more experimental, emphasizing the expressive potentials of the medium.


ROMANCE COMES TO UP CALLOW
LEAD:  CIVIL TO STRANGERS  And Other Writings.
By Barbara Pym.
Edited by Hazel Holt. 388 pp.
New York: E. P. Dutton. $18.95.


2 Are Slain in Belfast
LEAD: Two men were shot dead in separate attacks in Belfast, becoming the first casualties in 1988 of Northern Ireland's political violence, the police said today.


CITY RULES ON TRUCKS FAULTED
LEAD: FEDERAL transportation officials have declared New York City's restrictions on the size of fuel tanker-trucks a violation of Federal law and an indirect threat to environmental safety in some New Jersey and Westchester County communities.


Newark Must Provide For Its Homeless
LEAD: ''Shelter means out of the terrain, out of the inclement weather.'' BISHOP JAMES W. PARROTT


MISS BROWN TO MARRY NICHOLAS DEVLIN
LEAD: The engagement of Elizabeth Sage Brown to Nicholas Kirk Devlin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Devlin of Mountainside, N.J., has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Henry B. R. Brown of Leesburg, Va., parents of the bride-to-be.
A May wedding is planned.


NOVICE REGULATOR: David S. Ruder; Seeking Tighter Control Over the Financial Markets
LEAD: DAVID S. RUDER was tapped to be a good caretaker.


The Winter Kitchen Offers Fish Staples
LEAD: FISH cookery in winter turns to the skillet and the oven, rather than the grill.
As a result, thick steaks of swordfish and tuna are low on the shopping list.


Pop-Up Books: The Magical Art Of Making Movable Pictures Over the Years
LEAD: WORDS, WORDS, words, said Hamlet, when Polonius asked him what was in the book he was reading.
But sometimes books contain pictures, too; and sometimes, just sometimes, the pictures revolve or jiggle around or spring to attention.


LUCINDA J. ALPERT TO WED D. H. GRANDE
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm C. Green of Boston and East Hebron, N.H., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Green's daughter Lucinda Jean Alpert to Dodd Harrison Grande, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Grande of Des Moines, Wash.
The couple plan to marry March 5.


'Mystery of Edwin Drood' in Elmsford
LEAD: ''PREPARE yourself for unexpected twists and turns,'' the audience is forewarned.
It is the audience that determines some of those surprises - by applauding, by hissing, by a show of hands - in the second act of ''The Mystery of Edwin Drood.''


THE COURSE OF TRUE LOVE IN VANCOUVER
LEAD:  LOVE IN THE TEMPERATE ZONE  By L. R. Wright. 280 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


AIDS ANTIBODIES IN NEW YORK INFANTS
LEAD: EVEN in an epidemic in which grim statistics have become numbingly commonplace, a New York state study on AIDS and newborn infants was shocking: one of every 61 babies born in New York City last month carried antibodies to the virus, indicating that their mothers were infected and that many of the babies were also carriers.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: ONE certain thing about the reflection in the mirror - it's sort of a shock, a picture that would surprise, maybe even stun, an awful lot of your friends.
Is it really you - you, who only a few hours ago, were an example of good grooming and put-togetherness, the epitome of big city chic?


Secrets of the Rain Forest
LEAD: ''BUTTERFLY heaven,'' exults Donald Perry from his mobile perch above the jungle roof.
The first sunny morning all week and the butterflies are out; a dozen varieties, a dozen different color swatches, flit by within half an hour.


Two Goaltenders Are Better Than One
LEAD: THERE is tension on Canada's medal-conscious Olympic hockey team as the calendar draws closer to that time Coach Dave King calls ''the point of no return.'' But the anxieties don't extend to the team's impromptu goaltending duo.
The coincidence of King's ending up with a pair of first-string goalies could provide the edge his club of modest scorers will need against more talented Olympic opponents.


Commercial Property: Submetering; A Carrot for Landlords Who Limit Profits on Power
LEAD: AFTER a decade of failed efforts to restrain New York City landlords who generate profits off electricity, the Koch administration hopes to cajole them into trimming their revenues as middlemen between Con Edison and commercial tenants.


AMY R. BERMAN, LAWYER, TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Alan M. Berman of New York and Bridgehampton, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Robin Berman to Crain Alan Sukin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack D. Sukin of Billings, Mont.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Berman, an associate in the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a J.D.


Group Homes for Retarded Gaining Success and Goodwill
LEAD: EVERY evening after dinner, George Papineau goes to a nearby Friendly Ice Cream Shop for a snack.
When he gets his check, he fishes a small card from his wallet and scans the numerical tables to find the correct amount for the 15 percent tip.


Dismissed Officer Held in Attack on Captain
LEAD: An officer who was dismissed for running a British container ship aground stabbed his captain and threw him overboard today, the Coast Guard reported.


Lake Champlain Cleanup Plan Nears Completion
LEAD: Looking westward on a frigid January afternoon across the icy shore of Lake Champlain, it is hard to imagine balmy midsummer days when hundreds of people make their way here to North Beach for a refreshing dip.


U.S. TRADE: TAKING THE LONG VIEW
LEAD: WAS Friday's report of a 25 percent drop in the United States trade deficit, to $13.2 billion for November, the sign of a long-awaited turning point?
The stock and bond markets certainly thought so.
The Dow Jones industrial average added nearly 40 points, even as delighted Administration officials cautioned against overreliance on any one month's figure.


'Pajama Tops' Chases for Laughs
LEAD: WHEN the maid, Claudine L'Amour, and the police inspector, LeGrand, confide to each other that their respective careers would be enhanced by a ''notorious scandal,'' the audience knows that a crime of passion is lurking somewhere offstage.
However, in ''Pajama Tops,'' the sex farce by Mawby Green and Ed Feilbert now at the Arena Players Repertory


CONNECTICUT STUNS SYRACUSE IN DOME
LEAD: Cliff Robinson made a foul shot with two seconds remaining tonight and Connecticut upset Syracuse, 51-50, in a Big East Conference game.


NEW LAW PROTECTS RIGHTS OF PATIENTS IN NURSING HOMES
LEAD: A new Federal law dramatically strengthens the protection of patients' rights by imposing dozens of new requirements on nursing homes and home health agencies.


HIGH COURT GIVES A CIVICS LESSON
LEAD: IN 1969, the Supreme Court ruled that students ''do not shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expression at the schoolhouse gate.''


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: Jack Clark's departure from St.
Louis heralds the arrival of a subway series in New York.
JENNIFER CLIFT  Lake Hiawatha, N.J.


Opera: An Adaptation Of Massenet's 'Cendrillon'
LEAD: ADVERTISEMENTS for the Music-Theater Group's ''Cinderella/ Cendrillon'' at St.
Clement's Church on Thursday night were enough to chill the opera lover's spine.
A ''retelling'' of the Cinderella story with ''a modern sensibility,'' they promised. (''Retelling'' plus ''modern'' in small American opera companies usually means ''vulgarization.


Streetscapes: 1451 Lexington Avenue; Sad Brownstone Monument To an Aborted Plan for a Sliver
LEAD: IT was to be the narrowest - and perhaps most notorious - of the sliver buildings, 33 stories on an 18-foot-wide lot at 1451 Lexington Avenue, between East 94th and 95th Streets.


MARY ANN DORE IS ENGAGED
LEAD: Mrs.
Edward James Dore Jr. of Bloomfield Hills and Glen Arbor, Mich., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Mary Ann Dore, to David James O'Connell of Bronxville, N.Y., a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence O'Connell.
Ms.
Dore, the daughter also of the late Mr.
Dore, is an institutional equities saleswoman with Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  'MACBETH'' IN STAMFORD


The Many Visions of Shakespeare's 'Dream'
LEAD: More than most Shakespearean plays, ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' freely lends itself to reinterpretation and transplantation, or - to use the word applied to Bottom - to ''translation.'' Although the play takes place in Athens and the forest beyond, it is an Athens of the mind, and the fairies can be relocated to almost any fictive environment - in contrast to the histories, which, by definition, are so rooted in specificity.


The Grand Canyon's Winter Face
LEAD: I FIRST saw the Grand Canyon by the light of a winter moon.
A handful of the canyon's snow-topped buttes shimmered under its gaze; ethereal and serene, they seemed to float above the darkened canyon floor.
Under a blanket of snow, the Grand Canyon lay mysteriously, almost terrifyingly, still.


Shoppers Flock to U.S.
LEAD: Ryoko Sato of Japan shopping in San Francisco.
Foreigners are finding bargains here because dollars are cheaper.
Page 22. (The New York Times/Terrence Mccarthy)


Ballet: 'Square Dance'
LEAD: LIKE a well-oiled machine, the New York City Ballet nowadays can be counted upon to produce reliably smooth performances.
Friday night's program at the New York State Theater was no exception, even when some previously scheduled dancers were replaced by others.


Missing the Point On a Folk Artist
LEAD: Helen Harrison's discussion on Dec. 6 of the Temperance Hall Gallery show in Bellport was thorough and balanced, as one would expect from a Times reviewer.
Her appreciation of Long Island artists is commendable, but she missed the point on Stuart Taylor Rabb.


INSIDE
LEAD:  CBS Drops Commentator  Jimmy (the Greek) Snyder, a television commentator for 12 years with the CBS Sports show ''N.F.L.
Today,'' was dismissed a day after making controversial comments about blacks in sports.
Section 5.
Unifying Force in Cambodia  Many of the 61,000 Cambodians in border refugee camps controlled by the Communist Khmer Rouge look to Prince Sihanouk, the non-Communist opposition leader, as a sort of liberator.


WOULD YOU CHOSE TO PLAY OR DEFEND?
LEAD: THE interests of bridge players reflect, in microcosm, a 20th-century tendency to move away from intellectual challenges.
Many voters who once studied editorials and argued about socialism are now content with a 30-second television view of a politician.
Many schoolchildren do not study grammar, history and foreign languages.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.83
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.79
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.82
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
11.07
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


MISS DICKERMAN TO MARRY IN JUNE
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Allen F. Dickerman of Lexington, Mass., and Boca Raton, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Tracey Beth Dickerman to Mark Albert Bilski, the son of Berthold Bilski of New York and the late Esther Alix Bilski, and the stepson of Victoria V. Bilski.
A June wedding is planned.


Adrift on the Rocky Seas of Adaptation
LEAD: THE MAJOR NOVELS OF OLIVIA Manning, written in the 1960's and 1970's and collected in two volumes called ''The Balkan Trilogy'' and ''The Levant Trilogy,'' have at long last made it to television.
They are dramatized in a BBC production entitled ''Fortunes of War,'' a mini-series that begins on WNET at 9 this evening as a ''Masterpiece


Practical Traveler; Coping With New Baggage Rules
LEAD: IF your Christmas gifts did not include carry-on luggage, perhaps your New Year's self-improvement project should be measuring your suitcases and practicing how to pack everything into two bags.


Thousands of Executives Seeking Wall Street Jobs in Bleak Market
LEAD: Three months after the stock market collapse, an army of highly educated, highly paid executives, people used to sitting at the center of corporate power, are scrambling to salvage their careers, professional reputations and affluent styles of life.


Hiram Bingham; Diplomat, 84
LEAD: Hiram Bingham, a former diplomat and head of the Sportatron Company of America, died Wednesday at his home in Salem, Conn.
He was 84 years old.


Trends in Art History
LEAD: To the Editor:


A CASE THAT CHANGED THE RULES
LEAD:  CHADHA  The Story of an Epic Constitutional Struggle.
By Barbara Hinkson Craig.
Illustrated. 262 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $24.95.


About Men; The Pastor's Problem
LEAD: WALKING THROUGH MILFORD, A NEW England town turned small city turned New York suburb, I think of my parishioners and can't help but feel a little envy.
It's not that I am jealous of their cars (which are nice) or their boats (beautiful) or their homes (expensive).
Rather, I am envious of the ways that their careers reward them.


Teheran Reported Planning Chemical Arms
LEAD: Iran has set aside funds in this year's budget for the production of chemical weapons, according to a summary of the budget published here.


A PHILATELIC SALUTE FOR THE WINTER OLYMPICS
LEAD: THE United States Postal Service salutes the winter Olympics with a single 22-cent commemorative that was released earlier this month.
It is the 15th Olympics issue.
The first was released in 1932, for the Olympic Games in Lake Placid, N.Y.
Subsequent United States stamps for winter Olympics were issued in 1960, when Squaw Valley, Calif.


ETTORE SCOLA SCANS HISTORY THROUGH 'THE FAMILY'
LEAD: IN ''THE FAMILY,'' WHICH opened on Friday at the Cinema Studio, Ettore Scola offers up a two-hour crash course in 80 years of European history, without ever leaving the rambling apartment which is both haven and prison for five generations of a comfortable Roman clan.
Just outside the family's field of vision - and the audience's - World War I rages, Mussolini waxes and wanes, threadbare liberation is followed by a burgeoning postwar boom, post-'68 malaise segues into the uneasy reconciliations of the 1980's.


WORKERS, IMMIGRANTS, SLAVES
LEAD:  POWER &amp; CULTURE  Essays on the American Working Class.
By Herbert G. Gutman.
Edited by Ira Berlin. 452 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $29.95.


An Aids Nightmare
LEAD: LATE ON AN UNUSUALLY WARM June 1 afternoon last year in East Baltimore, Jewel Foster Lyles, 25 years old, was walking down East Federal Street, which was littered with empty liquor bottles and food wrappers.
Mrs.
Lyles, a dark, statuesque woman with a broad forehead and a vibrant smile, was two weeks past term with her second child.


Lawsuit by City Against Boy, 7
LEAD: RYAN McDONNELL, 7 years old, got the bad news nearly a year after he collided with a municipal truck while riding his bicycle and was hurt slightly in San Carlos, Calif.
The city was suing him for $13,000.


Civil Rights Demonstrators March in Georgia
LEAD: Hosea Williams, with bullhorn, an Atlanta City Councilman, leading a march yesterday near Atlanta.
The 200 demonstrators retraced the steps of a brotherhood march in mostly white Forsyth County that was disrupted by violence a year ago.
Mr.
Williams led the march last year and another a week later with more than 20,000 demonstrators.


Inquiry on House Chairman and Lobbies Is Slowed
LEAD: The former chief investigator for the Justice Department recommended last month against prosecuting Representative Fernand J. St Germain, chairman of the House Banking Committee, because of insufficient evidence that he had accepted meals and entertainment from Washington lobbyists, lawyers close to the case say.


WHAT SNOOLS THESE MORTALS BE
LEAD:  WEBSTERS' FIRST NEW INTERGALACTIC WICKEDARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE  By Mary Daly with Jane Caputi.
Illustrated. 310 pp.
Boston: Beacon Press. $35.


FREE NETWORK AIR TIME
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: An art review in the Critics' Choices column of The Guide last Sunday misidentified a photographer in the show at the Twining Gallery.


AMERICA STILL HAUNTED BY PROBLEMS OF BLACK POOR
LEAD: NOT long before he was gunned down on the balcony of a motel in Memphis, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. observed that it did no good to be allowed to eat in a restaurant if you had no money to pay for a hamburger.
Dr.
King, whose birthday will be commemorated tomorrow, died 20 years ago this year, an anniversary that is provoking deep reflection.


JOYCE WOLF IS ENGAGED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Wolf of Bellerose, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter Joyce Carol Wolf to Phillip Anthony Ortiz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Oscar A. Ortiz of Port Jefferson Station, L.I.
Miss Wolf, a purchasing agent for the Thomas Publishing Company in New York, graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton, N.Y., as did Mr.


Jazz and Fiction
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bringing the Office Home
LEAD: IF there was one hot catch-phrase at this year's show, it was the ''home office.'' By one estimate, there are 13 million proprietors running businesses from their homes, and many of these people have high incomes, making them attractive targets for vendors.


Crash Comparison
LEAD: To the Editor: I have followed with interest the graph you printed each week comparing the crashes of 1929 and 1989.
But to put the post-crash periods in proper perspective, I think it mandatory that you graph the 50 or so trading days before the crashes.
Doing that will allow readers to see longer-term similarities and differences between the two events, and thus help us to evaluate the post-crash period.


MY SIX YEARS ON THE COUCH
LEAD: Let no reader of Dan Wakefield's troubling article be misled into thinking that the decline of ''orthodox'' Freudian analysis has made the couch a safer place.


Jazz and Fiction
LEAD: To the Editor:


SUSAN ROBINSON, A LAWYER, WEDS
LEAD: Susan Dana Robinson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin S. Robinson of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there last evening to Lincoln W. Briggs, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald K. Briggs of New York.
Rabbi Charles Lippman and the Rev.
Raynar W. Hesse, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Fenway Country


How One Company Clamped Down on Doctor Bills
LEAD: FOR Jeanne Kardos, director of employee benefits at the Southern New England Telecommunications Company, the numbers were alarming.
Last year, she estimated, her company spent almost $40 million on medical expenses for its employees, up 14 percent in one year and more than double its spending five years ago.


Self Discipline
LEAD: To The Editor:


THE MAKE-OVER AT ESTEE LAUDER
LEAD: How weary I am of having the marketing world tell me I am old and worthless (''The Make-Over at Estee Lauder,'' by Lisa Belkin, Nov. 29)!
Movies are made for yuppies.
Clothes are designed for people in their 20's and early 30's with the figures of nymphs.
And now, even Leonard Lauder has decided that the future of his Estee


MY SIX YEARS ON THE COUCH
LEAD: It would be unfortunate if Dan Wakefield's experience of ''strict Freudian psychoanalysis'' in the 1950's were considered representative of psychoanalysis today (''My Six Years on the Couch,'' Dec. 20).
That he was not helped despite considerable expenditure of time and money, and that he felt traumatized is obvious from his bitter account.


Witsken Makes Quarterfinals
LEAD: Todd Witsken, the only American remaining in the men's competition of the Australian Open, advanced today to the quarterfinals of the Grand Slam event.


After Flood, The West Side Is Recovering
LEAD: A crowd stood on a corner at West 84th Street and Broadway yesterday, gawking at the enormous hole left by an aged water main that broke and spewed thousands of gallons of water onto the streets early Friday morning.


848 Hunters Bag Just 4 Turkeys
LEAD: WHILE the number of hunters reached a record high during the fall wild turkey season, the success rate dropped to a record low, the State Department of Environmental Protection reported last week.


Tax Credits Produce Housing for Poor
LEAD: EVEN though Maurice Callender has never been to the boardrooms of J.C.
Penney or The Equitable, he expects the small neighborhood organization he heads - the West Harlem Group Assistance Corporation - to become a partner with those companies and several other corporate giants later this year to rebuild, of all things, 180 apartments for low-income families in


WING SOMMERS, A BANKER, IS MARRIED IN CAPITAL TO R. O. BLAKE JR., A DIPLOMAT
LEAD: The marriage of Anne Wing Sommers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Feldher Sommers of Chevy Chase, Md., to Robert Orris Blake Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Blake of Washington, took place yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in the Georgetown section of Washington.
The Rev.
George L. Peabody performed the ceremony.


Bogeys Haunt Pate, But He Holds Lead
LEAD: After playing 42 holes over three days with 15 birdies, 27 pars and no bogeys, Steve Pate took a double bogey on his 43d hole, his seventh hole in today's round.
He then took three bogeys on the back nine of LaCosta Country Club's course.
But he also had seven birdies for the round, and that helped him keep the lead he has held from the first day of the 36th annual MONY Tournament of Champions.


Food Inspection Results
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 37 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: If, by April, Jack Clark can learn to throw a curveball as well as he has been able to hit one, then the Yankees will have a shot.
FRANK J. CARROLL
River Edge, N.J.


NICARAGUA AGREES TO TALK DIRECTLY WITH THE CONTRAS
LEAD: In a last-minute concession after two days of difficult bargaining, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua agreed today to open direct talks with rebel leaders and to suspend a state of emergency in Nicaragua.


THE 'BLACK HOLE' OF MONEY
LEAD: The foreign trade deficit may have shrunk by more than $4 billion in November, as the Commerce Department reported, but statisticians know that raw monthly totals can be off by as much as $2 billion.
They will eventually refine the figures.
For overall world trade statistics, however, a much larger error defies refinement.


In Tokyo, States Compete for Plants and Jobs
LEAD: Like a general marking his victories, Francis T. Vaughan pointed to the map of New York State hanging on the wall of his office in downtown Tokyo.
It was covered with red dots - several clustered on Long Island, two near Elmira, others scattered throughout the state.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: The Yankees signed the wrong Jack.
What they need is pitching, and Steinbrenner should have signed Jack Morris.
Besides, as a right-handed power hitter, Clark will not have an easy time hitting homers in Yankee Stadium.
JOSEPH A. LEVY  Rego Park, Queens


Woman Killed in Fire At a Manhattan Hotel
LEAD: A 69-year-old woman was killed yesterday evening when fire broke out in her room at the Martha Washington Hotel on the East Side of Manhattan, fire officials said.


Does Pro Golf Need A New Star To Succeed?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Stocking Up for the Winter War
LEAD: WHEN I was a little girl, my mother used to tell me about the ration cards she jealously guarded during World War II.
She always stressed how difficult it was to obtain items like nylon stockings and gasoline; that even keeping your larder stocked with butter and sugar presented a formidable challenge.


Why New Issues Usually Disappoint
LEAD: FEW investors who bought new stock offerings from companies in 1987 will look back with pleasure.
The frothy pre-October market enabled Wall Street's underwriters to sell a record volume of initial public offerings - $24.2 billion worth, up 8 percent from a year earlier, according to Going Public, a service that tracks the new-issue market.


EVELYN FRIEDMAN WED TO DANIEL R. MUMMERY
LEAD: Evelyn Mann Friedman, a daughter of Joan Mann Friedman of Roslyn, L.I., and the late Irving Friedman, was married yesterday to Daniel R. Mummery, the son of Dr.
C.
Raymond Mummery of Coral Gables, Fla., and Kathleen Osborne of Stamford, Conn.
Jean S. Kotkin, a leader of the American Ethical Union, performed the ceremony at the Burden Mansion in Manhattan.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Justice Takes To the Road


Computers: A Necessary Insidiousness
LEAD: COMPUTERS are insidious things. You may have read how easy it is to use one.


ABC vs. Neighbors: Stand-Off on West 67th St.
LEAD: THIS IS A STORY OF A GOOD piece of architecture that some people think is in the wrong place - or perhaps it is better described as the story of how, in New York, you can never win.
The building is the new headquarters of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., the communications conglomerate, and the place is the neighborhood of West 66th and West 67th Streets off Central Park West, just north of Lincoln Center.


Rail Car Plant In Yonkers Seeks $1 Billion Contract
LEAD: IT was just a year ago that Yonkers officials were saying they hoped the city's new Kawasaki rail car plant, which was making subway cars for New York and New Jersey, would someday be manufacturing them for railroad and subway systems around the world.


Martha's Vineyard Land Pact Leaves Some Indians Bitter
LEAD: A bitter legal dispute between Indian tribal leaders and the Martha's Vineyard town of Gay Head ended this week with the signing of a final piece of legislation needed under a settlement that allows the tribe to buy some of the land it has long wanted.
But few of the Indians are rejoicing.


117 Secret U.S. Atomic Tests Are Indicated in Seismic Data
LEAD: The United States has concealed at least 117 nuclear explosions at its underground test site in the Nevada desert over the past quarter-century, a group of private scientists reported yesterday.


Packaging an Estate: Seacroft For Sale
LEAD: W. James Oelsner, the mayor of Centre Island from 1975 to 1977, is selling Harbour Point, the Oelsner family's Centre Island estate since 1946.
The 25.4-acre tract, which faces Cold Spring Harbor on the north shore of Long Island, is composed of 12 land parcels assembled over the years around Seacroft, the family's Mediterranean-style mansion.


PAMELA EVAN ROLLINGS WEDS NEAL R. BRENDEL
LEAD: At the Heinz Memorial Chapel in Pittsburgh, Pamela Evan Rollings and Neal Robert Brendel, lawyers in Pittsburgh, were married yesterday by the Rev.
Robert L. English, a Roman Catholic priest.


Mitsuko Shirai in Recital
LEAD: Mitsuko Shirai, a mezzo-soprano, will sing songs by Mendelssohn, Liszt and Wolf, and Karol Szymanowski's settings of James Joyce poems, tonight at 8 in Alice Tully Hall.
Her accompanist will be Harmut Holl.
Tickets are $10.
Information: 874-6770.


'Greek' Loses an Out Bet
LEAD: IN the tinkle of Las Vegas slot machines nearly two decades ago, Jimmy (the Greek) Snyder was hurrying out of the Stardust lobby toward double glass doors.
But instead of moving through the door that opened outward, he found himself stumbling against the door that opened inward.


Remembering the Big One of 1888
LEAD: THE mood on Wall Street was glum.
Just 2,000 shares changed hands that Tuesday.
Retail sales took a beating.
The B. Altman store had only one customer all day.
Food prices soared.
Milk went from 2 cents to more than 10 cents a quart within three days.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  TRAGIC WAYS OF KILLING A WOMAN. By Nicole Loraux. Translated by Anthony


Transactions
LEAD:  COLLEGES


Appeals Court Says Judge Erred In Not Discharging Biased Juror
LEAD: A trial judge should have discharged a juror who said after deliberations began that she could not ignore her own prejudice against Hispanic people in a case with a Hispanic defendant, the state's highest court has ruled.


Q and A
LEAD:  2-Family House Tenant


T. J. JULIAN IS WED TO MARY R. RAHO
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y., Mary Rachel Raho, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Raho of Rye and Watch Hill, R.I., was married yesterday to Thomas Joseph Julian, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Julian of Boca Raton, Fla., and Utica, N.Y.
Msgr.
Donald Pryor performed the ceremony.


Of Men and Mice: Witty Toys on View
LEAD: THE MOST COMPREHEN-sive collection of comic-character toys ever exhibited - Mickey Mouse, Popeye, Donald Duck, Little Orphan Annie, Felix the Cat and Betty Boop - will be on view through Saturday at the Alexander Gallery, 996 Madison Avenue (at 77th Street).
The 400 outrageously colorful and boldly graphic windup, push-pull, squeezeable and noisemaking toys were produced mostly between 1920 and 1940.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Stefan Batory  Question: I understand the Polish Ocean Lines' Stefan Batory is to be retired.
Is there to be a replacement for this wonderful ship, which my family has enjoyed the past three summers? - W. B. R., New Paltz, N.Y.
Answer: Polish Ocean Lines is seeking a more modern ship to replace the Stefan Batory, which is to be taken out of service in March.


He Furnishes Objects To Fit a World Gone Awry
LEAD: RICHARD ARTSCHWAGER'S IS A strange sculptural world, like an ordinary home whose furnishings - the tables and chairs, the windows, the floorboards, the medicine chest, everything - have all gone slightly mad.
His work called ''Handle,'' for instance, is a handsomely crafted piece of polished oak that resembles a length of bannister, but it hangs on the wall and is not a handle to anything.


Oysters From Northern California
LEAD: PREHISTORIC garbage heaps testify that humans have enjoyed oysters for hundreds of thousands of years.
In modern times, Californians had little chance, until relatively recently, to consume local oysters because the Olympia oyster - the only one native to the West Coast - didn't grow large enough to be commercially viable.


G.O.P. CANDIDATES CLASH IN DEBATE
LEAD: The six Republican candidates for President clashed sharply in a debate here today over economic policy, taxes and each other's records.


Music: 'Verein Revisited,' By Chamber Ensemble
LEAD: THE New York Chamber Ensemble has undertaken an appealing four-concert series this season at Alice Tully Hall.
Entitled ''Music of the Verein Revisited,'' it offers music once heard on the programs of Arnold Schoenberg's Society for Private Musical Performances in Vienna between 1917 and 1921.


AIDS Panel Recommends No Change in Bias Law
LEAD: A PANEL studying discrimination against AIDS patients has decided against recommending any changes in the law that guards against bias in housing, employment or other fields.


Knicks Roll Past Sixers
LEAD: Rick Pitino, searching for a new way to win, revived an old concept last night: starting Patrick Ewing and Bill Cartwright together on the front line.
It was only the second time this season that the Knick coach had started his two 7-footers together in hopes of controlling the boards and the tempo of the game.


Jackson Campaigns on an Iowa Farm
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson holding 8-year old Nick Aldrich on his lap on a visit yesterday to the farm of Terry Hoy, right, in Adel, about 20 miles west of Des Moines.
The Democratic Presidential candidate was there to talk with a group of local farmers about his farm policy proposals. (NYT/Jim Wilson)


ISRAEL'S HEAVIER HAND
LEAD: ISRAEL struck back with a variety of strong measures last week in new efforts to quell Palestinian demonstrations in the occupied territories.
But the violence continued and more deaths and injuries were reported.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: Jack Clark's acquisition doesn't improve the Yankees' chances as much as it does the Mets'.
The Cardinals have been stripped of their lone power hitter.
Unless Jack Clark can give the Yankees a few good innings on the mound (rotating, perhaps, in the fifth spot with such distinguished hurlers as Rick Cerone and Dave Winfield), the Yankees can look forward to another summer of 10-9 scores.


Cabaret: Murray Grand In Satirical Retrospective
LEAD: MURRAY GRAND is a singer, pianist and songwriter whose songs and performances reflect a past era of nightclub life.
He has gathered almost a score of his songs, written over the last three or four decades, in an intimate revue, ''Grand Slam,'' in which he is joined by Claiborne Cary and Nancy Timpanaro, both singers, at Don't Tell Mama, 343 West 46th Street, on Thursdays and


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Restoration Project Saves a 1785 Saltbox
LEAD: A SALTBOX Colonial on two-thirds of an acre at 79 Hollow Tree Ridge Road in Darien is on sale for $400,000.
Built in 1785 by Benjamin Weed, a soldier in the Revolutionary War, the 33- by 35-foot dwelling is listed on the State Register of Historic Places and has been undergoing extensive structural restoration since last July by the Connecticut Trust for Historic


CARLEY A. MILLER PLANNING TO WED ARTHUR SULLIVAN
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Lindley G. Miller of Upper Brookville, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Carley Anne Miller to Arthur Gary Sullivan, a son of Mrs.
Sidney Blakemore Sullivan of Fredericksburg, Va., and the late Mr.
Sullivan.
They plan to marry in the spring.


Thai Food: Flavors in Harmony
LEAD: LONG ISLAND offers adventurous eaters food choices that didn't exist here a decade ago.
Some are quite sophisticated, even exotic.
Not the least of them is Thai food.
And one of the best of the new Thai restaurants is the Thai House in Huntington.


'Frosty' Increases Streak
LEAD: Frosty the Snowman joined an increasingly interesting lineup of Florida Derby prospects by winning his third start without a defeat at Gulfstream Park today.


ResidentialResales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending Jan. 2  MANHATTAN  Morningside Heights  $186,000
320 Riverside Drive (104th St.)
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft., prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, large kitchen; maintenance, $542, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: A.J. Clark)  Murray Hill


ELIZABETH C. O'HERRON PLANS TO MARRY IN APRIL
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William J. O'Herron of Westfield, N.J., and Peru, Vt., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Coughlin O'Herron, to Robert Haldane Swindell 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Swindell Jr. of Baltimore and Damariscotta, Me.
An April wedding is planned.


AWARD-WINNING CD PLAYERS
LEAD: THERE ARE FEW PATHS to glory for audio engineers.


Islanders' Hrudey Stops Devils, 4-2
LEAD: The Islanders' Kelly Hrudey put a goaltending tip to good use this evening.
But he was not ready to divulge the key to his success.


Afghan Parley Is to Resume Next Month
LEAD: The next round of United Nations-sponsored peace talks on Afghanistan will open in Geneva in February and appear likely to produce agreement on a timetable for the withdrawal of Soviet forces, according to United Nations officials and diplomats here.


TOWARD BETTER DEALS AND BETTER DEALMAKING, IN ZONING
LEAD: SHOULD developers be allowed extra stories on their high-priced buildings if they promise, in exchange, to construct day care centers or esplanades as well?
And in any case, who should have the power to make such a concession and what role should the local community board play?


A New Perspective on 'Eloquent Objects'
LEAD: OCCASIONALLY, a book causes one to step back and, with a widened vision, see everything with a new perspective.
That was this writer's experience on opening ''The Eloquent Object,'' published in conjunction with a recent exhibition of the same name at the Philbrook Museum of Art in Tulsa, Okla.


Brunswick, Me.: College Town Graduating
LEAD: TWO office complexes are under construction here and a third is planned, adding a new dimension to this town of about 19,000 people on the Androscoggin River.


Tactics and Technology on Farmers' Agenda
LEAD: WHILE household gardeners, with spring in mind, have begun poring over seed catalogues, farmers and others for whom the land provides a livelihood have been preparing to gather in Atlantic City Tuesday for the annual New Jersey Vegetable Meeting, a three-day conference said to be the largest of its kind on the East


Needed: A Protocol - or at Least a Truce - About Gift-Giving
LEAD: OUR friend Alan gets the shakes every time he thinks of how close he and Ellen came to a divorce after 38 years of marriage.


SHAWN MAHIEU WEDS CAPT. CARLOS FRANCISCO ORTIZ
LEAD: Shawn Mahieu, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Julien Mahieu of North Haledon, N.J., and Lake George, N.Y., was married at the First Presbyterian Church in North Haledon yesterday to Capt.
Carlos Francisco Ortiz, U.S.A., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andres A. Ortiz of Mahwah, N.J., and New Paltz, N.Y.
The Rev.


THE LAST MASSACRE
LEAD:  SHOSHONE MIKE  By Frank Bergon. 290 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


OOH OOH. AND THEN AGAIN, AH AH
LEAD:  LITERAL MADNESS  Three Novels: Kathy Goes to Haiti.
My Death My Life by Pier Paolo Pasolini.
Florida.
By Kathy Acker. 410 pp.
New York: Grove Press. $19.95.


Outdoors; Books on Fly Fishing Are Flourishing
LEAD: BOOKS dealing with fly fishing have long outnumbered those devoted to any other angling technique.
This tradition shows no sign of weakening even though fly fishermen represent only a small fraction of the angling public.


HIP GRAPHICS
LEAD: Your essay on ''Hip Graphics'' (Works in Progress, Dec. 13), with the images in sequential rotation of the human hip, recalls a similar revolutionary image of the human body 76 years ago -Marcel Duchamp's ''Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2.'' The painting caused quite a stir at the Armory Show of 1913 in New York, owing to the liberties it took with the human form.


A Wellspring From Poulenc's Song Legacy
LEAD: FOR A DECADE NOW, THE GREAT point of reference for the songs of Francis Poulenc has been the rich edition integrale, lovingly and carefully produced for EMI with Dalton Baldwin (who early in his career was close to Poulenc's artistic circle) at the piano.
The singers are Elly Ameling, Nicolai Gedda, Michel Senechal, William Parker and Gerard Souzay: important talents all.


Classics Won't Just Disappear
LEAD: OUT OF FRUSTRATION WITH A HISTORICAL clock that insists on moving at its own measured pace, some dedicated propagandists for new music come to sound like the generals who insisted that the only way to save Vietnamese villages was to bomb them out of existence.
Only by ruthlessly dismantling the repertory built up over previous centuries, it is suggested, can room be made for the 20th century's own candidates for survival.


NOW IT'S NOFZIGER'S TURN
LEAD: THE scene was familiar: a former senior Reagan Administration aide on trial, accused of trying to capitalize illegally on political contacts and a friendship with the President.


Remembering Neil Colville
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  A WORLD DESTROYED: Hiroshima and the Origins of the Arms Race, by Martin J. Sherwin. (Vintage, $9.95.) Examining decisions made by Franklin Roosevelt, Winston Churchill and Harry Truman, the historian Martin J. Sherwin attempts to show how the world lost its chance to avoid the arms race by bringing nuclear weapons under international control.


DATA UPDATE
LEAD:  BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing Units)
Nov. 87
Oct. 87
Nov. 86
New York
4,215
4,656
4,179
New Jersey
4,161
5,264
3,979
Connecticut
1,918
2,028
1,611
Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce  MORTAGE INTEREST RATES (Average)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago


A Crew Leader
LEAD: WHILE Horace Davenport was growing up in not very prosperous circumstances in Brooklyn in the 1920's, he went to Columbia, where he went out for sports teams - football, swimming and crew -so he could eat.
In that era, the training table for the athletes featured steaks and was a standard accoutrement of intercollegiate athletics.


JEANNE MININALL, LAWYER, IS WED
LEAD: Jeanne Miller Mininall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Franklin Mininall of Birmingham, Mich., was married last evening to Arthur Edwin Bass, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Herman Michael Bass of Cherry Hill, N.J.
Rabbi Burt Segal and the Rev.
Lazarus Sequeira, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Meadowlands estate in Darien,


Mets Unveil New Team
LEAD: A SCARECROW stood guard on the snowy field, orange work clothes and a bucket for a head.
A few footprints led toward the pitching mound, where Dave Johnson often trudged last summer.
The scoreboard was being dismantled, more radically than the team itself.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: The Red Sox are the team to beat.
Unless the Yankees can find a starting pitcher or two, all acquiring Jack Clark can do is help them build on the new Yankee tradition: finishing in second place.
J.
D.
GALLAGHER  Essex Junction, Vt.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Bruins 5, Sabres 1: Cam Neely scored three goals for the third time in his career as the Bruins won yesterday in Boston.
Buffalo, beaten by 9-0 and 2-0 in two games with Boston in late December, ended a scoreless string of 186 minutes 22 seconds against the Bruins on Phil Housley's 18th goal at 12:45 of the second period.


DATA BANK: January 17, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,835.9
$3,795.3
$3,683.3
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.3
2.5
2.79
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$141.9
$134.5
$130.2


SERENA REED TO MARRY PAUL KUSSEROW
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Verner Reed Jr. of New York and Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Serena Reed to Paul B. K. Kusserow, a son of Suzanne Kusserow of Underhill Center, Vt., and the late Dr.
Berthold Kusserow.
A May wedding is planned.


LONGINGS, SWOONINGS AND POSTURINGS
LEAD:  A LITERATE PASSION  Letters of Anais Nin and Henry Miller, 1932-1953.
Edited, and with an introduction, by Gunther Stuhlmann. 422 pp.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $19.95.


Political Notes; A Successor For Giuliani: A List Grows
LEAD: The list of possible successors to Rudolph W. Giuliani as United States Attorney in Manhattan is like an accordion - for a variety of reasons, it expands and contracts in the hands of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and his aides.


Managua Seizes 5 in Opposition Who Met Contras
LEAD: The police in Managua have arrested five opposition leaders who recently met with the contras, and were seeking six others, according to the Interior Ministry.


U. S. Aide Sees 'Important Step' By Nicaraguans &gt;
LEAD: A senior Reagan Administration official said today that Nicaragua's reported agreement to open direct talks with the contra rebels ''would be an important step'' if it led to serious negotiations.


Dole, Pressed About His Finances, Releases Data on Taxes and Trust
LEAD: After a week of controversy about his financial affairs, Senator Bob Dole today made public 21 years of Federal tax returns along with the details of a blind trust belonging to his wife, Elizabeth Hanford Dole.


Iroquois Drops Spur To Hartford Area
LEAD: OPPONENTS of a proposed natural gas pipeline are hailing the elimination of a 42-mile east-west spur that would have cut through 10 towns in Connecticut.
But they remain staunch in their opposition to the major part of the project, the route from Sherman to Milford.


First Town Houses: Strangers In Town
LEAD: The first town-house development in Palisades Park, N.J., is under construction at the corner of Grand Avenue and Roosevelt Place.
Upon completion next fall, the six buildings of the 26-unit complex will join the area's mostly one-family homes and garden apartments.
The $4 million project's first building, with three units, will be ready for occupancy next month, said the developer, Alfred Haber.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 17, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
(Signet/NAL, $4.50.) A fairy tale, complete with
an aged king, an evil wizard and a mouse.
2
10
WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
(Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.


T.A. Pappas, 89, Dies; Was Envoy to Greece
LEAD: Thomas A. Pappas, a prominent Republican who was Ambassador to Greece during the Eisenhower Administration, died at his home here after a long illness.
He was 89 years old.


Show of Folk Art In Scarsdale
LEAD: THOUGH its clapboard facade has changed a few times, the Cudner-Hyatt House has stood near the corner of the White Plains Post Road and Boulevard for 254 years.
The Quaker Meeting House next door, another wood building, is a comparative newcomer, having been removed from its original site on Griffen


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We recently installed a brass-framed glass door over the opening to our brick fireplace.
Because the brass frame is very straight and the brick against which it fits is rough and bumpy, there are gaps where smoke seeps out into the room.
We stuffed small strips of fiberglass insulation into these cracks, but some smoke still gets through and bits of fiberglass keep falling out.


Correction
LEAD: An article by The Associated Press last Sunday about United Press International misstated the number of people dismissed from U.P.I. in the last two months.
Christopher Smith, a U.P.I. spokesman, said that while as many as 100 employees had left the news agency in the period, only 33 were laid off.


Teams Find It's Better to Receive
LEAD: FOR three seasons, Anthony Carter felt more like a status symbol than an integral part of the Minnesota Vikings' offense.
He was the family heirloom that the Vikings were reluctant to remove from its display case.
Whether a wide receiver relies on speed or moves, or both, he must be elusive.
And here was Carter, sensing constraints, as if he were running his pass patterns in a ball and chain.


3 Indictments Strain U.S.-Mexican Links
LEAD: Drug trafficking is again emerging as a source of tension between the United States and Mexico, after an interlude of nearly a year in which both sides played down their differences on what each should be doing to combat it.


HEIDI DINA CHEVEN WEDS MICHAEL D. JAFFE, LAWYER
LEAD: Temple Judea in Manhasset, L.I., was the setting last evening for the wedding of Heidi Dina Cheven, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Cheven of Sands Point, L.I., to Michael David Jaffe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton Jaffe of Cedarhurst, L.I.
Rabbi Gilbert S. Rosenthal officiated.
The bride, a graduate of Adelphi University and the St.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: THE National Football League has named Shane Conlan of the Buffalo Bills rookie of the year.
Conlan was a first-round draft pick from Penn State, where he helped the Nittany Lions win the 1986 national championship. . . .
Tamara McKinney, the United States' best hope for an Olympic medal in skiing, has progressed to gate training in her comeback from a fractured ankle.


3 Officials Named for Democratic Convention
LEAD: The Democratic high command today chose the convention officials who will referee the opening rounds of competition between the party's Presidential candidates who survive the primaries and caucuses.


TAMARA AND TAMARA AND TAMARA . . .
LEAD: In ''Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead,'' Tom Stoppard gave audiences a chance to see the tragedy of ''Hamlet'' through the eyes of its bewildered bit players.
In ''Tamara,'' the playwright John Krizanc makes bit players of the members of the audience, who trail after 10 characters through action set in the sprawling estate of the Italian poet Gabriele d'Annunzio.


A Manuscript Recounts Drake's Explorations
LEAD: TWO major exhibitions that span centuries of European and American exploration and history - ''Sir Francis Drake and the Age of Discovery'' and ''Edward Curtis and 'The North American Indian' '' - have just opened at the Pierpont Morgan Library and will continue into the early spring.


MARY SHELLEY TO WED DR. JOHN MORRISSEY JR.
LEAD: The engagement of Mary Eileen Shelley to Dr.
John Daniel Morrissey Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morrissey of Pelham Manor, N.Y., has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Shelley Jr. of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The couple plan to marry in August.


A Horovitz Comedy Traces the Rosens
LEAD: LAST season Studio Theater in Lindenhurst presented ''Today I Am a Fountain Pen,'' the first of a trilogy by Israel Horovitz based on stories by Morley Torgov about the Jewish community of Sault Ste.
Marie, Ontario, Canada, before, during and after World War II.
In ''Fountain Pen'' we were introduced to the Yanover family, whose 10-year-old son, Irving Yanover, has a passion for eating bacon.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: With Henderson and Randolph in front and Winfield and Pags following, the Yankee lineup will be devastating.
With Clark hitting behind him, Mattingly will have an unbelievable season.
As for pitching, the American League East is a weak division anyway with no team able to count on more than two reliable starters.


MISS BRIGGS WED TO J. G. BROOKS JR.
LEAD: The marriage of Margaret Mary Briggs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Briggs of Williamsville, N.Y., to James G. Brooks Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brooks of Naples, Fla., and Dorset, Vt., took place yesterday at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
The Rev.
Robert A. Nunn performed the ceremony.


Contesting a Sewage Moratorium
LEAD: HOW far can a rubber band stretch before it snaps?


Drunken Driver Imprisoned
LEAD: An insurance agent who drove his car into a neighbor's house while drunk and killed a 4-year-old girl was sentenced Friday to 15 years to life imprisonment.
The driver, James Masoner, 47, was convicted on four counts, including one of second-degree murder, after he crashed his car into the home of Timothy and Barbara Shaner and killed their daughter Jessica while she was sleeping on a couch.


A '31 ANSCHLUSS MIGHT HAVE FOILED HITLER
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hamden Engraver Creates Artwork On Cycles and Cars
LEAD: THOMAS LETIS'S candy apple-red motorcycle is often the subject of intense stares as he drives along streets and highways.
It isn't the machine's color that attracts attention - it's the scores of scrolls and hand-engraved dragons and flowers.


In White Plains, a Growing Disenchantment With Development
LEAD: THE city of White Plains has 47,000 occupants at night and close to 250,000 in the daytime, when shoppers and office workers arrive - and that's enough for the time being, according to city officials.


Installing a Drywall Ceiling
LEAD: INSTALLING panels of drywall, also known as plasterboard, gypsum wallboard or Sheetrock, overhead to create a ceiling is seldom a cinch.
However, the job can be made much easier by employing some of the strategies and tools used by professionals.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We recently installed a brass-framed glass door over the opening to our brick fireplace.
Because the brass frame is very straight and the brick against which it fits is rough and bumpy, there are gaps where smoke seeps out into the room.
We stuffed small strips of fiberglass insulation into these cracks, but some smoke still gets through and bits of fiberglass keep falling out.


EMPLOYERS OFFER AID ON CHILD CARE
LEAD: More than 10 percent of the nation's employers provide specific benefits or services to help their workers arrange for child care, the Labor Department said Friday.


MISS BURKS IS ENGAGED
LEAD: Deborah Parnelle Burks and Michael John Southwick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Southwick Jr. of Princeton, N.J., plan to marry in August, the future bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
William P. Burks of Princeton, have announced.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  A DESIGN FOR LIVING.
By Lillian Langseth-Christensen. (Viking, $18.95.) Today, Josef Hoffmann is revered by design enthusiasts the world over.
But at the beginning of this century the Viennese architect, one of the founders of the Wiener Werkstatte movement, had only a coterie of avant-garde admirers.


Dancing to the Beat, Counted Out in Sign Language
LEAD: THE dancers relaxed during their break and chatted about the performance they would give at the New Rochelle Public Library that evening.
There was laughing and teasing about what hair styles to wear, and the only thing unusual about the group was that the conversation was in sign language.


Corrections
LEAD: A Travel Advisory report on Dec. 27 about Hertz rental cars omitted mention of some national car-rental companies that hold renters responsible not only for collision damage but also for vandalism, theft and other loss of the car.
Besides Value Rent-a-Car and Hertz, they are Alamo and Thrifty.
In some copies, the headline characterized Hertz's new policy inaccurately.


FICTION
LEAD:  NIGHTS AT THE ALEXANDRA.
By William Trevor.
Illustrated by Paul Hogarth. (Harper &amp; Row, $10.95.) ''I am a 58-year-old provincial,'' writes the narrator of William Trevor's slim novella, the latest in the Harper Short Novel series. ''I have no children.
I have never married.'' The person responsible for this state of affairs is Frau Messinger, an Englishwoman who finds refuge from World War II with her elderly German husband near the Irish town of Cloverhill.


Alysheba Heads San Fernando
LEAD: Alysheba, winner of the Eclipse Award as the top 3-year-old last year, will head a field of eight entered in the $200,000-added San Fernando Stakes Sunday at Santa Anita.


FIRST, ALBANY HAS TO COUNT ITS MONEY
LEAD: THE 1988 battle over the New York State budget, which began formally last week with Governor Cuomo's presentation of his spending plan, will probably be not so much about how to spend the money as about how much money there is to spend.


Retracing Jewish History In Austria
LEAD: ALMOST three centuries ago, Emperor Leopold I called a money expert, Samson Wertheimer, from Worms on the Rhine to Vienna to help him replenish his treasury, which had been exhausted by the Emperor's Turkish wars.


Are You an American? Show Us Your Papers
LEAD: IT'S always been an early harbinger of spring around our house: the first mail of the new year brings a letter from a Connecticut university congratulating me for once again having been appointed an adjunct professor for the spring semester.
It's a little extra cash, but that's not why I do it; call it teaching for the joy of it.


A CORRECTION
LEAD: In a Posting on Dec. 27 on the Cutter Financial Center in Hartford, a reference to another office project, 180 Allyn Street, failed to mention that the Tishman Realty &amp; Construction Company is its codeveloper.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  On-Time Data For Flights Draw Interest


Dole Investment Fund Shows a 30% Increase
LEAD: Documents released today by Senator Bob Dole show that an investment fund established as a blind trust by his wife, Elizabeth Hanford Dole, increased in value by 30 percent in the last three years, according to a review of the financial records.


Cambodians in Pol Pot's Camps Await a Liberator
LEAD: Of all the Cambodians whose future will be discussed in coming talks on a political compromise, perhaps none have so much to gain or lose as the tens of thousands of civilians still living under the control of Communists who run several refugee camps along the Thai-Cambodian border.


Roadside Diner In the Limelight
LEAD: A BOARDED-UP stainless steel diner, resting forlornly amid weeds off a highway in Robbinsville, N.J., was destined for fame in Washington last spring.
The Smithsonian Institution said it would acquire it as a classic example of the roadside eating places that flourished in the 1930's and '40's, the Golden Age of


Cambodian Is Said to Offer To Return American Remains
LEAD: A high-ranking Cambodian official told three Congressmen touring Southeast Asia that his country has the remains of 80 American servicemen killed during the Vietnam War and is prepared to release them to the United States, the lawmakers said today.


Goodbye Daisy Wheel, Hello Laser
LEAD: JAMES BOB stomped into the employee lounge, slammed his quarters into the cold drink machine and pounded on it. ''I hate that printer!'' he said. ''The noise is driving me crazy and I hate getting ribbon ink all over my hands.'' He's fussy that way.


A VCR In Every Pocket
LEAD: THE Sony Walkman helped usher in a new category known as ''personal audio'' products, which allow people to take high quality music with them anywhere.
Now, electronics companies hope to repeat their success with ''personal video.'' They are combining tiny television sets and video cassette recorders into miniature units that would allow people to take their favorite movies with them anywhere.


MY SIX YEARS ON THE COUCH
LEAD: Dan Wakefield's article leaves readers with the impression that his hallucinatory psychotic illness resulted from the analysis and his doctor's mismanagement.
There is no question in my mind that Mr.
Wakefield was suffering from alcohol-induced hallucinations.
The explanation offered by his analyst that they had entered the ''heartland'' of analysis is pure nonsense.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Amityville  $275,000
13 Victoria Way
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new condominium town house; den with fireplace, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200, monthly charges $450.
Bay Shore  $650,000
55 Gardner Lane
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 65-year-old colonial; fireplace, boat slip, 2 acres; taxes $10,000.


BUSINESS FORUM: Factories, Services and Speed; Simplify the Shop Floor
LEAD: RECOGNIZING that they were losing their ability to compete in domestic and world markets, many American manufacturers have been engaged in years of globe-trotting, seeking cheap offshore labor to bring their manufacturing costs down.
Now, a handful of companies, including I.B.M., Emerson Electric and Swank, are returning production to our home shores.


Gorillas and Dian Fossey
LEAD: To the Editor:


A CASE OF COLIC
LEAD: Joel C. Berman's description of his daughter's colic and his reactions to her distress has an important message for all of us (About Men: ''A Case of Colic,'' Nov. 29).
Patients will hear a sensitive physician admitting his frailties and will admire his expressions of camaraderie with those who turn to health-care providers for help.


MOVIES
LEAD:  Through a Glass Darkly  Directed by Ingmar Bergman.
With Harriet Andersson, Gunnar Bjornstrand, Max Von Sydow. 1961.
International Collection/ Nelson Entertainment Group 90 minutes. $29.95.


Food; FEASTS AGAINST FROST
LEAD: IT IS A BROMIDE, of course, to say that fresh air - particularly fresh snowy air - fires the flames of hunger.
At mealtime on the slopes, the skiers I have observed over the years have been discriminating but unpretentious eaters.


Young Love
LEAD:  EVERY TIME WE SAY GOODBYE  Starring Tom Hanks and Cristina Marsillach (both in photo).
Directed by Moshe Mizrahi. 1987.
Lightning Video. 97 minutes. $79.98.


Karan Takes A Long View
LEAD: Donna Karan said she did not show longer skirts in her summer collection Friday just to provide the customer with options.
She said she did so because ''I think they look great, and they look new.''


A Final Round?
LEAD: The last round in the tangled 21-year legal battle of Rubin (Hurricane) Carter may have ended last week when the United States Supreme Court refused to reinstate triple-murder charges against the onetime contender for the middleweight boxing championship.
Mr.
Carter, now 50, and John Artis, 41, were convicted in two trials, in 1967 and in 1976, of the fatal shootings of two men and a woman at a bar in Paterson, N.J., in 1966.


The Winter Kitchen Offers Fish Staples
LEAD: FISH cookery in winter turns to the skillet and the oven, rather than the grill.
As a result, thick steaks of swordfish and tuna are low on the shopping list.


BORK IS BACK IN OLD ROLE OF INTELLECTUAL CRUSADER
LEAD: IN choosing to end his career as a Federal judge with a blast at his critics and a vow to seek vindication off the bench, Robert H. Bork validated both the admiration of his supporters and the worst fears of those who succeeded in blocking his elevation to the Supreme Court four months ago.


RUTGERS SUFFERS 7TH STRAIGHT LOSS
LEAD: Tom Garrick and Carlton Owens combined for 40 of 58 second-half points for Rhode Island today as the Rams defeated Rutgers, 84-71.
The loss was the seventh straight for Rutgers.


Legislators Plan Limits On Off-Road Vehicles
LEAD: The chairmen of the Transportation Committees of the New York State Senate and Assembly plan to propose stringent laws to regulate the sale and use of all-terrain vehicles, a legislative commission report said yesterday.


Donald Healey; Sports Car Designer, 89
LEAD: Donald Healey, designer of Austin-Healey sports cars in Britain, died last Wednesday after a short illness, his family said today.
He was 89 years old.


'Wall Street': The Banality of Greed
LEAD: HOLLYWOOD has at last made what it considers a serious movie about business and we bray appreciatively at its verisimilitude. ''Wall Street'' the movie does get the technicalities right.
The jargon is dead on, the brokers dress in their conformist code, the geography of the trading room is, well, picture perfect.


CYNTHIA AIDA HACINLI WEDS WILLIAM CONNOR
LEAD: Cynthia Aida Hacinli, a freelance journalist, and William Steel Durward Connor, a reporter for WCSH-TV in Portland, Me., were married yesterday at St.
Vartan Armenian Orthodox Cathedral in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Arten Ashjian performed the ceremony.
He was assisted by the Rev.
Arnak Kasparian and the Rev.


Correction
LEAD: An article on the film page of the Arts and Leisure section today about the movie ''The Family'' gives an incorrect opening date.
The film opens Friday at the Cinema Studio.
A picture caption in the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday about a Benny Goodman concert at Carnegie Hall 50 years ago misidentified the photographer.


HIGH-POWERED HOT DOGS AND OTHER MONUMENTS
LEAD:  Norval White has already done much to elevate popular appreciation of New York's physical history, as the co-author with Elliot Willensky of ''The AIA Guide to New York City,'' the standard architectural reference work for almost two decades.
His new book, NEW YORK: A Physical History (Atheneum, $29.95), is as opinionated as that earlier volume, more of a commentary than a history, although it has dates and names in abundance (including such tidbits as crediting the high-powered firm of Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill with the design of a small building in Times Square that now houses


Filipino Leftists Take a Half Step Above Ground
LEAD: Simply stating his party affiliation is considered to be an act of courage for Amado Santos, a candidate for mayor of this town 50 miles north of Manila.


Director Revives 'Lost Art Form'
LEAD: IMAGINE casting Jack Gilford, Jack Weston, Ellie Greenwich and David Essex in ''We Bombed in New Haven.''


LONG-TERM WITNESS
LEAD: In 1935, a 62-year-old Philadelphia schoolteacher named Florence Knapp retired - but for a period that extended beyond all expectation.


Survey Rates West Virginia the Heftiest State
LEAD: Nearly a quarter of West Virginians are overweight, fewer Tennesseans are, and Hawaiians and Utahans are the slimmest of all, according to a 25-state study by Federal health researchers that found Americans' weight seems to vary by state.


New York Area Agencies Pressed To Study Shift From Sea Dumping
LEAD: The Federal Environmental Protection Agency is pressing New York City and several sewage authorities in New Jersey to find alternatives to dumping sewage sludge in the Atlantic Ocean.


BUICK PUTS STAMP ON REATTA
LEAD: IT happens, I guess. The older you get, the less certain you are about anything.


ANIMAL-RIGHTS GROUP ASSAILS EGG FARM
LEAD: NEW JERSEY'S largest egg farm has put this Warren County community on the map by just having produced its billionth egg.
Poultrymen are impressed, but not everyone is crowing about it.


Correction
LEAD: A front-page caption on Jan. 3 in The Guide, about the Boar's Head and Yule Log Festival at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, gave an incorrect identification provided by the event's publicity agent for the actor at the right.
He was Rob Elk.


Case Closed
LEAD: ''This is the continuing saga of McDuff and Tucker, two members of the species 'canis familiaris,' popularly known as 'man's best friend,' who had an altercation on the streets of Pleasantville in January 1986.''


IN COLOMBIA, DRUG MONEY TALKS AT THE HIGHEST LEVELS
LEAD: SHORTLY after Jorge Luis Ochoa Vasquez was detained on minor traffic violations near Cali on Nov. 21, Yolanda Rico, a lawyer from Colombia's Attorney General's Office, arrived at the police precinct where he was being held, embraced him warmly, and then, with a flurry of legal arguments, began demanding his release.


A CRASH PROGRAM
LEAD: What can be done right now to bring back a semblance of stability to the stock market?


Trends in Art History
LEAD: To the Editor:


Harvesting Drama in Hardy Country
LEAD: IN PROSPECT, VISITING THE NA-tional Theater to see ''Entertaining Strangers'' seemed rather like going to the Ritz for bran and apple juice.
According to pre-opening publicity, it was a ''community play,'' a history of 19th-century Dorchester painstakingly researched by the townspeople themselves and originally presented in a local church.


High Costs in Massachusetts Thin Ranks of Obstetricians
LEAD: Nearly one-fifth of the obstetricians in Massachusetts who responded to a survey have quit their practices since 1984, a result of increasing malpractice insurance rates and a rising number of lawsuits.


New Attack on Arizona Governor
LEAD: Four Republican members of Arizona's Congressional delegation called for Gov.
Evan Mecham to resign today, saying the legal and political turmoil surrounding him had virtually paralyzed the state.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: The Yanks will be favorites when they have a starting rotation to match the Blue Jays.
Adding John Candelaria (still a big 'if') still leaves them a quality pitcher short.
JEFF MARINER
New Hyde Park, L.I.


Death Brings Texas Town Together
LEAD: The preacher's words sounded like something from the Book of Revelation as they thundered through the old pine pews of the Macedonia Baptist Church.


PLANTING CARROTS AMONG THE STICKS
LEAD:  SOVIET AGRICULTURE  By Zhores A. Medvedev.
Tables. 464 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $27.50


Leveraged Buyouts: On the Level?
LEAD: FOR MOST OF MY LIFE, I trusted the system, especially the economic system, to serve as an engine not only of prosperity but of equality and freedom and individual rights under the law.
I fully believed that once principles of law were at stake, all Americans were equal.


Building Rules for Casinos Tightened
LEAD: NEW JERSEY has closed a loophole in its 1977 Casino Control Act that had allowed companies operated by reputed organized-crime figures to reap more than $800,000 from casino construction projects in Atlantic City.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  REALIST ARTIST


Defenses Face Test In Denver
LEAD: The two most dangerous quarterbacks remaining in the National Football League playoffs perform here Sunday in the American Conference championship game.


Perspectives: Land Auctions; Buying City Parcels on Must-Build Terms
LEAD: THE public auction - that tried and true method of getting city-owned tax-foreclosed land back into private ownership - is alive and well in New York City, but it has acquired a new wrinkle.


The Lessons Of a Hospital Stay Abroad
LEAD: NO ONE, I thought at the time, could prepare adequately for the kind of terror that grabbed me when I awoke abruptly at 5 A.M. in the Tel Aviv Sheraton to find that I was hemorrhaging internally.
Today, I realize that with careful planning for a possible medical emergency, I might have avoided the panic.


Despite Disparities, Tirozzi Is Pleased by Tests' Results
LEAD: CONNECTICUT still has a long way to go in reducing disparities between urban and suburban districts on basic skills test scores, according to Education Commissioner Gerald N. Tirozzi.


Jazz
LEAD: Compatible improvisers who stick together, year after year, develop camaraderie and quick reflexes that can't be built any other way.
A long-running band doesn't need conventions or formulas; like family members who can finish one another's sentences, they can skip the basics and get down to deeper communications.


The Theory Gap on the Trade Gap
LEAD: THE persistent failure of the cheaper dollar to significantly improve the United States trade balance not only signals problems for Administration economic policy.
It is a puzzle - and increasingly an embarrassment - for an economics profession that predicted almost unanimously that a cheap dollar would bring dramatic trade improvement.


Trends in Art History
LEAD: To the Editor:


A CASE OF COLIC
LEAD: It was a thrill to see our son's article on the About Men page.
It was also a source of perverse satisfaction to me, as I well remember that he, too, was a colicky baby who drove us to distraction for a time, as we paced the floor with that same feeling of helplessness.
There is some justice in the world.


Brady's Market Plan
LEAD: The Brady report called for changes in the financial markets.
Among other things, the commission recommended unified margin requirements, better clearing mechanisms, a coordination of existing ''circuit breakers'' and the establishment of a market coordination agency.
But what kind of future does the Brady Plan have, and can it really fix the market?


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''Nobody wants to play now.
I've been a player all my life, and I don't want to play.
We have no control over our destiny.''


ST. JOHN'S SURVIVES BY 71-70
LEAD: In an evening of Big East Conference upsets, Seton Hall came close to doing what it had not managed in many years: beating St.
John's on its home court.


MY SIX YEARS ON THE COUCH
LEAD: The article by Dan Wakefield suggests to me a modestly successful analysis as opposed to a failed analysis.
Mr.
Wakefield's analysts withstood his self-destructive attempts to get them to intervene and become the involved parents he lacked (or felt he lacked).
Because the analysts resisted his attempts at emotional blackmail, Mr.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Mahopac, N.Y.  $272,500
21 Florence Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 17-year-old frame/brick raised ranch; eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, cul de sac, .96 acre; taxes $3,420.
Rye, N.Y.  $257,500
8 Glen Avenue
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 61-year-old stucco Tudor/Norman; new eat-in kitchen with quarry-tiled floor, study; taxes $2,500.


O.A.S. Adopts Rule to Battle Trafficking in Drugs
LEAD: The Organization of American States unanimously adopted a compromise resolution late Friday in which the member countries reaffirmed their commitment to wage a vigorous war against drug traffickers.


BUSINESS FORUM: Factories, Services and Speed; Just-in-Time, Right for Retail
LEAD: ALTHOUGH just-in-time systems were once used exclusively by large manufacturers, a wide range of non-manufacturing companies are beginning to use such systems successfully to increase their competitiveness and extend their geographic reach.
In my judgment, just-in-time techniques applied to retailing and services offer benefits for small and large companies as dramatic as those they offer manufacturing.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: If Jack Clark is healthy, he provides the Yankees the right-handed power they have missed since Thurman Munson.
But to win the pennant, the Yankees still need a right-handed starting pitcher.
STAN BARBER
Bronx


Bonn Pledges Aid to Poland in Stability Drive
LEAD: West Germany has pledged to explore new economic aid to Poland, a move that evidently reflects growing concern in Bonn that economic turmoil could produce social instability in Eastern Europe.


END OF AN ILLUSION
LEAD: Palestinian protests over the last five weeks have brought about at least one profound change in Israeli thinking.
People no longer believe that it will be easy to go on occupying the West Bank and Gaza.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  I LIKE THE MUSIC  By Leah Komaiko.
Illustrated by Barbara Westman.
Unpaged.
New York: Harper &amp; Row. $12.95. (Ages 4 to 8)


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We recently installed a brass-framed glass door over the opening to our brick fireplace.
Because the brass frame is very straight and the brick against which it fits is rough and bumpy, there are gaps where smoke seeps out into the room.
We stuffed small strips of fiberglass insulation into these cracks, but some smoke still gets through and bits of fiberglass keep falling out.


The Winter Kitchen Offers Fish Staples
LEAD: FISH cookery in winter turns to the skillet and the oven, rather than the grill.
As a result, thick steaks of swordfish and tuna are low on the shopping list.


Venturing Back Alone To a City Once Shared
LEAD:  I want to love you  As long as the world is a world,  Oh, Fiorenza,  Until the stones go flying away.


DR. KATHERINE MIRIAM HESS WEDS KENNETH M. TALLERING
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
Katherine Miriam Hess, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Hess of New York, to Kenneth Marc Tallering, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Tallering of Great Neck, L.I., took place last evening at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck and Bolton Landing, N.Y.
Rabbis Robert Widom and Gunther Hirschberg officiated.


How They Tore Hutton to Pieces
LEAD: ON a windy, bitterly cold day last week, Robert P. Rittereiser sat in his eerily still office on the 28th floor of E. F. Hutton &amp; Company's year-old headquarters.
In the plush offices all around him, the telephones were silent.
Sunlight poured in on dozens of empty, tufted-leather chairs.
Everything was clean, orderly, an office seemingly poised for an important meeting of Wall Street dealmakers.


NAOMI R. HABER IS MARRIED TO JOEL BARRY RUDEN
LEAD: The marriage of Naomi R. Haber, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Haber of New York, to Joel Barry Rudin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Rudin of Bayside, Queens, took place last evening at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Rabbi Lavey Derby officiated.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: Jack Clark should prove to be the Yankees' best designated hitter since Don Baylor.
If they do not get overconfident, the Yankees, with Clark and company, should be strong contenders for third  PETER MOUNT
Secaucus, N.J.


DIANE MCFERRIN TO WED
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Ralph W. McFerrin, U.S.A.F., retired, and Mrs.
McFerrin of Kansas City, Mo., have announced the engagement of their daughter Diane Elizabeth McFerrin to Gerald Harlan Peters, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Peters of Manhasset, L.I.
Miss McFerrin, a graduate of the University of Missouri, is a marketing manager for the Rosenbluth Travel Agency in Philadelphia, where her fiance is an associate with the Susquehanna Investment Group.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  Earning the (Ice) Blue Belt ''Eee-yaah,'' the barefooted Long Islander gasped as his toes sank into the snow. ''Eeeeeee-yoooowwwww'' came the collective roar as 62 more bare feet hit the icy whiteness.


Violin: Sylvia Rosenberg
LEAD: GEORGE PERLE'S Second Sonata for Solo Violin is, at its best, a work of expressive vigor, overlong by just a bit maybe, but calling for a performer who can project dissonant lines of urgent, nervous energy.
The 20-minute piece from 1963 found a worthy exponent in the person of Sylvia Rosenberg, who gave the belated local premiere of Mr.


Examining King's Nonviolent Resistance
LEAD: AS we remember Dr.
Martin Luther King's achievements, we readily focus upon his courageous crusades that attained extensive desegregation and contributed to the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act and the 1965 Voting Rights Act.
But what were the sources of the philosophy of nonviolence that directed his crusades?


Ice Dancers Who Spin Tales of Romance skates.
LEAD: YOU DIDN'T NEED TO KNOW A time step from a soft shoe when you watched Ginger Rogers and Fred Astaire.
And you won't need to tell a death spiral from a flying camel or any other picturesquely named skating move when the British skaters Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean arrive in town Wednesday with the Ice


Artists Present Other Artists
LEAD: THE show now at Art/Place, the co-operative at the Southport railroad station, is ''Gallery Artists Choose Other Artists.'' Twenty guests are present - presumably one per member - although the observer has no way of knowing who chose whom.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  BURY THE DEAD  By Peter Carter. 374 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $14.95. (Ages 12 to 16)


ALEXANDRA MEREDITH TO MARRY IN MARCH
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Meredith of Pennington, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alexandra Meigs Meredith to Ward Shaffer Taggart, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Taggart of Dallas.
A March 26 wedding is planned.


WHAT WE DON'T KNOW ABOUT NUCLEAR POLICY
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Winter Kitchen Offers Fish Staples
LEAD: FISH cookery in winter turns to the skillet and the oven, rather than the grill.
As a result, thick steaks of swordfish and tuna are low on the shopping list.


PRAISING HIS NAME IN THE FIRE
LEAD:  KIDDUSH HASHEM  Jewish Religious and Cultural Life in Poland During the Holocaust.
By Shimon Huberband.
Translated by David E. Fishman.
Edited by Jeffrey S. Gurock and Robert S. Hirt. 474 pp.
New Jersey/New York: KTAV Publishing House/ Yeshiva University Press. $35.


MOVIE
LEAD:  Bombay Talkie  Starring Jennifer Kendal, Shashi Kapoor and Zia Mohyeddi.
Directed by James Ivory. 1970.
Embassy Home Entertainment. 115 minutes. $39.95.


CHIRAC, TRAILING IN POLLS, DECLARES CANDIDACY
LEAD: Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, the conservative who has headed France's Government since March 1986, today announced his candidacy in the presidential elections this spring.


Clipper Sinks at Boston Pier
LEAD: A 144-foot clipper believed to the nation's last working square rigger of her size sank Thursday night while docked for maintenance work, officials said Friday.
The 80-year-old Regina Maris was undergoing routine maintenance at the Boston Marine Works when she sank in about 30 feet of water, said Dusty Rhodes, a spokeswoman for Quincy's Marina Bay, where the vessel was usually docked.


Sunday Observer; Polls Apart
LEAD: THOUSANDS OF POLL fans, learning of my retirement, beg me to publish my memoirs of the early days of polling.


LOOKING BACK AT 'LOOKING BACKWARD': WE HAVE SEEN THE FUTURE AND IT DIDN'T WORK
LEAD: NEAR the end of the last century Edward Bellamy wrote ''Looking Backward'' - a ''fanciful romance,'' as he called it - in which he risked daring predictions about life at the end of our own century.
We are still reading his durable classic, but time has revealed to us what it hid from him: the appalling implications of his prophecies.


Paris
LEAD: To the Editor: Having recently returned from a week in Paris, we have been telling friends about our tour of the catacombs, which was not unlike that described in Frederick Turner's article ''The Worlds Beneath Paris'' (Travel, Oct. 25).


CONTENTIOUS BUT CATALYTIC
LEAD:  HITCHCOCK AND SELZNICK  The Rich and Strange Collaboration of Alfred Hitchcock and David O. Selznick in Hollywood.
By Leonard J. Leff.
Illustrated. 383 pp.
New York: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $22.50.


After 20 Years of Infighting, the Democrats Grow Closer
LEAD: BEFORE the Democratic candidates for President gathered in debate here last week, people figured they knew what would be said about the deficit and arms control and welfare reform.
What people were wondering was, would any one in the pack go after Gary Hart on the character issue?


IN TV AT THE MOMENT, 'DIGITAL' MAY NOT ADD UP
LEAD: WHAT SNAKE OIL was to folk medicine in the last century, the word ''digital'' is to home electronics in our era.
Like the reptilian elixir, or traditional incantations of ''abracadabra,'' that word is deemed to possess miraculous powers.
Anything to which the term digital can be attached is supposed to be either perfect already or getting there fast.


Corrosion of Bridge's Cable Is Called Limited
LEAD: Engineers and transportation officials, seeking to determine the future of the aging Williamsburg Bridge, uncovered the bridge's most corroded cable yesterday and pronounced it not as badly damaged as they had feared.


Verbatim; Reductions
LEAD: ' We must, perhaps for the first time since the late 1940's, seriously debate the posture of U.S. military forces around the world. '
James H. Webb Jr.
Secretary of the Navy, suggesting that American forces, especially in Europe, could be cut.


More Than Ever, Gershwin Songs Are Here to Stay
LEAD: IT WOULDN'T BE SURPRISING if future pop historians, looking back on 1987, expressed more interest in the accelerating popularity of George Gershwin than in Michael Jackson's changing physiognomy or Bruce Springsteen's romantic maturation.


U.N. Aide in Middle as Israelis Shoot
LEAD: A senior United Nations official, sent to investigate conditions in Palestinian refugee districts, was caught up in a hail of rubber bullets and tear gas today as the Israeli Army chased youthful protesters.


The Co-op 'Chill'
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Buck Stops
LEAD: Over the last two years a 23-year-old New York investor named David Bloom collected $10 million from 100 friends and associates to play the stock market.
But last week authorities charged that Mr.
Bloom's favorite investment was himself.
They said he spent most of the money on such things as an art collection, a beach house, a condo, an Aston Martin and contributions to Duke University, his alma mater.


Army Is Trying to Save Half Of Plan for New Helicopters
LEAD: The Army has asked Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci to authorize continued development of a new tactical helicopter in exchange for delaying similar work on a model for transporting troops, Pentagon sources say.


Taxes and Outlays: Scenario in Works
LEAD: GOVERNOR KEAN touched nearly all the bases in his State of the State address last week, but omitted tax and spending reforms, probably because the working script for those items is being written by others.


Fire at Russian Palace
LEAD: A fire broke out in the 18th century Yekaterinsky Palace on Friday night, slightly damaging its gilded throne hall, the Communist Party newspaper Pravda reported today.
The palace in the town of Pushkin, near Leningrad, is considered one of the finest examples of Russian Baroque architecture.


'School for Wives' At the Whole Theatre
LEAD: ''EACH man has his own design for wedded bliss.'' So says Arnolphe, a would-be husband determined not to be duped, in ''The School for Wives'' at the Whole Theatre.


Orpheus to Make Two Appearances
LEAD: BY next weekend, the concert calendar will have returned to its busy preholiday pace, and choices will have to be made from among orchestral concerts, chamber recitals or folk music.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: You just betcha.
Who needs more pitchers?
These bats will take care of those arms.
MINNI WALKER
New York


Fashion; SUIT SEARCHING
LEAD: IT'S THE JACKET THAT MAKES THE SALE.
THE moment a woman slips into the top half of a suit, she sees herself taking on a new shape.
This season, her shoulders are still jaunty, though more rounded than squared.
The seaming makes her look at once thinner and curvier.
The elongated lapels or lower openings suggest that her neck is admirably longer.


Taiwan Imprisons 2 Backing Independence
LEAD: A Taiwanese court today imposed long prison terms on two dissidents who were convicted of sedition for advocating Taiwan's independence from China.


Nurse and Teacher Licensing Under Fire
LEAD: THE rush to fill vacant nursing and teaching positions is resulting in what critics contend are policies and proposals that will lower the licensing standards for people entering the fields.


Lakshmi Jha, Indian Economist And Former Envoy, Is Dead at 74
LEAD: Lakshmi Kant Jha, one of India's most distinguished economists and an architect of the country's recent economic liberalization, died of kidney failure today.
He was 74 years old.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We recently installed a brass-framed glass door over the opening to our brick fireplace.
Because the brass frame is very straight and the brick against which it fits is rough and bumpy, there are gaps where smoke seeps out into the room.
We stuffed small strips of fiberglass insulation into these cracks, but some smoke still gets through and bits of fiberglass keep falling out.


From Usher to Rozelle
LEAD: Dear Pete:


MICHELLE CRUZ IS ENGAGED
LEAD: The engagement of Michelle Marie Cruz to Mark Bingham, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Bingham of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
David Cruz of Great Neck, L.I.
Miss Cruz, a graduate of the University of Colorado and the Fordham University School of Law, is an associate in the New York law firm of Shea &amp; Gould.


A FEW OF THE SEASONAL PROJECTS
LEAD: STUDY seed and nursery catalogues and place orders promptly to be sure of getting first choices.
Stock bird feeders daily.
Bring in a pot of hardy bulbs from the coldframe, water gradually and place in sunlight to force flowers.
Study pruning manuals to brush up on methods for trimming back grapevines, fruit trees and other dormant plants, weather permitting.


Excerpts From Communique of 5 Presidents
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the communique issued by the Presidents of Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala and Costa Rica after their meeting on the regional peace treaty, which is officially called the Esquipulas II Treaty:


What's Doing in Rio de Janeiro
LEAD: THERE is much more to celebrate in busy and sensuous Rio de Janeiro than generous beaches, exotic night life and the string of luminous baccanalia that climax with Carnival.


Canadian Team Wins
LEAD: The United States Olympic hockey team, testing itself against tougher competition after an idyllic schedule in which it routed collegiate squads, today lost its second consecutive game to Canada's Olympic team.
Sean Burke of Canada made 50 saves in a 5-1 Canadian victory at the Joe Louis Arena.


Census Count: 42 Eagles
LEAD: The annual census of bald and golden eagles has counted 36 birds in the Quabbin Reservoir so far and at least six others elsewhere in the state, according to Massachusetts wildlife officials.
Bird counters said this week that this year's total was slightly below those of the past two winters, when more than 50 birds were counted.


Jersey Casino Revenues Grew 9.4% Last Year
LEAD: The revenues of the Atlantic City casino industry continued to grow about 10 percent last year, despite the addition of a 12th casino to a market limited by a lack of scheduled air service.


Jazz and Fiction
LEAD: To the Editor:


SUSAN R. SOLOW PLANS TO WED MARVIN DUBIN
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel S. Solow of Brooklyn of the engagement of their daughter, Susan Renee Solow, to Marvin Dubin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Dubin of Howard Beach, Queens.


MISS BIGELOW PLANS TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
David Bigelow of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cynthia Ruth Bigelow to Thomas Moore O'Hara, the son of Raymond O'Hara of Norwalk, Conn., and the late Mary Ellen O'Hara.
A September wedding is planned.


429 THOUGHTS ON WHAT CAN FILL THE SPACE OF WESTWAY
LEAD: THE New York real estate market, perhaps even more than nature, abhors a vacuum, and one of the biggest vacuums in the city is the 4.2-mile stretch of Hudson River waterfront between 44th Street and Battery Park City.
Though last August Governor Cuomo and Mayor Koch announced their support of a roadway and esplanade, which will succeed the Westway proposal defeated in 1985, no comprehensive plan exists for the adjoining ragged edge of water, piers and land amassed during the Westway years.


THE WORLD: The Stinger Missile; HELPING TO CHANGE THE COURSE OF A WAR
LEAD: WHAT the longbow was to English yeomen and the V-2 rocket was to the Germans in World War II, the Stinger antiaircraft missile is to today's American-backed guerrilla fighters.


FOR FIGHT GAME, A SOLUTION TO AN AGE-OLD PROBLEM
LEAD: WITH two leviathans from the past (Larry Holmes and George Foreman) once again rumbling round a boxing ring, I've been keeping a good idea on the back burner.
However, if Mike Tyson readily dispatches ex-champion Holmes in Atlantic City Friday night, things will be put into proper perspective and we can go ahead as planned.


Big Plays A Factor In N.F.C.
LEAD: Between them, the Washington Redskins and the surprising Minnesota Vikings have four starting quarterbacks, two big-play receivers who have emerged from the shadows, two strong defensive lines and one cornerback with a pain in the ribs.


What Is a Wife? A Mix of Peccadilloes and Passions
LEAD: JUST beyond the senior prom and the soft-spoken words ''I will'' is a wonderful creature called a wife.
Joke all you want about them, wives are the best things that happen to men.
They come in all heights and weights, with straight or wavy hair, with green or blue or brown eyes, with freckles and without, but somehow the one you have is the nicest combination of all.


East Europe's Links to Foreign Creditors Strained
LEAD: Throughout Eastern Europe, an economic crisis is placing increasingly heavy strains on the region's already difficult relations with foreign creditors.


A Tax Worry Adds To Texaco's Burdens
LEAD: Texaco might face a $6.5 billion bill for back taxes relating to the pricing of Saudi Arabian oil from 1979 to 1981.
The Internal Revenue Service would not comment, but Texaco said it was possible such a claim would be filed in the company's bankruptcy proceedings.
Texaco's effort to get out of bankruptcy was already facing enormous expenses, principally a $3 billion payment to Pennzoil to settle their celebrated legal dispute.


ON THE EDGE OF A PERILOUS FOREST
LEAD:  A HOUSE OF TREES  By Joan Colebrook. 256 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $18.95.


PATRICIA AYCOCK TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Patricia Ann Aycock to Christopher Stephen Baker, a son of Linda Baker of Point Lookout, L.I., and the late James E. Baker, has been announced by the future bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
William G. Aycock of Mebane, N.C.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A headline on Dec. 20 with a Travel Advisory report misstated the scope of the Hertz Euraildrive Escape.
The program covers 16 countries, not France alone.


CARTING OFF THEIR FAITH
LEAD:  TIME WITHOUT BELLS  By Horst Bienek.
Translated by Ralph R. Read. 338 pp.
New York: Atheneum. $19.95.


SARAH BERNSTEIN TO WED IN JUNE
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Bernstein of Philadelphia have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Rachel Bernstein to Ian O. Lesser, the son of Mortimer Lesser of New York and the stepson of Henrietta Lesser.
The couple plan to marry in June.


WHEN PLAYERS ARE METHODICALLY GROUND DOWN
LEAD: WHAT is the right moment to terminate a game, whether by resigning or by offering a draw?


New Mafia Drive Seen in Sicily Ex-Mayor's Death
LEAD: A former Mayor of Palermo was shot to death on a crowded city street this week in what officials say is a signal that the Mafia has taken the offensive again, less than a month after a mass trial convicted 338 defendants of Mafia crimes.


Baseball Notebook; Some Clubs Need More Power Against Left-Handers
LEAD: THE Toronto Blue Jays failed to win the American League East championship last year because they failed to win any of their last seven games of the season.
That disaster, however, could have been less disastrous if, during the season, they had won a few more games in which left-handed pitchers started against them.


Bookshelf
LEAD:  Additional titles of interest:


Installing a Drywall Ceiling
LEAD: INSTALLING panels of drywall, also known as plasterboard, gypsum wallboard or Sheetrock, overhead to create a ceiling is seldom a cinch.
However, the job can be made much easier by employing some of the strategies and tools used by professionals.


200 Workers Vote to Strike At a Connecticut Steel Plant
LEAD: Two hundred workers at Thames Valley Steel Corporation, one of the city's largest businesses, voted Friday to strike after the current contract expires at 12:01 A.M.
Monday.


Learning How to Run a Small Business
LEAD: GEORGIA ROELOF was there.
So was Risa Bell, Carolyn Davis and Paulette Ensign.
All of them had paid $100 to attend a conference at which they hoped to learn how to manage better their own small businesses.
The daylong conference, sponsored by the Entrepreneurial Center of Manhattanville College in Purchase last


Installing a Drywall Ceiling
LEAD: INSTALLING panels of drywall, also known as plasterboard, gypsum wallboard or Sheetrock, overhead to create a ceiling is seldom a cinch.
However, the job can be made much easier by employing some of the strategies and tools used by professionals.


Executive Ethics
LEAD: To the Editor:


BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 17, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
8
THE TOMMYKNOCKERS, by Stephen King.
(Putnam, $19.95.) Two writers' zealous attempt to
unearth mysterious artifacts creates nightmares
in a Maine village.
2
4
11
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom
Wolfe.


CONNECTICUT Q&amp;A: Frank D. Gawle; 'Teaching Is Something You Live'
LEAD: THIS month, Frank D. Gawle begins his official duties as the Connecticut Teacher of the Year.
He is also marking his 30th year as a teacher, 28 of which he has spent teaching social studies at Enfield High School.


Clint Eastwood's Riff on Charlie 'Bird' Parker
LEAD: WEARING NIKE RUNNING shoes and an expression of casual glee, Clint Eastwood stepped into 1943.


CBS Dismisses Snyder
LEAD: CBS Sports dismissed Jimmy (the Greek) Snyder yesterday, a day after the veteran commentator made derogatory racial comments about athletes.


Dance
LEAD: The poetic and the rowdy will be celebrated at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street) this week when Jazzdance: The Danny Buraczeski Dance Company performs in a program of new and recent work.
Over the past decade, Mr.
Buraczeski has set himself the task of exploring and mining jazz dance, and he has stretched the boundaries of that seemingly limited form of dance with contagious wonder and good cheer.


Mondrian on the Path to the Abstract
LEAD: IT IS UNUSUAL FOR A DEALER TO put together an exhibition on a modern master that seems indispensable.
Yet Sidney Janis has done just that.
The 44 paintings, drawings and gouaches at the Sidney Janis gallery through Feb. 13 focus on the early figurative work and the ideas and feelings that Piet Mondrian wanted to distill and synthesize in his abstraction.


Maryland Tops Duke; Oklahoma Is Upset
LEAD: A slam-follow by Derrick Lewis with 24 seconds left broke a tie, and Rudy Archer added a free throw as Maryland upset Duke, 72-69, in an Atlantic Coast Conference game tonight.


JESSICA WAXMAN WEDS REID NAGLE
LEAD: Federal Hall in New York was the setting last evening for the wedding of Jessica Waxman, the daughter of Dorothy Waxman and Avrom S. Waxman, both of New York, to Reid Nagle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. W. Nagle of Tequesta, Fla.
Judge Richard M. Palmer of Family Court in Brooklyn officiated.


DOES CLARK MAKE THE YANKS THE FAVORITES?
LEAD: Steinbrenner has betrayed Yankee fans, once again.
He's merely seeking to increase his turnstile profits.
Clark would only help the Yankees if he revealed a latent ability to pitch a 15-victory season, or if he accidently mistook Steinbrenner's head for a screwball in batting practice.
H.
M.


Surgery for Stanley
LEAD: THE pitcher who has saved more Boston Red Sox games than anyone else, Bob Stanley, was hoping that doctors at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester had saved the day for him after four hours of surgery on his pitching hand Friday.
Stanley, a right-hander with 123 saves in his 11 years with the Red Sox, was listed in good condition yesterday following the surgery on his hand to repair tendons and digital nerves that were cut when he fell while taking out the trash at his home


Rangers Fail in Rally
LEAD: Michel Bergeron had gotten out of a hospital bed and brought himself, weary and medicated, back to his team.
To his dismay tonight, he found them where he had left them.
The Rangers, often within reach of victory, are still in last place in their division.


Bigger Deficits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''They're interested only in famous brand names like Brooks Brothers, Ralph Lauren, Tiffany; they aren't interested in American souvenirs.''
- Katsuhiko Narisada,
of the Japan National
Tourist Organization,
on foreign shoppers
in the U.S.  [ 22:2. ]


80's Movies Take the Easy Route
LEAD: LIKE SO MANY FILMS OF THE 1980'S, THE GOLDIE Hawn comedy ''Overboard'' offers something for everyone.
To begin with, it presents the amusing spectacle of Miss Hawn impersonating a viciously bad-tempered heiress, striking terror into everyone she meets.
After this satirical high-life phase, the film moves into its low-rent period, with an amnesiac Miss Hawn trapped in the squalid home of a carpenter (played by Kurt Russell), who intends to teach her a lesson.


WHAT'S NEW IN CONSUMER ELECTRONICS
LEAD: IN the annals of consumer electronics, 1987 will go down as the year in which sales of video cassette recorders stopped growing.
Now, beset by the falling dollar and shrinking profit margins, the industry is looking for its next blockbuster product.


Plotting Against U.S. Brings a 7-Year Term
LEAD: A man who pleaded guilty to conspiring to overthrow the United States Government as a member of a radical group accused of nearly 20 bombings has been sentenced to seven years in prison and fined $20,000.


Social Events
LEAD: Achievers and Royal Gala  Honoring Role Models  Jan. 19 - Arthur Ashe and Marilyn Horne are among well-known achievers who came up the hard way and who will be honored as role models at the ninth annual Sidewalks of New York fund-raising dinner of Big Brothers of New York City in the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria.


ONE LIFE WAS NOT ENOUGH
LEAD:  CHATTERTON  By Peter Ackroyd. 234 pp. New York: Grove Press. $17.95.


Hoyt to Allenwood
LEAD: THINGS might have taken a turn for the better for LaMarr Hoyt, the former Cy Young Award winner whose pitching career came to a sad end last January when he was released by the San Diego Padres after a succession of drug arrests in 1986.


Holiday Tomorrow
LEAD: The birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., actually Jan. 15, will be observed tomorrow.
Following are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post Offices: Special delivery and Express Mail delivery only; offices are open in Manhattan at 25 Broadway, 90 Church St., 909 3d Ave., Grand Central Terminal, 33d St.


Aboard the Andalusian Express
LEAD: AS the Andalusian Express wends its way through the southern Spanish province for which it is named, the beauty and splendor of the region unfold as if the pages of a photo album of the American South and West were being slowly turned.


ON CHOOSING FILM
LEAD: IT'S a scene I see almost every time I go into a camera store.
Harry, the hapless customer, walks up to the counter and asks for a roll of film. ''What kind?'' the clerk queries. ''I dunno, the kind that makes color prints,'' Harry replies, acting as if he's on an errand for his wife.


A Widow Reflects on Her Difficult Adjustment to a New Life
LEAD: TWO years have gone by since my husband died, and I have just realized that I no longer wince when I refer to myself as a widow.
Looking back now, I see there have been other changes in my feelings during my difficult adjustment to a new life.
I've experienced shock, anger, grief, depression, guilt, doubt, pain, regrets and loneliness.


LOUISE M. PURCELL TO WED GLENN EDWARD HEMMERLE
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Purcell of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Louise Mary Purcell to Glenn Edward Hemmerle, the son of Mrs.
John Hemmerle of Rocky Mount, N.C., and the late Mr.
Hemmerle.
An April wedding is planned.


U.S. Ends Evidence Presentation in Westies Trial
LEAD: Federal prosecutors have finished presenting their evidence in a long racketeering trial involving several grisly murders attributed to a gang known as the Westies.


ITALY DEBATES ITS 45 YEARS OF AVERSION TO FASCISM
LEAD: SINCE Mussolini's fall in 1943, anti-Fascism has been a national creed in Italy, extolled, institutionalized and politically manipulated.
Only recently has anyone argued that it is obsolete.
The debate has raged since Italy's most prominent historian of the Fascist period, Prof.
Renzo De Felice, said in a newspaper interview last month that ''the great alternative'' between Fascism and anti-Fascism ''no longer makes any sense either in the public conscience or in the reality of everyday political struggles.


CRIME
LEAD: For a first novel, PUSH, MEET SHOVE by Peter Barthelme (St. Martin's, $14.95) moves with unusual confidence.
The writing is assured and relaxed, with snappy, sophisticated dialogue and convincing characterizations.
Mr.
Barthelme is also on secure ground, in that he is an advertising man in Texas writing about an advertising man in


Christmas
LEAD: To the Editor: It's nice to be remembered.
Especially at Christmastime.
And that's what Virginia Van der Veer Hamilton did in her article ''Leaving Home for Christmas'' (Travel, Dec. 13).


Abe Waters; Textile Executive, 77
LEAD: Abe Waters, a textile executive, died of cancer Wednesday at his home in Lauderhill, Fla.
He was 77 years old.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE TECHNOLOGY WAR: A Case for Competitiveness.
By David H. Brandin and Michael A. Harrison. (Wiley-Interscience, $24.95.) Information may be to the age of technology as oil was to the industrial era: the fuel running the world's economies.
David H. Brandin, president of Strategic Technologies Inc., and Michael A.


MOVIES
LEAD:  My Name Is Nobody  Starring Henry Fonda, Terence Hill.
Directed by Tonino Valerii, 1974.
Kartes Video Communications. 115 minutes. $19.95.


Antiques Preview; WINTER'S GLITTER
LEAD: NO GATHERING OF ANTIQUES is more eagerly anticipated in New York than the Winter Antiques Show, which opens with a series of preview parties on Friday and runs through Jan. 31 at the Seventh Regiment Armory, at Park Avenue and 67th Street.
Now in its 34th year, it is one of the city's smartest social charities (proceeds benefit the East Side House Settlement in the South


BROKER ENGAGED TO MISS WINGATE
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Paul D. Wingate of Hamden, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Joy Wingate, to Joel M. Hausman, the son of Mrs.
Irving Hausman of San Francisco and the late Rabbi Hausman.
An April wedding is planned.


FOREIGN MONEY, U.S. FEARS
LEAD: Isn't progress wonderful (''Foreign Money, U.S. Fears,'' by Martin and Susan Tolchin, Dec. 13)?
In just a little over 200 years we have progressed from being a colony whose economic and political life was governed from across the ocean, to an expanding free nation, to the world's greatest political and economic power and the world's largest creditor nation, and, in the last six Reagan years, to being the world's largest debtor nation, with an economy increasingly owned and controlled by foreign investors from across two oceans.


Double Vision for Just $280
LEAD: UNTIL now P.I.P. has hardly made a squeak. But that could change soon.


Jazz and Fiction
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Lake Placid Landmark, in Ashes, to Rise Anew
LEAD: As smoke from a fire in the historic Mirror Lake Inn hung above this village Monday morning, the inn's owners, Edwin and Lisa Weibrecht, arranged an unusual shopping expedition.


Vermont Citizen Legislature Gets Used to the Fast Lane
LEAD: As a chill settled over the Vermont capital a couple of weeks ago 180 farmers, lawyers, homemakers, insurance salesmen, car dealers and teachers settled down to what is certain to be the most trying 15 weeks of their year.


Mother Is Ruled Not Liable For Party Given by Her Son
LEAD: Parents cannot be held liable for all their children's actions, a magistrate said Tuesday in rejecting a misdemeanor charge against a woman whose teen-age son was charged with allowing minors to drink at a party at their house while she was away.


Police Are Monitoring a New Drug
LEAD: LAW-ENFORCEMENT officials are trying to combat a new form of cocaine that they say is deadlier, more addictive and cheaper than crack.


Tornado Toll at 59 in 1987
LEAD: Tornado deaths rose to 59 in the United States last year, nearly quadruple the toll of a year earlier, the National Weather Service says.
While tornado-related deaths rebounded from the record low of 15 posted in 1986, last year's total still fell short of the long-term average of 90 fatalities, the agency said Thursday.


Brunch With a River View
LEAD: THE OYSTER CLUB, a new restaurant in Cos Cob, doesn't just look familiar, it is familiar.
We failed to identify the locale driving into the Palmer Point office-condominium complex where it is situated, but the view of the Mianus River rang a faint bell.


CANDIDATES TAKE TO THE STUMP, THEN AND NOW
LEAD: To the Editor:


N.F.L. Cardinals Get Stadium Lease
LEAD: The Arizona Board of Regents unanimously approved a 10-year lease today that would permit the St.
Louis Cardinals to play their National Football League games next season in 70,491-seat Sun Devil Stadium.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD: CONCERT FOR DR. KING


Installing a Drywall Ceiling
LEAD: INSTALLING panels of drywall, also known as plasterboard, gypsum wallboard or Sheetrock, overhead to create a ceiling is seldom a cinch.
However, the job can be made much easier by employing some of the strategies and tools used by professionals.


'Sandwich' Adults: Doing Double Duty
LEAD: I AM a member of the ''sandwich'' generation.
I am a parent who has suddenly found herself caring for own parent.
Sometimes I feel as if I am trapped in the middle, like the cream of the Oreo cookie, with no way out of a situation for which I was totally unprepared.


Talking: Rentals; Knowing The Laws That Apply
LEAD: EVEN though the rents of well over a million apartments in New York City are governed by rent control or rent stabilization, hundreds of apartments do not have to abide by those regulations.


ROSCOE MITHCELL'S MUSIC KNOWS NO CATEGORY
LEAD: ROSCOE MITCHELL'S ''FLOW of Things'' (Black Saint, LP and cassette) and ''Four Compositions'' (Lovely Music Ltd., compact disk only) present contrasting views of a complex and frequently misunderstood musical sensibility.
On ''The Flow of Things,'' Mr.
Mitchell, a saxophonist and founder of the Art Ensemble of Chicago, is backed by a trio of piano, bass and drums; the album is a probing exploration of musical processes pioneered by the late John


Free Trade Pact Spurs Debate in Canada
LEAD: Canada's free trade agreement with the United States is provoking a spirited debate unusual for this normally placid nation.


Retelling Blizzard of '88 in Pictures, Prose and Poetry
LEAD: THE mood on Wall Street was glum; only 2,000 shares changed hands that Tuesday.
Retail sales took a beating; a B. Altman's store saw only one costumer all day.
Food prices soared; milk went from 2 cents to more than 10 cents a quart within three days.


COORDINATE, DON'T STRANGLE, MARKETS
LEAD: While the New York Stock Exchange scrambles to tame the exaggerations of computerized program trading, President Reagan's task force report looks elsewhere for the causes of the October crash.
Traditional markets for stocks, and the newer markets for stock futures and options, the commission argues, are now inextricably linked.


HOW CIVIL RIGHTS CAME TO BE A 'SPECIAL INTEREST'
LEAD: IN his crusade for the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. said the evil of race discrimination was ''so great that the Negro cannot fight it alone.''


Creating a Climate for Growth
LEAD: THE debate rages clear out to Montauk.
Where is Long Island going and what will it look like when it gets there?
The economy, our government, education, transportation and taxation are just a handful of the issues that keep popping up like targets on a pistol range.


Meese Meetings Are Disclosed
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, under investigation for his stock holdings in the telephone industry, apparently met with top executives of two regional Bell companies while his financial manager held $10,000 worth of his telephone stock.


Sheik Reported to Link Reagan and Hostages
LEAD: The Sunday Express quoted a Moslem cleric as saying in an interview that kidnappers holding foreign hostages in Lebanon will not consider terms for their release until President Reagan leaves office, but the cleric said in Beirut today that the report was ''fabricated.''


BROWNS FALL, 38-33, AFTER LATE FUMBLE
LEAD: A year later, the Browns fell nine feet short of creating their own heroics in the American Conference championship game.
The Broncos again toppled them and once more will go to the Super Bowl.


Martha Graham, 93, Is Hospitalized for Tests
LEAD: Martha Graham, the 93-year-old modern-dance choreographer, is in the hospital to undergo tests, according to Ron Protas, associate director of the Martha Graham Dance Company.
Mr.
Protas said last night that Miss Graham had experienced dizziness in the afternoon and that they had made the decision together for her to enter the hospital.


Pate Wins Shortened Event
LEAD: Steve Pate became the winner of the 36th MONY Tournament of Champions today when a Pacific storm with 40-mile-an-hour winds and heavy rains washed out the final round of the year's first PGA Tour event.


Concessions Insufficient, Nicaragua Cleric Says
LEAD: Miguel Cardinal Obando y Bravo, who has been serving as a mediator in Nicaragua's civil conflict, said today that political concessions made by the Sandinista Government this weekend were encouraging but insufficient.


BALANCING WORKOUT WITH FUN ON SKATES
LEAD: It is cold, very cold and the pond is frozen solid.
The neighborhood children push aside the snow, someone builds a fire and soon the ice is covered with skaters gliding to and fro, their faces reddened from the cold and exertion.


Joseph May Serve Egypt Once Again
LEAD: To the Editor:


James Macandrew, Leader in New York In Educational TV
LEAD: James F. Macandrew, a pioneer in educational broadcasting who helped build New York City's public radio and television systems, died of a heart attack Friday at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 82 years old and lived in Garden City, L.I.


Master Scout
LEAD: As a baseball scout for more than 25 years, Pete Smith, who started with Houston and has been with the Mets since 1971, has seen his share of high school and college players with major-league potential.


Conflict Over Tradition Ends A West Point Cadet's Dream
LEAD: From the age of 12, John Edwards had wanted to go to the United States Military Academy, and he made it the hard way, first enlisting in the Army and then distinguishing himself in military intelligence and language studies.


Babbitt Takes On an Iowa Meat Plant
LEAD: Bruce Babbitt was the first, accusing IBP Inc., the giant meatpacking company that operates four plants in Iowa, of being a ''corporate outlaw'' because of recurrent labor problems and a history of unsafe working conditions.


Water System: The Marvelous Monster
LEAD: It is a vast subterranean network, a whooshing, gurgling 6,000-mile iron snake under the streets of New York City, and it is unseen and largely ignored until it erupts like a monster, flooding basements, streets, subways and utility lines as it did twice last week.


TV Reviews; DRAMA OF COLLEGE FOOTBALL, ON ABC
LEAD: ''WHAT PRICE VICTORY'' has no question mark; it has no story, either.
Mostly it has cliches: big-time college football has no soul; it chews up and spits out good old country boys.
Actually, this makes the two-hour movie, on ABC at 9 o'clock tonight, sound more interesting than it is.
Cliches can work fine, but in this movie they are particularly barren.


Pacific Gas Ends Offer
LEAD: The Pacific Gas and Electric Company said it was withdrawing its proposal to consolidate its gas service in the Sacramento, Calif., area with the electricity operations of the Sacramento Municipal Utility District.
P.G.&amp;E., which had proposed in September to take over the struggling utility and scrap its nonfunctioning nuclear power plant, said it was dropping the offer because of the Sacramento utility's failure to give it serious consideration.


City Ballet to Honor American Composers
LEAD: The New York City Ballet will celebrate the music of American composers with its American Music Festival at the New York State Theater.
The festival, which features such guest artists as Ray Charles, begins April 26 with a gala opening of the company's spring season, and continues through May 15.
Over 35 ballets are scheduled, 19 of them world premieres.


When a Tie Vote Means Death
LEAD: While the Supreme Court awaits a ninth justice,tie votes of 4-to-4 have blocked decisions in some instances.
But not when the Court grinds out orders that send condemned prisoners to the executioner.
An anomaly in the Court's rules, coupled with the determination of four justices to get on with executions, is producing death decrees from a deadlocked tribunal.


Outdoor Sales, Mimicking the Temperature, Are on the Rise
LEAD: Browsers crowding a table yesterday at an outdoor flea market at the Avenue of the Americas and 26th Street as the temperature soared to 44 degrees.
Today should be even warmer, with a high of about 46, but periods of rain are expected. (NYT/Dith Pran)


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Friday about troubles at the New York Mercantile Exchange misstated the employment record of Kevin Conway, most recently the exchange's vice president of compliance.
He has never worked for the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Skiing  Tomba Wins Slalom: Alberto Tomba of Italy scored his fourth victory of the season yesterday in a slalom race at Bad Kleinkirchheim, Austria, increasing his overall lead in the World Cup standing.
Two Austrians, Thomas Stangassinger and Bernhard Gstrein, finished second and third.


COACHES COVERED IN DRUG PROPOSAL
LEAD: If an athlete tests positive for use of a banned substance, and it is his first offense, should he alone bear the responsibility of sanction?


Barbara Zinn, President Of Travel Agency, Weds
LEAD: At the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York, Barbara Zinn, the daughter of Eve Zinn of New York and the late Victor Zinn, was married yesterday to Stephen Stout-Kerr, a son of the late Cantor and Mrs.
Aron Stoutzker of London.
Rabbi Harlan Wechsler officiated.


Verity Sees Stable Dollar
LEAD: Commerce Secretary C. William Verity Jr. said today that he believed the American economy was strong enough to stabilize the dollar at about its current level.


Rock: Big Dipper, Dumptruck and Subtle Plague
LEAD: BIG DIPPER and Dumptruck, two big attactions on the college rock circuit, brought a near-overdose level of earnestness to CBGB Saturday night.
Both groups are from the Boston area, and they both present rock as anti-spectacle.
Band members wear the same T-shirts and jeans offstage as they do on, both groups stand there, calmly delivering their songs with the idea that the words take priority over entertainment - rock as literature.


Israeli Inflation Eases
LEAD: Israel's consumer price index rose 16.1 percent in 1987, the lowest annual inflation rate in 15 years, the Central Bureau of Statistics announced Friday.
The improvement reflected a sweeping austerity program begun in July 1985.
It included a freeze on prices and wages and helped to reduce inflation from a record 444.9 percent in 1984 to 19.7 percent in 1986.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Poor Young Farmer
LEAD: Senator David Karnes, Republican of Nebraska, is calling on the Federal Department of Agriculture to change the way it interprets the definition of a ''person.''


Group Meets On Multifoods
LEAD: Bregman Partners, an investment group led by the Bregman and Belzberg families of Canada, has met with the International Multifoods Corporation to discuss buying ''certain operating divisions'' of the food processing company, based in Minneapolis.
In a Securities and Exchange


Stop and Shop's Control Mostly All in the Family
LEAD: Management at the Stop and Shop Companies is a family affair.
Avram J. Goldberg is chairman and chief executive; his wife, Carol R. Goldberg, is president and chief operating officer.


Music: Alan Mandel Plays Ives
LEAD: LISTENING to Alan Mandel play piano music by Charles Ives and Elie Siegmeister Friday night was to reverse the usual musical practice of tension and release.
Mr.
Siegmeister was in attendance at Weill Recital Hall, and surrounded by colleagues, he spent the first half of the evening listening to Ives's cheerful iconoclasm - ''Five Takeoffs,'' eight Studies and five other pieces including ''Baseball Takeoff'' and a march on ''Here's to Good Old Yale.


REAGAN WILL SEEK MORE CONTRA AID DESPITE NEW MOVE
LEAD: The Reagan Administration will push plans to ask Congress for new military aid for Nicaraguan rebels despite a pledge by the Nicaraguan President, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, to hold direct talks with rebel leaders and suspend a state of emergency in Nicaragua, senior White House and State Department officials said today.


Excruciating End for Vikings
LEAD: A highlight film of the Vikings' season will not be necessary.
All that splicing and editing would not capture the year in review any better than today's National Conference championship game against the Redskins.
Steve Jordan, the tight end, called it a bumpy road, much like the one the Vikings have traveled since September.


Percy Qoboza, 50, A Black Journalist From South Africa
LEAD: Percy Qoboza, an award-winning black journalist who was editor of several leading anti-apartheid publications, died today.
He was 50 years old.


The Dance: Laurie De Vito's She-Bops and Scats
LEAD: MODESTY and lack of assumption are virtues that seem increasingly rare in the theater these days.
But they were refreshingly present in a program by Laurie De Vito's She-Bops and Scats company on Friday at Marymount Manhattan Theater, at 221 East 71st Street.
Ms.
De Vito, a noted Manhattan jazz-dance teacher, seemed to be aiming for simplicity, freshness and an entertaining and even inventive evening of jazz dance performed by a well-rehearsed company of strong and personable dancers.


Few Voters in Evidence at Provincial Polling Place
LEAD: At the Douglass Memorial Children's School, four elections officials sat on the front terrace grimly surveying the courtyard from behind large gray ballot boxes as they waited in the rising midmorning heat for voters to appear.


Memorial Set for Leo Steiner
LEAD: A memorial service for Leo Steiner, co-owner of the Carnegie Deli, will be held 12:30 P.M.
Feb. 1 at the Sutton Place Synagogue at 225 East 51st Street.
Mr.
Steiner died of complications of a brain tumor Dec. 31 at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 48 years old.


Papers in PTL Inquiry Are Reported Missing
LEAD: Missing financial documents that may have been shredded or removed have hampered a Federal investigation of Jim Bakker, the former leader of the PTL ministry, and his top aides, a newspaper reported today.


The Wrong Lesson
LEAD: The Supreme Court, as Justice William J. Brennan Jr. wrote in dissent, taught ''young men and women'' the wrong civics lesson when it upheld the right of a principal to impose prior restraint on a student newspaper.
So it did, and that damaging lesson may well be absorbed far beyond the corridors of high school.


Jane Aaron Wed to Skip Blumberg, a TV Producer
LEAD: The marriage of Jane Aaron to Skip Blumberg took place yesterday at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Aaron of New York.
Justice Betty Weinberg Ellerin of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony.


The Misadventures of 2 Best-Selling Books
LEAD: One disgruntled author got so angry in 1979 at his publisher, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, because he thought his book had been mishandled that he rented an airplane and buzzed the house's mid-Manhattan headquarters.


Allen Churchill, 76, Writer on New York Nostalgia
LEAD: Allen Churchill, a social historian who wrote sprightly books on subjects ranging from the bohemian culture of Greenwich Village to the unsolved disappearances of several famous missing persons, died of pancreatic cancer on Saturday at Bellevue Hospital Center.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Wiesel and Walesa Visit Auschwitz
LEAD: Lech Walesa, left, and Elie Wiesel, right, winners of the Nobel Peace Prize, during a visit yesterday to the Auschwitz Nazi death camp in Oswiecim, Poland.
They and five other Nobel laureates took part in a ceremony marking the liberation of the camp by Soviet troops in 1945.
Mr.
Wiesel was a prisoner at Auschwitz and witnessed the killing there of his father and one of his sisters.


VIKINGS LOSE BY 17-10 AS DRIVE STALLS
LEAD: The Redskins won the National Conference championship and a berth in the Super Bowl today, though they made it harder than it should have been.
But in the last quarter, they stopped the Minnesota Vikings once on the 1-foot line and, with 52 seconds to go, stopped them near the end zone again to save a 17-10 victory.


Judge Edward Weinfeld, 86, Dies; On U.S. Bench Nearly 4 Decades
LEAD: Judge Edward Weinfeld, one of the nation's most respected Federal judges, died of cancer at his home in Manhattan yesterday at the age of 86.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Business Digest on Friday about the reassignment of a General Services Administration official misstated A.T.&amp;T.'s allegations on the Government bidding process.


Chambers Case Turning On Truth of Confession
LEAD: A police sergeant who had investigated the death of Jennifer Levin in Central Park was testifying in the murder trial of Robert E. Chambers Jr.
Mr.
Chambers's lead defense lawyer, Jack T. Litman, was doing exactly what most defense lawyers avoid - putting his client at the scene of the crime.


Advertising; Supplement Reaches Goal In New York
LEAD: WHEN The Daily News announced Friday that it would include Vista, the Hispanic Magazine, in its Sunday issue once a month beginning March 6, it concluded a three-year effort by Arturo Villar, Vista's publisher, to crack the country's second-biggest Spanish-speaking market.


Lull in Weekly Note and Bond Sales
LEAD: The only Treasury auctions scheduled this week are today's regular sales of three- and six-month bills.


Panel Hearings Will Examine 'Hate Crimes'
LEAD: A House panel is planning to investigate the phenomenon of ''hate crimes,'' including the racial incident in Howard Beach, Queens.


Islanders Lose, 5-2
LEAD: Scott Arniel scored twice in the third period tonight as the Buffalo Sabres beat the Islanders, 5-2.


College Basketball; Maryland Bounces Back Under Wade
LEAD: THE large oak desk that seemed so formidable 15 months ago has been moved from the south wall to the west wall, where it supports stacks of papers and an engraved nameplate that reads: Robert P. Wade.


S.&amp;P. Reports Debt Defaults
LEAD: The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said Friday that United States corporations had defaulted on $9 billion of debt in 1987, up from $3.3 billion in 1986.
Texaco Inc. and the Public Service Company of New Hampshire accounted for about $8 billion of last year's defaults, it said.


Harvey Herman Gains 2 Health Care Clients
LEAD: After a particularly bad 1987, Harvey Herman Associates is seeking to improve its economic health with a pair of new health care clients.


News Analysis; Takeshita Visit: Warmth, Skepticism
LEAD: A new Japanese Prime Minister, Noboru Takeshita, has just visited Washington talking of his country's greater willingness to shoulder global economic responsibilities.


Trump Developing Ringside Interests
LEAD: IN his office, 26 floors above Fifth Avenue, there are models of buildings that Donald Trump has in the works or on his mind.


Jazz: Big Band Revival at Carnegie
LEAD: FIFTY years to the day after Benny Goodman's orchestra played the first complete jazz concert ever held in Carnegie Hall, on Jan. 16, 1938, the program was repeated on Saturday evening by an orchestra led by the clarinetist Bob Wilber.


Katherine Brod Weds
LEAD: Katherine S. Brod and Milton H. Lehrer were married yesterday in New York by Rabbi David M. Posner, who performed the ceremony in his study at Temple Emanu-El.
The bride, the widow of Melvin D. Brod, an architect and engineer, is a painter in oils and acrylics.
The bridegroom is an administrative law judge and arbitrator.


Central Bank Is Urged for Europe
LEAD: Despite widespread skepticism and strong opposition from West Germany, the Finance Minister of France, Edouard Balladur, has been talking up the idea of forming a European central bank, in the hope of putting the matter on Western Europe's economic and political agenda.


Irving Hochstadter, Chemical Engineer, 100
LEAD: Irving Hochstadter, a chemical engineer who founded Hochstadter Laboratories Inc., died Jan. 8 at the Valley Nursing Home in Westwood, N.J., where he lived.
He was 100 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: The caption of a Reuters picture in some copies on Thursday about a hockey game between the Winnipeg Jets and Vancouver Canucks misidentified the Winnipeg player.
He was Ray Neufeld.


City Ballet: 'Petits Riens,' by Martins
LEAD: EVEN Mozart wrote a ballet score, and last year Peter Martins became the latest choreographer to be attracted by it, creating one of his best works in the process.


Lilly Settles British Suits
LEAD: Eli Lilly &amp; Company, the large drug maker, said that more than 1,000 Britons had agreed to settle injury claims linked to the Lilly arthritis treatment Oraflex, called Opren in Britain.


Blending Event and Invention
LEAD: In fiction rooted in history, a novelist uses but transcends fact.
This is what happens in a hefty new novel (size: 824 pages; number of real and fictional characters: 107) that has already arrived in the bookstores, ahead of its Jan. 29 publication date, preceded by trumpets of critical acclaim.


Who Wears Dr. King's Mantle?
LEAD: In life, Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. fought to put an end to segregation, discrimination and, hardest to root out, bigotry.
On the anniversary of his birth, many now claim to wear his mantle, to walk in his footsteps.


The Way Up
LEAD: With George Foreman's boxing comeback, Don King has come down with a mild case of nostalgia, remembering Foreman's part in what amounted to something of a role reversal between the two men: Foreman losing his crown and King gaining a new career.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; Young Name Dropper Wins Riches, and a Date in Court
LEAD: David P. Bloom has finally stopped telling everyone he meets about how much money he has.
Instead, the 23-year-old Duke University graduate with an eye for American art and, according to the Government, a knack for selling bogus investment services stood before Federal Magistrate James C. Francis 4th in


Dole Data Yield No Surprises
LEAD: The stack of income tax returns and other financial documents released by Senator Bob Dole this weekend contained no major surprises, according to those familiar with the matter.


Bank Officer To Join Mellon
LEAD: David L. Eyles, chief credit officer for the Chemical Bank, is leaving to become a vice chairman of the Mellon Bank Corporation in Pittsburgh, Mellon announced Friday.
Mr.
Eyles, 48 years old, will also be chairman of Mellon's credit policy committee and the senior credit committee.
Chemical, a subsidiary of the


In Philosophy's Turf Wars, They Hurl Syllogisms
LEAD: To the Editor:


Koch, O'Connor And Moynihan Back The Post
LEAD: Mayor Koch, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and John Cardinal O'Connor were among 1,500 people who attended a ''Save The Post'' rally yesterday outside The New York Post building in lower Manhattan.


Flyers Edge Rangers in Scrappy Match
LEAD: A sellout crowd at Madison Square Garden last night prepared to jeer the return of Dave Brown of the Flyers but got a double disappoinment.


Dukakis Is Hard at Work Next Door
LEAD: It was not the schedule of a complacent candidate, confident of the affections of his neighbors.


Subtle Steps to a Better Grip on the Game
LEAD: THE names of the basic tennis strokes, forehand and backhand, should tell you something about the role of your hands in shot-making.
The adage is that the racquet should feel like an extension of your hand.
You should meet the ball on the forehand side as if you were striking it with your open palm, and on the backhand side as if you were hitting it with the back of your hand.


OUTRDOORS: A GOOD TIME TO WORK ON FISHING GEAR
LEAD: MOST northeastern anglers will be casting for nothing but memories until spring, and one way to enliven this winter-imposed idleness is to begin putting gear into shape for the coming season.


Williams Makes His Point
LEAD: THERE are moments when the elements of time and place and improbable coincidence converge to make for dramatic events.
This afternoon was one of those moments.


VOTE APPEARS LOW
LEAD: Haiti's army-dominated Government held its presidential elections today, but voting appeared to be light, and irregularities, from multiple voting to voting by youths under the minimum age of 18, appeared widespread.


20% of Reliance Unit Sold
LEAD: The General Accident Corporation of America said Friday that it had bought 20 percent of the United Fire and Casualty Company for $20.2 million from the Reliance Insurance Company.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, General Accident said the purchase was for investment.
General Accident, a unit of the Scottish Insurance Corporation of Perth, Scotland, also said it might seek seats on the board of the insurance company, based in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.


Reporter's Notebook: Getting the Last Laugh on a Budget Gap
LEAD: By and large, an executive budget briefing is about as funny as a tax form.


Big Shootout at the Bronco Corral
LEAD: HIGH atop the scoreboard at Mile High Stadium a big white fiberglass bronco is rearing on his hind legs, his front legs pawing the rarefied Rocky Mountain air.
It's as if the bronco had been startled yesterday by all the points that kept going up beneath him like bursts from six-shooters when John Elway and Bernie Kosar had a shootout on the dusty main street of the


'Preach-Off': Keeping the Flocks Awake
LEAD: The choir finishes the hymn and the minister ascends the pulpit.
Across the congregation, even before the preacher has opened his mouth, eyelids begin to feel heavy.


Clash at Abortion Rally in Boston
LEAD: Bill Baird, right, an abortion rights advocate, and Jozef Mlot-Mroz, an anti-abortion activist, as their paths crossed yesterday at Faneuil Hall in Boston.
Groups supporting both sides of the abortion issue demonstrated there to mark the 15th anniversary of the Supreme Court decision that legalized abortion.


Met Opera: The Final 'Fledermaus'
LEAD: THE season's final ''Fledermaus'' at the Metropolitan Opera Saturday night brought together several cast members who had gone into the show at one time or another since the return of the production last month.
Thomas Allen was an excellent Eisenstein; he delivered the spoken dialogue with more verve and class than anyone else, and his ringing, juicy baritone was a pleasure to hear.


Renegade Officer Seeks Philippine Governorship
LEAD: Col.
Rodolfo Aguinaldo, jungle fighter, mutineer and now candidate for governor of Cagayan Province, sat over a breakfast of rice, eggs and marinated beef the other day discussing his campaign strategy.


Usual Party Politics At R.F.K. Stadium
LEAD: Today was a normal wintertime Sunday in Washington for Jack Kent Cooke.
He gave a party and invited a few dozen of his closest friends, including the nation's No. 1 military leader, a former White House chief of staff, three men who might have been President (and a couple who may yet be) and the Governor of


U.S. Drops a Warrant In '85 Ship Hijacking
LEAD: The Justice Department has withdrawn the arrest warrant it issued two years ago for Mohammed Abbas, who also uses the name Abul Abbas, in connection with the hijacking in 1985 of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro and the murder of an American passenger, a department spokesman said today.


New Hopes at Space Companies
LEAD: Maxime A. Faget, a leading figure in the development of NASA's manned space program, now runs a six-year-old company called Space Industries.
He and his colleagues at the Houston-based concern think they can build and operate a small, low-cost space station that would be rented to commercial and Government researchers.


3 Children and Adult Die in 2 Newark Fires
LEAD: Four people, including three children, died in two fires here over the weekend and 27 other people were left homeless, fire officials reported today.


Executives
LEAD: *
Air Midwest Inc., Wichita, Kan., elected as chairman Gary M. Adamson.
Robert L. Priddy was named to succeed Mr.
Adamson as president and chief executive.


Jessica Wolfe Weds Jonathan Bernstein
LEAD: The marriage of Jessica Wolfe, a public affairs specialist at the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation in Washington, to Jonathan Bernstein, the assistant press secretary and a legislative assistant to Senator Quentin N. Burdick, Democrat of North Dakota, took place yesterday in New York.
Rabbi Marshall Hurwitz performed the ceremony at 24 Fifth


'Midsummer Night' Comeback
LEAD: Fifteen years ago, when A. J. Antoon directed ''Much Ado About Nothing'' to the accompaniment of ragtime music, an oompah band, and the antics of Keystone Kops, President Nixon saw the play and said wonderingly, ''I didn't know they could do it that way.''


Acting Mayor to Run in '89
LEAD: Eugene Sawyer, the Acting Mayor, announced today that he would run in a 1989 election to complete the last two years of the four-year term vacated by the death of Mayor Harold Washington. ''I'm the Mayor, the man in the chair,'' Mr.
Sawyer said in an interview on the radio station WBMX. ''I'm going to remain the Mayor.


Paris Journal; Scandal, Sex, Big Money; That's TV, Off-Screen
LEAD: As if there were not enough uncertainties in this presidential election year, French television is in a state of upheaval.


Washington Talk: Congress; A 'Fighting Marine' Battles Japan on Trade . . .
LEAD: Jack Brooks is a Congressman who loves a good fight, and sometimes he goes looking for one.
Such is the case now as he takes the lead in bashing Japan on its trade policy with the United States.


E.P.A. Will Allow Use of a Chemical That It Had Banned
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency says it will permit dinoseb, one of only three pesticides ever subjected to an emergency ban, to be used in the Pacific Northwest for the next two years as long as inventories last.


Bridge: Imp Scoring With Computer Has Impact on a Pairs Event
LEAD: Computers have long been used for generating tournament deals, and more recently for scoring.
They now have an impact on the type of event being played.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If you like a man but you can't stand his wife, that tempers your judgment about whether you invite him to dinner.''  - Linda Denning, an Iowa voter,  explaining how disillusionment with President Reagan  hurts George Bush.  [ A13:4. ]


Quiet Farewell for Snyder
LEAD: The subjects that had bedeviled CBS Sports for two days - Jimmy (the Greek) Snyder and his racial comments - were reduced to a mere oblique mention on the network's pre-game show yesterday.


Metro Matters; Shutting the Door On the P.L.O. In New York
LEAD: It was one day after Andrew Young resigned under fire as the chief United States delegate to the United Nations, and Zehdi Labib Terzi was worried.


Ski Boot: A Softer Approach
LEAD: The rigid plastic ski boot became an institution in downhill skiing after its introduction in the mid-1960's.
Along with it have come improvements in the way bindings anchor the boot to the ski.


Chicago Journal; Whites Lead a Revival of the Blues
LEAD: Like the roar of an El train, thunderous and urgent and get-out-of-my-way powerful, the sound bursts out through the walls of the Checkerboard Lounge and escapes down the streets of the South Side.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE TRIAL OF SOCRATES. By I. F. Stone. 282 pages. Little, Brown. $18.95.


U.S. Studied Halting Iran-Bound Missiles
LEAD: Reagan Administration officials considered and rejected a military option to intercept ships carrying Silkworm missiles to Iran in recent weeks, deciding the idea was probably illegal and diplomatically unwise, according to several officials.


Question Box
LEAD: QUESTION: Mel Allen, among many others, has called Don Mattingly the best Yankee first baseman since Lou Gehrig?
How about it?


ZZZZ Best Indictment
LEAD: A young entrepreneur who started a carpet-cleaning business in his parents' garage and turned it into a million-dollar enterprise was charged Friday along with 11 other people in a 54-count Federal indictment that includes accusations of securities fraud and embezzlement.


Rising Use of Donated Eggs For Pregnancy Stirs Concern
LEAD: One woman goes to the Women's Medical Pavilion in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., because she is determined to have no more children.
Another is there because she has been unable to conceive.
If all goes well, the second woman will become pregnant with an egg contributed by the first, who is then to be sterilized.


Tinkering With Way Parties Choose Nominees Hasn't Worked Very Well
LEAD: Since the Democratic National Convention of 1968, when tensions within the Democratic Party exploded into riots on the streets of Chicago, American political parties have been tinkering with the methods by which they choose their Presidential nominees, attempting to make the process more responsive to the views of the average voter.


Ms. Grossbard, Medical Student, Weds
LEAD: Caren Lisa Grossbard, a fourth-year student at the Harvard Medical School, was married yesterday to Dr.
Scott David Solomon, a resident in medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
Rabbi Hyman Krantz performed the ceremony at the Terrace Restaurant Atop Butler Hall in New York.


Biotechnology Lags Despite Success
LEAD: Amid the national uproar over whether to release living, genetically altered bacteria into the environment, one vital development seems to have gone virtually unnoticed: a biotechnology experiment that began last year in California seems to have worked.


Glenda Jackson in 'Strange Interlude'
LEAD: YESTERDAY'S experiment is today's curiosity.
That's one easy conclusion, certainly, to be drawn from Eugene O'Neill's ''Strange Interlude,'' an award-winning sensation when it was unveiled in 1928 and now a decidedly odd but still powerful period piece in a four-and-one-half-hour production made for television.


Shifting Tactics, New York Plans Closer Supervision of Mentally Ill
LEAD: In a major change of strategy, the Cuomo administration plans to create a new category of highly trained workers to manage the lives - from psychiatric care to welfare benefits - of the 25,000 people who are most difficult to treat among the state's mentally ill.


3 Die in 3-Car Crash on L.I.; Drunken Driving Is Charged
LEAD: Three people died, including two Canadians, in a three-car accident early this morning.


Business People; Fluor Official Poised To Succeed Chairman
LEAD: Leslie G. McCraw has been named president of the Fluor Corporation, putting him in line to head the international construction and engineering company based in Irvine, Calif.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, JANUARY 18, 1988   ; International A2-9
LEAD:  New military aid for the contras will be sought by the Reagan Administration despite a pledge by the Nicaraguan President to hold direct talks with rebel leaders and suspend a state of emergency in Nicaragua, officials said.
Page A1


Seeking the Gold Wins at Gulfstream
LEAD: Can a son of Mr. Prospector win the Kentucky Derby?


Dance: Middle Eastern Panorama
LEAD: THE Ramzi El-Edlibi Dance Company offered a panorama of Middle Eastern dances on Saturday night at the Schimmel Center for the Arts at Pace University.


Redskins' Defense Answers a Prayer
LEAD: As the Minnesota Vikings lined up with a minute to go, just 6 yards from a touchdown that could have tied the game, and even less than that for a first down that could have given them another chance, Coach Joe Gibbs of the Washington Redskins dropped to his knees on the sideline.


SURPRISES FOR GEORGETOWN AND SYRACUSE
LEAD: A series of upsets and close finishes last week might lead to questions whether the talent pool in the Big East is half full or half empty.


Cello: Karine Georgian
LEAD: THE latest installment in the Town Hall series of ''Russian Nights'' was an estimable and sometimes exciting recital by the cellist Karine Georgian. ''Russian Nights'' is a misnomer, though doubtless more salable than ''Soviet Nights'' would be, since both Miss Georgian and her accompanist, Sahan Arzruni, are Armenian.


Australian Open; Shriver Is Upset; Mandlikova Gains
LEAD: Anne Minter, cheered by a hometown crowd, stunned fourth-seeded Pam Shriver, 6-2, 6-4, today to advance to the quarterfinals of the Australian Open.


Music: Waverly Consort Plays Medieval Program
LEAD: ELEANOR OF AQUITAINE - celebrated Saturday night by the Waverly Consort at Alice Tully Hall - watched over a century of remarkable change in Medieval Europe.
Music was one of them.
Wife to two great kings, mother of Richard the Lionhearted, possessor of enormous political and cultural influence in both France and England, she accompanied the French King Louis on the 12th century's Second Crusade and survived 16 years of imprisonment to become the power behind the throne of her legendary son and


Ms. Goldberg, Writer, Is Wed to Stuart Lewis
LEAD: The marriage of Judith Goldberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Goldberg of New York, to Stuart Lewis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Lewis of Blauvelt, N.Y., took place yesterday at the Hotel Inter-Continental in New York.
Rabbi Martin Zion officiated.


Ballet Stars Join in Brussels AIDS Benefit
LEAD: Twenty-five international ballet stars, including current Soviet dancers and an expatriate, joined here today in an AIDS gala benefit.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 17, 1988:  MONDAY  Central &amp; SW Corp  Midwest Energy  Eastern Util Assoc  PS Group  Jorgensen Co  Southern Co  Kennametal Inc  WICOR Inc  TUESDAY  Crompton &amp; Knowles  Jostens Inc  Equitable Resources  K Mart Corp  Honeywell Inc  Scott Paper  ICM Property Invstrs Inc  JM Smucker Co


Market Place; The Strategies Of Top Managers
LEAD: THE nation's top-ranking investment advisers of 1987 began raising cash well before the stock market collapsed on Oct. 19.
But, unlike many other money managers, they also had the fortitude to jump back into the market on the heels of the record 508-point plunge in the Dow Jones industrial average.


'St. Elsewhere,' on NBC, to Cease Production
LEAD: ''St.
Elsewhere,'' NBC's award-winning medical drama, is to cease production in March and its crew is to move to a new series, although NBC is still discussing ways to keep the show alive, officials said today.


Building on a Legacy in Taiwan
LEAD: A dynasty ended in Taiwan when President Chiang Ching-kuo died last week, but change had already begun.
While faithful to the myths of Chiang Kai-shek's rule, the generalissimo's son was a realist who had recently set course toward liberalization and democracy.
The challenge to Taiwan's new president is to keep that course, tackle economic problems and yet not upset the delicate balance that maintains calm in the Formosa


Nets and 76ers Analyze Trade
LEAD: With 4 minutes 17 seconds remaining in Saturday night's game against the Boston Celtics at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena, Mike Gminski hit a 13-foot jumper over Dennis Johnson that tied the score at 91-91 - it was to be the 6-foot-11-inch center's last basket as a Net.


DEALS PROPEL SPACE STATION MAKER
LEAD: If any company has positioned itself well for the commercialization of space, it is Space Industries.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an obituary on Wednesday about Morris Giloni, a stockbroker and board member of the Jewish National Fund of America, described the fund incorrectly.
It represents not only the Herut Zionists but other Jewish groups as well.


Frank V. Schwinn, 67, Bicycle Company Chief
LEAD: Frank V. Schwinn, who developed the independent dealership network for his family's bicycle company, died unexpectedly at home last Tuesday.
He was 67 years old.


Games Banks Play With Home Equity Loans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Church Attack Leads to a Dissident's House
LEAD: An explosion ripped through a Mormon church Saturday.
Hours later law-enforcement officers surrounded the house of a woman whose husband had feuded with the Mormon leadership before he was shot to death by the police nine years ago.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Choice for Ambassador
LEAD: The next American Ambassador to East Germany will be Richard C. Barkley, according to State Department insiders.


Council Leaders Draft a Compromise Bill on Campaign Financing
LEAD: After weeks of negotiations, the leadership of the New York City Council has crafted a compromise bill on the Koch administration's proposal for public financing of municipal election campaigns and says it has the votes to pass the measure.


City Ballet's 'Matinee'
LEAD: The New York City Ballet will present its annual ''Family Matinee'' on Jan. 31 at 1 P.M. at the New York State Theater.
The company will perform ''Symphony in C'' and ''The Four Temperaments,'' both by George Balanchine, and ''Brahms/ Handel,'' a collaboration by Jerome Robbins and Twyla Tharp.
During intermissions, company members will be on hand to answer questions and demonstrate such activities as the preparation of toe shoes, pre-performance warm-ups and applying stage makeup.


Hart Finds You Can Go Home Again
LEAD: Some of Gary Hart's old friends did not turn out to see him this weekend when he came back to his hometown.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, JANUARY 18, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Independent Taiwan: Risky Idea May Be Gaining
LEAD: As Tsai Yo-chuan and Hsu Tsao-teh saw it, all they had done was to exercise free speech when they organized a political group with a charter calling for Taiwan's independence from China.
But to the Government, what they did constituted an act of sedition, and this weekend Mr.
Tsai and Mr.
Hsu were sentenced to up to 11 years in prison.


GOVERNMENT LAGS ON PHONE CHANGES
LEAD: A $25 billion plan to overhaul the Government's outdated telephone system has fallen almost a year behind schedule and could experience substantial additional delays because of a bidding dispute that has led to several criminal investigations.


Mexican Candidate Ties Repayment Of Foreign Debt to Economic Growth
LEAD: In an interview here today, the man almost certain to become Mexico's President later this year said repayment of his country's $105 billion foreign debt must be linked to the achievement of ''sustainable economic growth'' and urged the United States to seek a more ''dignified'' and realistic relationship with Mexico.


The U.N. Today; Security Council
LEAD:  Meets on southern Lebanon at 11:30 A.M.
Economic and Social Council  COMMISSION ON INTERGOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS IN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL FIELDS - 10 A.M.


In Philosophy's Turf Wars, They Hurl Syllogisms; Journey of the Mind
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shevardnadze in Bonn; He Hails 'New Era'
LEAD: The Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, arrived in Bonn today for a three-day visit, the first by a senior Soviet official under Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Being There
LEAD: For some firefighters in Engine Company No. 45 on Tremont Avenue in the Bronx, the daily routine provides enough excitement.
The firehouse has been among the busiest in the city for years.


Artificial Heart Patient, 60
LEAD: Walton Jones, the oldest person ever given a temporary artificial heart, died today of an infection, doctors said.
He was 60 years old.
Mr.
Jones' heart was replaced by the Jarvik-7 pump on Dec. 4 by Dr.
William DeVries, the surgeon who has done four of the five permanent mechanical heart operations.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Diplomatic Gaffe
LEAD: A playbill issued by the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts contains a passage that conflicts with the frequently-declared policy toward Yugoslavia of the center's sponsor, the United States Government.


Companies Match Worker Donations to Give Lift to Neediest
LEAD: Donald G. Fiordelisi of Princeton, N.J., contributed $100 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund in honor of his father, Peter, who died on Thanksgiving Day.


Hanoi Seeks New Image, U.S. Lawmakers Report
LEAD: A Congressional delegation has returned from Vietnam convinced that Hanoi is embarking on a campaign to regain some of the international understanding it lost by invading and occupying Cambodia nine years ago.


Rail System Plan Backed by Houston Voters
LEAD: Voters here approved a $2.57 billion transit improvement program Saturday that includes a 20-mile rail system to connect downtown with other business areas.


Governor of Arizona to Face Impeachment Hearings Soon
LEAD: The Arizona House will begin impeachment hearings this week against Gov.
Evan Mecham, the House Speaker said today.


Bias Lawsuit May Have Wide Impact
LEAD: When Clara Watson dropped by Fort Worth Bank and Trust in 1973 to pick up an application for a job as a teller, she said, the chilly reception almost ended her dream of working at the bank.


Slowdown In Housing Expected
LEAD: After four years of robust demand that kept construction of new homes at annual levels of more than 1.7 million units, the housing industry has entered a slower period that is likely to extend into the mid-1990's.


Promotions At Times Co.
LEAD: Arthur M. Hettich, editor in chief of Family Circle magazine, has been named senior vice president, magazine development, of The New York Times Company Magazine Group.


In Iowa, Tarnish on Reagan Rubs Off on Bush
LEAD: Bill Southwick is George Bush's nightmare.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a sen-tence in an article by Kosta Tsipis on Jan. 11 implied that canceling further production of the MX missile and the Trident submarine would save $2 bil-lion.
It should have said ''as much as $2 billion per submarine.''


Dr. King Is Honored at Riverside Church
LEAD: The Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, executive minister of the Abyssinian Baptist Church, delivering his sermon yesterday at Riverside Church during a service honoring the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


More Gains Foreseen for Bonds
LEAD: Long-simmering hopes that interest rates will decline boiled over Friday after Government statistics showed a large drop in the nation's trade deficit and lower-than-expected inflation.


1988: The Process
LEAD:  Efforts to improve how America elects a President have had unexpected side effects such as Michigan's confusing caucus process.
First article of a series, page A12.
Mexican Debt Condition  The man almost certain to be Mexico's next President said foreign debt repayments must be linked to ''sustainable economic growth.


Dollar Jumps In Tokyo
LEAD: The dollar rose sharply in trading in Tokyo this morning, on the heels of an improvement in United States trade figures announced Friday.
Stock prices also rallied, traders said.


Neoax Raises Offer for IU
LEAD: Neoax Inc. said yesterday that it had increased its tender offer for the IU Corporation by $1.50 a share, to $19, or about $589 million.


Thief Must Pay Aged Victim
LEAD: A circuit judge has ordered a 17-year-old robber to pay $100 a month for the next five years to a 102-year-old man he attacked outside a grocery store.
Judge Frank Eppes issued the order to Darrel Burrel in sentencing him to 10 years in prison, suspended to probation for five years.


India's Clandestine Market in Gold
LEAD: It is the wedding season in this wealthy and powerful city - as in many other parts of India -and ballrooms and community centers are booked for months.


Washington Talk: Congress; . . . as Tiny U.S. Agency Takes on Japan Bashers
LEAD: While some legislators and others in the Government vilify Japan over economic issues, one tiny Federal agency struggles on to bring the two countries closer together.


Social Security Issue Stirs Debate
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, left, talking with Senator Albert Gore Jr. before the Democratic Presidential candidates appeared on ABC News's ''This Week.''


Venezuela's Oil Dealings Abroad
LEAD: After Venezuela nationalized 14 American and other foreign oil companies in 1976, it came to recognize that much of the industry - the business of refining and marketing oil abroad - was in fact still in foreign hands.


Cross-Ownership Rule Driving Newspapers Out of Business
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bank of America Fined
LEAD: The Commerce Department said Friday that it had fined the Bank of America $220,000 for 22 purported violations of blacklist laws.
The Commerce Department said the bank had paid an American beneficiary based on a letter of credit that required him to refuse to do business with certain blacklisted nations.


Super Teams: Denver and Washington
LEAD: Ricky Nattiel of the Broncos after scoring during Denver's 38-33 victory over the Browns.
At right, the Vikings' Wade Wilson being sacked by Dave Butz and Dexter Manley (72) of the Redskins.
Washington won, 17-10.
Super Bowl is Jan. 31.
SportsMonday, page C1. (AP)


Denver Defense Rewrites the Script
LEAD: The Cleveland Browns were going to score.
The orange-clad fans stacked to the top of Mile High Stadium were going to have to endure an overtime period with a spot in the Super Bowl resting on the outcome.
The script said so, and the Denver Broncos thought so.


High Stakes In Nicaragua
LEAD: The Nicaraguan Government's last-minute offer Saturday to suspend its state of emergency and begin direct talks with the rebels opens a volatile period of political maneuvering, with high stakes that could determine the future course of not only the Sandinista revolution but also of Central America.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Just an 'Intimate' Party
LEAD: Several weeks ago, the finance chairmen of the Democratic National Committee sent out invitations to a $500-per-person ''intimate birthday dinner'' honoring Paul G. Kirk Jr., the national chairman, on Jan. 20, two days after his official 50th birthday.


A New Effort In Securities Fraud Cases
LEAD: Concerned that insider trading and other crimes are going unpunished, the Justice Department and several regulatory agencies are planning a task force that will seek out securities fraud cases across the country, concentrating on several large cities outside New York.


Rock: The Music of the 60's From the Dinosaurs
LEAD: PSYCHEDELIC-ERA nostalgia arrived Friday when the Dinosaurs, a group of San Francisco rockers with a 1960's pedigree, headlined an evening of music, lights and reminiscences.
It was the first Psychedelic Daze Revue at the Saint, the discotheque that replaced the Fillmore East Auditorium at 105 Second Avenue, at Sixth Street; the next revue, with the Chambers Brothers, is scheduled for Jan.


Coliseum as Shelter
LEAD: To the Editor:


Argentine Troops Move on Rebel Soldiers at Base
LEAD: Troops loyal to the civilian Government encircled a northern army compound today after a rebel officer and about 100 sympathizers had seized control of the compound's regimental headquarters.


Business and the Law; Expectations In Cigarette Case
LEAD: HALFWAY through a trial in Lexington, Miss., lawyers representing the survivors of a cigarette smoker are convinced that they have made the strongest case yet against the tobacco industry.


AN 'ANGEL' SAVES ROCKET DEVELOPER
LEAD: The American Rocket Company has always been a fun kind of place.
In one of his previous professional incarnations, George Koopman, Amroc's president, designed the spectacular stunt and car-chase scenes in the movie ''The Blues Brothers.'' And when it came to naming Amroc's first two test engines, they naturally became Jake and


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in some editions on Jan. 7 about a hockey game between the Rangers and the Canucks misidentified the Rangers' defenseman.
He was David Shaw.


Painting Brings $6.6 Million
LEAD: Jan Davidsz de Heem's depiction of a banquet table from 1642 - the largest and most lavish still life ever painted by this artist - brought $6.6 million Friday in a sale at Christie's.
The price was the highest ever paid at auction in the United States for an Old Master painting.
The previous record was set Thursday at Sotheby's, with the sale of another


The Lie That Wasn't Shot Down
LEAD: On Aug. 31, 1983, the Soviet Union shot down a Boeing 747 with the loss of 269 lives, having failed to identify it as a civilian airliner.
Moscow deserved the universal obloquy it incurred.
But the Reagan Administration added a savage twist, sometimes implying and sometimes saying outright that the Soviet Union knew it was attacking a civilian plane.


Dance: Carol Fonda's 'Pieces of Glass'
LEAD: THE scenery dances along with the human performers in Carol Fonda's ''Pieces of Glass,'' thereby creating much of the magic of the two-act work that Carol Fonda and Company presented Friday night at the Triplex Theater of Borough of Manhattan Community College.


Pretoria's Frozen Debt
LEAD: South Africa said Friday that foreign creditors who were owed $13 billion in frozen debt could use the money to buy equity or property in the country.
Pretoria froze repayments of the debt in 1985 after foreign banks, worried by anti-Government actions, cut credit lines.


At Pan Am, Tensions Beneath a Surface Calm
LEAD: On the surface, the daily routine at the Manhattan headquarters of the Pan Am Corporation looks like business as usual.


Mixed View of G.M. Sales
LEAD: Officials of the General Motors Corporation's Pontiac, Buick and Oldsmobile divisions gave a mixed view Friday of auto sales for 1988.


ISRAELIS MAINTAIN WIDE ARAB CURFEW
LEAD: The Israeli Army kept more than 250,000 Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip sealed up in their refugee centers today in what is emerging as the Government's major tactic against the rioting in which at least 38 Palestinians have been shot dead.


Greta Bernard Is Married To R.S. Brown in Michigan
LEAD: Greta Bernard, a rabbinical student at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York, and Robert S. Brown, a student at the New York University School of Law, were married yesterday at Congregation Beth Shalom in Southfield, Mich.
Rabbis Robert Abramson and Robert Nelson officiated.


New Zealand Inflation
LEAD: New Zealand's inflation rate has dropped below 10 percent for the first time in more than 14 years, according to figures released today by the Government.
The consumer price index rose 9.6 percent in 1987, down from 18.2 percent in 1986.
The annual rate was slightly lower than that forecast by the Labor Party Government.


Guinness Fights Ruling
LEAD: Guinness P.L.C. today challenged a ruling by the British Takeover Panel that the brewer acted unfairly during its acquisition of the Distillers Company.


TUESDAY, JANUARY 19, 1988   ; International
LEAD: Investment and growth have contracted in debtor countries since the global debt crisis began in 1982, and living standards have slumped badly, the World Bank said.
Prospects for any near-term improvements are bleak, the bank said in a report that is the most pessimistic it has ever issued on the debt crisis.


PREMIER BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PREMIER BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
21,200,000
7,400,000
Yr net loss
18,400,000
6,300,000


PLANTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLANTRONICS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
29,361,000
27,787,000
Net inc
2,698,000
2,245,000
Share earns
.44
.36
6mo sales
56,462,000
52,076,000
Net inc
4,561,000
3,799,000
Share earns
.74
.61


FRIES ENTERTAINMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRIES ENTERTAINMENT (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,689,000
10,146,000
Net loss
305,000
b1,257,000
6mo rev
16,345,000
15,981,000
Net loss
168,000
1,370,000
b-Includes a one-time $3 million provision for doubtful accounts and a $400,000 write-off of costs related to a terminated acquisition.


MET-COIL SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MET-COIL SYSTEMS
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,455,000
11,360,000
Net inc
571,000
b78,000
Share earns
.26
-
6mo sales
21,460,000
20,550,000
Net inc
280,000
60,000
Share earns
.13
.03
b-Net loss


ROCKY MOUNTAIN MEDICAL reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCKY MOUNTAIN MEDICAL
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
583,088
626,258
Net loss
333,353
783,936


Advertising; The Sterling Automobile Campaign
LEAD: QUITE a few people who saw the TV debut of the new Hal Riney &amp; Partners campaign for the Sterling motorcar in the 12 markets where it was shown last night probably thought they recognized the music in the background as the camera caressed the leather seats and burled walnut paneling and a British-accented chap off camera glorified such appurtenances.


FEDERAL SAVINGS OF PUERTO RICO reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL SAVINGS OF PUERTO RICO
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
19,200,000
17,500,000
Per share
4.07
3.70
The prior year net excludes non- business income of $2.9 million from settlement of a lawsuit.


Retirement Set At Federated
LEAD: Donald J. Stone will retire Jan. 31 as a vice chairman of Federated Department Stores Inc. and will be succeeded by Allen I. Questrom, chairman of the company's Bullock's division in Los Angeles and a corporate executive vice president, Federated announced.


Music: Shostakovich 14th
LEAD: THE 14th Symphony of Dmitri Shostakovich, played at the 92d Street Y Sunday afternoon by the New York Chamber Symphony under the composer's son, Maxim, is a cycle of 11 songs on the subject of death.
The texts are by Lorca, Apollinaire, Kuchelbecher and Rilke, set for soprano and bass soloists.
It is an important, difficult work, and any performance of it is a significant event.


NESB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NESB CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,781,000
2,811,000
Per share
.35
.35
Yr net inc
10,258,000
9,139,000
Per share
1.28
-
No share earnings are available for the year-ago full year because the savings bank converted to stock ownership form in August 1986.


Hispanic Group Trying to Form 7-Branch Bank
LEAD: Herman Badillo and a group of investors have applied for a New York State banking charter and Federal regulatory permission to create a bank run primarily by and for Hispanic people.


ROLLINS ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROLLINS ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
50,725,000
39,504,000
Net inc
8,975,000
6,084,000
Share earns
.19
.13
The year-ago share earnings restated for a 3-for-2 stock split in June 1987.


FIDELCOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIDELCOR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
22,874,000
b23,652,000
Per share
-
.97
Yr net inc
37,720,000
92,267,000
Per share
1.13
3.95
b-Net income


THE BIRTH OF QUASARS: VIOLENT COSMIC ACCIDENTS OFFER A CLUE
LEAD: PRESSING against the limitations of their telescopes, astronomers believe they may be seeing the violent epoch of the birth of quasars, the most powerful energy sources in the sky.


Tax Watch; Smaller Bill Seen In Texaco Dispute
LEAD: EVEN If Texaco Inc. fails to resolve its $6.5 billion dispute with the Internal Revenue Service, former Government tax officials said experience suggested that the oil company could well end up paying only a fraction of the claim.


A Place for Homeless
LEAD: Representative Charles E. Schumer has come up with a surefire way to bring the Federal Government closer to the problem of homelessness: Turn the headquarters of the Department of Housing and Urban Development into a shelter.


CRIME DATA SHOW LOW JAILING RATE
LEAD: Barely one-third of the people arrested on felony charges in 11 states went to jail, and only a third of those convicted of violent crimes were sentenced to more than a year, a Justice Department survey found.


HEI INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEI INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
1,715,328
1,430,711
Net inc
b101,313
c116,756
Share earns
.07
-
b-Includes a tax loss carryforward of $40,000.
c-Net loss


PLANTERS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLANTERS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,177,000
1,924,000
Per share
.31
.28
Yr net inc
8,819,000
7,874,000
Per share
1.27
1.14
The year-ago per share earnings are restated to reflect a 3-for-2 stock split.


A. H. Robins Receives New Round of Offers
LEAD: The A. H. Robins Company yesterday received a new round of competing takeover bids from the American Home Products Corporation, the Rorer Group Inc., and Sanofi S.A. of France.
But a special meeting of the Robins board to choose among the bids was adjourned until today to give financial advisers time to study the details.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: Benedictine S.A., Paris, said its board had rejected a takeover move by Remy Martin, the cognac maker.


ELCOR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELCOR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
30,245,000
26,548,000
Net inc
88,000
b2,142,000
Share earns
.01
.30
6mo sales
63,464,000
60,285,000
Net inc
1,502,000
b6,344,000
Share earns
.21
.90


AMTECH SYSTEMS reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMTECH SYSTEMS
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,569,642
3,672,517
Net inc
b296,471
c861,587
Share earns
.08
-
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $127,000.
c-Net loss  The company said the latest results included a pre-tax gain of $303,556 on the sale of the Quartz division.


Cities Fault Capital on Handling of City Issues
LEAD: Officials of the nation's cities have given Congress and the Reagan Administration a ''lousy report card'' on how Washington handles key issues from drugs to the deficit, according to the National League of Cities.


Digital Repurchase
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation said that its board had authorized the purchase of up to three million shares of its common stock, or about 2 percent of Digital's outstanding shares, for use by the company's employee stock plans.
The shares would cost Digital $363 million, based on today's closing price on the New York Stock Exchange of $121 a share, up $2.50.


VACATIONS TO GO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VACATIONS TO GO (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
546,444
414,801
Net loss
120,088
b4,635
6mo rev
1,130,607
763,867
Net loss
190,435
b50,049
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income and for the 6 months includes a tax credit of $16,000.


A Nutrasweet Product Is Due
LEAD: The Nutrasweet Company is planning to announce the development of a fat substitute that could reduce calories and cholesterol in many foods, according to a report published in Crain's Chicago Business, a weekly publication.
The company declined to comment, but a spokesman said Nutrasweet had scheduled a news conference in New York on Jan.


JB'S RESTAURANTS INC reports earnings for 12wks to Dec 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JB'S RESTAURANTS INC (OTC)
12wks to Dec 20
1987
1986
Revenue
21,895,000
22,152,000
Net inc
246,000
b335,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
4,948,000
4,932,000
b-Net loss and after a tax credit of $242,000.


48 Black Writers Protest By Praising Morrison
LEAD: Forty-eight black writers and critics have signed a statement deploring the fact that Toni Morrison has not won a National Book Award or the Pulitzer Prize - something they attribute to ''oversight and harmful whimsy.''


CANANDAIGUA WINE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANANDAIGUA WINE CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
41,320,412
37,956,555
Net inc
904,046
1,836,468
Share earns
.19
.38
Shares outst
4,792,430
4,792,430


U.S. Vetoes U.N. Move
LEAD: The United States vetoed a Security Council resolution today that criticized Israel for its recent military attacks and other moves in southern Lebanon.
Washington said the resolution lacked balance and showed insufficent concern for Israel's security needs.


NCR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NCR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,820,055,000
1,575,122,000
Net inc
161,385,000
134,071,000
Share earns
1.79
1.39
Shares outst
90,066,000
96,747,000
Yr rev
5,640,667,000
4,881,641,000
Net inc
419,330,000
336,524,000
Share earns
4.51
3.42
Shares outst
93,067,000
98,306,000


RAISE G.O.P. HOPES FOR ELECTION YEAR
LEAD: The latest reports on the economy, including signs that the trade deficit is finally shrinking, have raised Republican hopes that the economy is settling onto a course that enhances the prospects of the party's candidates.


Mark Michtom, Toy Executive, 59
LEAD: Mark Michtom, a former executive of the Ideal Toy Company, died of bladder cancer Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Medical Center.
He was 59 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Neoax May Raise IU Bid Further
LEAD: Neoax Inc., which raised its offer for the IU Corporation over the weekend, said it might increase its $520.6 million bid further if it received more financial information about the trucking, food services and waste management company.
IU's shares rose 87.5 cents today, to $19.375, on the New York Stock Exchange amid speculation that


CACI INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CACI INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
33,655,433
29,199,370
Net inc
1,028,476
705,676
Share earns
.09
.06
6mo rev
67,726,674
55,296,096
Net inc
2,018,296
1,160,865
Share earns
.17
.10


DYNATRONICS LASER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYNATRONICS LASER (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,020,300
498,500
Net inc
118,000
b26,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
1,973,600
1,086,800
Net inc
219,100
b14,100
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Birds Seen Moving Eggs
LEAD: RESEARCHERS writing in the British journal Nature say they have observed the first clear evidence of birds' slipping eggs into neighboring nests as an apparent hedge against destruction of their own nests.


BARRIS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARRIS INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,895,000
45,011,000
Net loss
22,362,000
b12,258,000
Share earns
-
1.36
6mo rev
17,175,000
49,502,000
Net loss
18,532,000
b13,330,000
Share earns
-
1.48


Robertson Seeks the Faithful In Cross-State Tour of Iowa
LEAD: Pat Robertson campaigned from border to border across Iowa today, stopping his specially equipped bus at small towns, preaching his message of moral values and trying to energize Iowans to support him in the state's Republican Presidential caucuses three weeks from today.


Preparations for Connally Auction
LEAD: Nellie Connally, wife of John B. Connally, former Treasury Secretary and Governor of Texas, examining a statue that was once in Westminster Abbey.
The statue is one of the items scheduled to be sold at a bankruptcy auction of the family estate Friday in Houston. (AP)


HOME SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
820,027
798,111
Per share
.49
.48


Andrija Artukovic, 88, Nazi Ally Deported to Yugoslavia, Is Dead
LEAD: Andrija Artukovic, a former leader of the Nazi puppet state of Croatia who was extradited from the United States to Yugoslavia, died Saturday in a prison hospital in Zagreb, where he had been condemned to death for mass murder, the Yugoslav press agency announced yesterday.
He was 88 years old and had won a stay of execution on the ground of poor health.


CCX NETWORK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CCX NETWORK INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,928,000
11,731,000
Net inc
1,310,000
656,000
Share earns
.32
.16


I.O.C. Is Upbeat As Deadline Passes
LEAD: The head of the International Olympic Committee today criticized the decisions by North Korea and Cuba to boycott the Olympic Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea, but said he was pleased that a record number of nations would attend the Games next September.


China Buying Plant Line
LEAD: China's General Internal Combustion Engine Factory in Beijing has agreed to buy a second-hand assembly line from the General Motors Corporation for $16.5 million, the official New China News Agency said today.
The engine-making line, which was closed in 1984 after two years of operation, is to start running in Beijing in 1990.


FRANKLIN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRANKLIN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
321,833
227,623
Share earns
.34
.37
Shares outst
947,561
607,257
6mo net inc
608,000
566,000
Share earns
.64
.94
Shares outst
947,561
599,841


FIRST PEOPLES FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST PEOPLES FINANCIAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,180,000
c2,824,000
Per share
.93
.88
Shares outst
3,365,000
2,940,000
Yr net inc
b11,356,000
c8,393,000
Per share
3.49
2.72
Shares outst
3,370,000
2,735,000


Tax Returns Here to Stay
LEAD: President Reagan's dream of a tax system in which most people would not have to file returns apparently is not to be.


Avon Sells Foster Unit To Abbey Medical
LEAD: Avon Products Inc. said yesterday that it was selling its Foster Home Health Care division to Abbey Medical Inc. for $228 million, in the latest of several changes in the home health-care industry.


At a Welfare Hotel, Dreams Still Deferred
LEAD: In contrast to the elaborate, official ceremonies marking the birth of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., some of New York's poorest children gathered yesterday at the welfare hotel where they live and voiced their feelings about a man who inspired millions before they were born.


PARKER DRILLING COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARKER DRILLING COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
25,827,000
37,906,000
Net loss
18,611,000
20,164,000


INTERTAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERTAN INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
175,945,000
148,019,000
Net inc
8,298,000
2,953,000
Share earns
.93
-
6mo sales
288,430,000
242,103,000
Net inc
10,775,000
b2,385,000
Share earns
1.21
-
b-Net loss


Sports of The Times; The Greek and the Preacher
LEAD: THE REV.
JESSE JACKSON and Jimmy (the Greek) Snyder -the preacher and presidential candidate along with the oddsmaker - met and appeared together on the television news Sunday, looking not so much like an odd couple, not so much like Oscar and Felix or Burns and Allen or Cheech and Chong, but more like opposite sides of a coin, Repentance and


Jazz: Curlew, a Quintet
LEAD: CURLEW, the best of the unsigned, genre-busting downtown groups, sounds a bit like Ornette Coleman's electric band, Prime Time.
Instruments chatter in the background, keys get clashed, harmonized melodies appear and a saxophone often states the main themes as a question or a declaration.
But where Mr.


Transactions; BASEBALL
LEAD: CHICAGO (AL) - Agreed to terms with Ozzie Guillen, shortstop, and Greg Walker, first baseman, on one-year contracts.


TECO ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TECO ENERGY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
237,900,000
223,108,000
Net inc
17,408,000
22,292,000
Share earns
.30
.40
Shares outst
56,663,587
56,583,928
Yr rev
970,361,000
901,909,000
Net inc
110,670,000
97,603,000
Share earns
1.95
1.73


Haitians Quietly Awaiting Results and the Reaction
LEAD: The heavy downtown traffic signaled a return to normal here today after a day of closed stores and roadblocks.


67 Laureates Consider the Century's Legacy
LEAD: An unusual conference of Nobel laureates, summoned by President Francois Mitterrand and Elie Wiesel, gathered here today to ponder the perils and promises that confront mankind with the 21st century just 12 years away.


GENDEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENDEX CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,395,000
3,316,000
Net inc
461,000
b213,000
Share earns
.16
.10
9mo sales
11,949,000
9,227,000
Net inc
875,000
b509,000
Share earns
.34
.24
b-Includes extraordinary credits of $35,000 and $84,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.How is the wind-chill factor calculated?


Books of The Times
LEAD: AFGHANISTAN, THE GREAT GAME REVISITED.
Edited by Rosanne Klass. 519 pages.
Freedom House.


Panamanian Chief Dismisses Aide Seeking Political Deal
LEAD: Panama's military leader has dismissed a close adviser who had been trying to arrange a transition to true civilian rule, senior Latin American diplomats said tonight.


UST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UST CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
6,751,000
4,439,000
Per share
.53
.36
Yr net inc
b24,408,000
19,390,000
Per share
1.93
1.56
b-Includes a gain of $3 million on the sale of equity securities.


Panel Sees Abuse in Phone Bids
LEAD: A Senate committee said yesterday that it had evidence that an official of the General Services Administration had passed secret bid information to at least two competing telephone companies.


In Kabul, Military Prowess on Parade
LEAD: Helicopter gunships and jet fighters roared overhead today and dozens of armored vehicles and other weapons rumbled through the streets as the Afghan military staged a show of force in the capital.


Advertising; Network and Spot TV Ads for 'Platoon' Video
LEAD: You'll be seeing it soon on network and spot TV.
The screen will be full of action-packed scenes from ''Platoon,'' the hit film of the war in Vietnam, when across the bottom of the tube will crawl one of those print bands that is usually the station or network's way of announcing real news.
It will say: ''America.


Sports People; Center of Attention
LEAD: The Rangers have given Mark Janssens, their fourth choice in the 1986 draft, a five-game tryout that will start tonight against the Kings in Los Angeles.
Janssens, a center, is in his last year of junior eligibility with the Regina Pats of the Western Hockey League, where he has 23 goals and 27 assists in 43 games.


Five Officers Are Hurt As an Elevator Plunges
LEAD: Five police officers and four Emergency Medical Service workers were injured last night, none seriously, when an elevator in which they were riding fell six floors in an apartment building in Queens, officials said.


Edgar Couper, 88, Regents Chancellor In New York in 60's
LEAD: Edgar Williams Couper, a former Chancellor of the New York State Board of Regents, died of a heart attack Sunday at Lourdes Hospital in Binghamton, N.Y.
He was 88 years old and lived in Binghamton.


SUN MICROSYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUN MICROSYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Revenue
235,094,000
116,486,000
Net inc
13,959,000
8,507,000
Share earns
.38
.28
Shares outst
38,465,000
30,923,000
6mo rev
426,803,000
208,415,000
Net inc
26,891,000
15,202,000
Share earns
.74
.51
Shares outst
38,406,000
30,075,000


KEY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEY CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,986,000
16,067,000
Net loss
b1,311,000
c217,000
Share earns
-
.10
Yr sales
46,028,000
46,432,000
Net loss
b1,507,000
c875,000
Share earns
-
.39
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $1,277,000 and $1,524,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


NCNB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NCNB CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
14,724,000
45,917,000
Per share
.17
.59
Yr net inc
166,852,000
198,765,000
Per share
2.03
2.53
The latest fourth quarter earnings reflect an after-tax charge of $36 million for special provision for losses on Mexican loans.


G.M. Denies Throttle Problems in Its H-Body Cars
LEAD: Engineers of the General Motors Corporation recommended in an internal memorandum that the company's 1986-87 H-body cars be recalled to fix problems that cause the throttles to stick open, according to company documents cited today by a consumer advocacy group.


RIVER FOREST BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RIVER FOREST BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,976,000
1,652,000
Per share
.53
.33
Yr net inc
11,837,000
7,633,000
Per share
2.05
1.51
The increase in net income was due to positive contribution of Commercial National Bank as of Dec.


Advertising; People
LEAD: Ira Berkowitz has become president of Beaumont-Bennett, a sales promotion agency subsidiary of Grey Advertising.


HOME INTENSIVE CARE reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME INTENSIVE CARE (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,589,036
2,625,193
Net inc
1,481,781
193,554
Share earns
.18
-
In the year-ago period preferred stock dividend requirements exceeded net income.


Ohio River Oil Spill Dispersing
LEAD: An oil spill from a ruptured diesel fuel tank has oozed nearly 200 miles as it slowly dissipates down the Ohio River, regional officials say.


Joseph Conlon, Corporate Manager, 76
LEAD: Joseph Conlon, a former general manager of the dyestuff chemical division of the GAF Corporation in New York City, died Jan. 11 at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia after a brief illness.
He was 76 years old and had lived in West Chester, Pa., since his retirement in 1970.


CENTRAL BANCSHARES OF THE SOUTH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL BANCSHARES OF THE SOUTH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
7,397,000
9,178,000
Per share
.34
.44
Yr net inc
33,482,000
36,461,000
Per share
1.57
1.73


NBD BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NBD BANCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
49,685,000
44,048,000
Per share
1.08
.95
Yr net inc
162,229,000
167,552,000
Per share
3.47
3.70
The provision for possible loan losses in 1987 increased to $115.1 million, compared with $19.2 million a year ago.


Begun Leaves Soviet, Ending 17-Year Emigration Struggle
LEAD: Iosif Begun flew out of Moscow bound for Israel today, ending a 17-year emigration battle that included years in prison and Siberian exile.


DREW INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DREW INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,797,000
17,403,000
Net inc
687,000
194,000
Share earns
.01
-
Results for the latest quarter include the operations of White Metal Rolling &amp; Stamping Corp., acquired Dec.


CROSS &amp; TRECKER CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROSS &amp; TRECKER CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
107,318,000
103,329,000
Net loss
1,363,000
b2,857,000
b-Includes a loss of $779,000 from discontinued operations.


GULL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GULL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
19,012,000
16,499,000
Net inc
1,252,000
1,039,000
Share earns
.25
.26
Shares outst
5,040,000
4,056,000
6mo sales
31,979,000
33,093,000
Net inc
1,784,000
1,935,000
Share earns
.35
.48
Shares outst
5,036,000
4,059,000


College Basketball; Ohio State Upsets Michigan by 70-68
LEAD: Grady Mateen's dunk with seven seconds remaining gave Ohio State a 70-68 upset of Michigan tonight in Big Ten play.


Macintosh on Stage
LEAD: A new generation of desktop laser printers, a plug-in board that allows the Macintosh SE to work in color and a software package that allows Macintosh II computers to run I.B.M. software were among the new-product announcements at the annual MacWorld Expo, which ended here today.


Shock-Wave Therapy Tested Against Gallstones
LEAD: A DEVICE designed by West German aerospace engineers to pulverize kidney stones with shock waves is now being explored as a promising treatment for a far more common condition: gallstones.


AMSOUTH BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMSOUTH BANCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,202,000
16,900,000
Per share
.22
.74
Shares outst
23,443,000
22,715,000
Yr net inc
b60,226,000
67,392,000
Per share
2.63
2.98
Shares outst
22,932,000
22,649,000


RYAN BECK &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RYAN BECK &amp; CO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,524,000
10,958,000
Net loss
483,000
b2,701,000
Share earns
-
.26
Yr rev
36,400,000
40,035,000
Net inc
4,750,000
9,165,000
Share earns
.46
.94
Shares outst
10,279,000
9,767,000


William H. H. Wilkinson, Labor Administrator, 84
LEAD: William H. H. Wilkinson, a former administrator of the New York State Department of Labor, died of prostate cancer Jan. 10 at Beth Abraham Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 84 years old and lived in Hartsdale, N.Y.


TANDEM COMPUTERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TANDEM COMPUTERS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
282,282,000
240,240,000
Net inc
23,693,000
27,074,000
Share earns
.24
.29
Shares outst
99,749,000
94,290,000
The year-ago results are restated to reflect pooling of interests with Atalla Corp., a wholly owned subsdiary, acquired through a merger in November 1987.


Westinghouse Net Up 9.9%
LEAD: The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said today that its net income for the fourth quarter rose 9.9 percent, to $223.3 million, or $1.54 a share, from $203.2 million, or $1.38 a share, in the quarter a year ago.


DMI FURNITURE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DMI FURNITURE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
11,341,000
10,830,000
Net inc
b626,000
b528,000
Share earns
.11
.10
b-Includes extraordinary credits of $212,000 for the latest quarter and $247,000 for the year-earlier period.


WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,121,500,000
2,869,100,000
Net inc
223,300,000
203,200,000
Share earns
1.54
1.38
Yr rev
10,679,000,000
10,731,000,000
Net inc
738,900,000
b670,800,000
Share earns
5.12
4.42
Shares outst
145,200,000
152,300,000


France Plans Sale Of Matra
LEAD: After suspending France's privatization program in reaction to last October's stock market plunge, France's Finance Minister, Edouard Balladur, announced today that the Government would resume the program by selling off its 51 percent interest in the Matra Group, one of France's largest makers of military and electronic equipment.


Bigotry's Persistence Noted as Dr. King Is Honored Nationwide
LEAD: A spirited parade in chilly, misty weather and a solemn ceremony at the church where the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. once was pastor marked the holiday honoring the slain civil rights leader here today.


FIRST CHICAGO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST CHICAGO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
96,448,000
b64,226,000
Per share
-
1.08
Yr net loss
570,660,000
b249,202,000
Per share
-
4.20
b-Net income  The year-ago periods have been restated.


Sharon Trustee Weighs Suit
LEAD: The new bankruptcy trustee for the Sharon Steel Corporation, a company that was once pivotal in the takeover empire of Victor Posner, said today that he would consider legal action against the Miami financier to recover money that he says is owed to the corporation.


FIRST CAPITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST CAPITAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
6,794,000
5,784,000
Per share
.69
.59
Yr net inc
26,217,082
25,377,194
Per share
2.67
2.58
The year-ago results are restated to reflect mergers with Gateway Capital Corp.


Despite Gains, U.S. Businesses Fear Expansion
LEAD: American industry is showing an unusual reluctance to build new factories - even though a growing number of companies are hard pressed to meet a rising demand for their products at home and abroad, according to economists and Commerce Department statistics.


IPCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IPCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
51,597,000
49,444,000
Net inc
88,000
b649,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sales
104,915,000
97,836,000
Net inc
1,035,000
b2,189,000
Share earns
.20
-
b-Net loss and includes losses from discontinued operations of $208,000 for the quarter and $436,000 for the 6 months, and the 6 months also includes a loss on disposal of $1,739,000.


Bridge: Tri-State Regional Tourney Ends in a Flurry of Activity
LEAD: A flurry of team activity concluded the Tri-State Regional Championships in Port Chester, N.Y., Sunday.
These were the winners of titles: Knockout Teams Flight A - Jeff Bayone and James Sampson, both of Manhattan; Lapt Chan, Woodside, Queens, and Jeffrey Ferro, Atlanta.


BUTLER, JOHN O CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUTLER, JOHN O CO (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,276,774
10,125,605
Net inc
1,007,423
789,889
Share earns
.16
.12


N.F.L. Playoffs; Redskins Relax And Look Back
LEAD: The telephone rang this morning here at Redskin Park, the Redskins' office and training complex down the road from Dulles International Airport.
It was Dan Reeves, the coach of the Denver Broncos, calling for Joe Gibbs, the coach of the Redskins.


APPLIED MAGNETICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APPLIED MAGNETICS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
60,601,000
36,817,000
Net inc
4,338,000
1,068,000
Share earns
.28
.08
Shares outst
15,639,697
13,477,336
Share earnings and shares outstanding reflect a 2-for-1 stock split for shareholders of record Nov.


The Basic Speech/Jesse Jackson; From a Tradition of Marching for Jobs and Rights
LEAD: Candidates seeking the Presidential nomination make dozens of speeches in their campaigns.
Some address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
But more often the candidate uses a ''basic speech.'' It summarizes, with little variation from one occasion to the next, how the candidate wants to present himself to the voters.


FRANCHISEIT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRANCHISEIT CORP
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
539,969
202,115
Net inc
54,442
b30,356
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Vintage Musicals in Revival
LEAD: When a 29-piece orchestra strikes up the overture to Jerome Kern's 1920 show ''Sally'' tomorrow evening at the Academy Theater, the sound of music will herald the revitalization of the New Amsterdam Theater Company, the only theater organization in New York devoted full time to the concert restoration of vintage


CALIFORNIA AMPLIFIER reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALIFORNIA AMPLIFIER (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,174,000
1,827,000
Net inc
237,000
95,000
Share earns
.06
.03
9mo sales
5,700,000
6,100,000
Net inc
442,000
209,000
Share earns
.12
.06


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
n.a.
6.85
n.a.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
n.a.
5.87
n.a.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
n.a.
6.25
n.a.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
n.a.
8.43
n.a.
30-YR.


GENETICS INSTITUTE reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENETICS INSTITUTE (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,424,000
6,112,000
Net loss
4,113,000
961,000
Yr rev
19,600,000
19,297,000
Net loss
10,444,000
4,504,000


N.F.L. Playoffs; Broncos Eager to Bury Their Bitterness
LEAD: Finally, John Elway said today, he realizes that the Super Bowl ''is just another football game.''


TWIN DISC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TWIN DISC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
37,417,000
32,566,000
Net inc
2,170,000
791,000
Share earns
.71
.25
6mo sales
69,188,000
59,132,000
Net inc
3,588,000
b613,000
Share earns
1.16
-


Filipinos Vote in Local Elections
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino voting at her family's estate yesterday in Tarlac.
About 80 percent of the nation's 27 million voters took part in the balloting for 16,000 provincial and local posts.
A gubernatorial candidate, Roy Padilla, was murdered hours before the polls opened and a campaign worker was killed during the voting which followed a violent campaign in which 87 people were reported killed.


108 Killed as Turboprop Plane Crashes in China
LEAD: A domestic airliner crashed in southwestern China, killing all 108 people aboard, the official New China News Agency reported today.


HEALTHCARE INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTHCARE INTERNATIONAL (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
74,645,000
58,965,000
Net inc
196,000
1,409,000
Share earns
.01
.15
Shares outst
8,501,000
9,664,000
6mo rev
144,009,000
115,667,000
Net inc
322,000
2,458,000
Share earns
.01
.25
Shares outst
8,708,000
9,688,000


INITIO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INITIO INC
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,173,498
4,763,473
Net loss
560,000
b47,926
6mo sales
4,917,750
6,127,183
Net loss
1,396,511
306,362
b-Net income


N.F.L. Playoffs; Williams Feels Weight of Role
LEAD: The symbolism did not escape Doug Williams today.
On the morning after he achieved the high point of his professional football career, he was the grand marshal of the Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. parade in Washington.
And although the game he plays for a living may appear insignificant on a day like this, Williams found King's words appropriate to describe his feelings about reaching the Super


SHELTON SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHELTON SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
176,000
325,000
Per share
.23
.43
6mo net inc
406,000
645,000
Per share
.54
.86
The company said the earnings decline primarily was the result of weakened loan demand and one-time expenses related to its conversion from FSLIC to FDIC deposit insurance.


EVANS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EVANS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Revenue
38,526,000
45,884,000
Net loss
375,000
b1,349,000
Share earns
-
.28
9mo rev
86,426,000
94,501,000
Net loss
4,497,000
1,202,000
b-Net income


KENT FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENT FINANCIAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
16,740,000
14,179,000
Per share
.74
.62
Yr net inc
63,390,000
60,585,000
Per share
2.81
2.71


MUTUAL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MUTUAL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
390,000
443,000
Share earns
.34
.39


Harvard Names Head Of Renaissance Center
LEAD: A Harvard professor of English and comparative literature has been appointed director of the university's Center for Italian Renaissance Studies in Florence, Italy.


Rabin Vows to Quell Palestinian Unrest
LEAD: Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today that the disturbances in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip were the most difficult and widespread that Israel had yet faced, but he vowed to bring the unrest to a ''manageable'' level.


Sports People; Mahorn Is Punished
LEAD: Rick Mahorn, the Detroit Pistons' power forward, was suspended without pay for one game and fined $5,000 yesterday for committing a foul that started a fight during the Saturday night game in which the Bulls defeated the Pistons.
Rod Thorn, the National Basketball Association's vice president for operations, who levied the fine on Mahorn, also fined Charles Oakley, the Bulls' power forward, $2,000, and Doug Collins, the Bulls' coach, $1,500.


JOHN HANSON SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHN HANSON SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,221,000
1,157,000
Per share
.20
.20
6mo net inc
2,122,000
789,000
Per share
.35
.14
Shares outst
6,008,273
5,898,273


HAITI GOVERNMENT PRAISES ELECTION
LEAD: The army-dominated Government defended Sunday's presidential election today as ''beautifully'' done, but several candidates charged widespread fraud and opposition leaders said irregularities and a lack of voter participation robbed the elections of credibility.


MUSICLAND GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MUSICLAND GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
202,708,000
178,366,000
Net inc
16,218,000
11,906,000
Share earns
1.44
1.30
Yr rev
510,467,000
412,151,000
Net inc
22,595,000
13,238,000
Share earns
2.05
1.45
Shares outst
11,007,000
9,148,000


Europe Holds Farm Talks
LEAD: Ministers of the European Community renewed attempts today to curb soaring European farm spending and prevent the bloc from falling into bankruptcy.


DYNATEM reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYNATEM
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
266,731
418,819
Net loss
164,339
165,126
Shares outst
1,418,400
1,188,000
6mo sales
699,887
792,199
Net loss
149,917
238,100


Rig Count Falls Again
LEAD: The number of rigs drilling for oil and gas in the United States dropped again last week, falling by 48, to 1,054, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
A year ago, the rig count was 886.
The Houston-based oil tool maker tallies only the number of rigs exploring for oil.
The count is a widely watched barometer of drilling activity.


New Research Yields Clues in Fight Against Autoimmune Diseases
LEAD: WITH a newly detailed picture of molecules on the surfaces of cells, scientists are hopeful that they can finally devise strategies against the 40 or more diseases that result when the immune system mistakenly turns against the body.


Drug Prevention Project Enlists Girls' Peers
LEAD: The Girls Clubs of America is undertaking a nationwide program to prevent drug and alcohol abuse among girls 10 to 14 years old.
The goal of the Government-financed program is to reach at least 35,000 girls in the next five years.


SQUARE INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SQUARE INDUSTRIES INC
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,246,000
11,345,000
Net inc
507,000
325,000
Share earns
.44
.28
9mo rev
38,098,000
33,350,000
Net inc
1,032,000
b1,523,000
Share earns
.89
1.31


HARTFORD NATIONALL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARTFORD NATIONALL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
32,805,000
33,685,000
Per share
.75
.81
Yr net inc
125,444,000
116,710,000
Per share
2.91
2.87


Protests, Politics and Deep Emotion Mix as New York Honors Dr. King
LEAD: From Brooklyn to the World Trade Center, from Harlem to City Hall, protesters, politicians, worshipers and workers honored the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. yesterday.
They did so with warmth, with criticism, with anger and with politics, in ways that the slain civil rights leader might have understood and in ways that he might not have appreciated.


CRESTAR FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRESTAR FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
12,000,000
19,600,000
Per share
.40
.68
Yr net inc
56,700,000
82,600,000
Per share
1.92
2.89
The company said the decline in earnings is largely because of an additional $10.5 million special provision for Latin American loans.


It's Just Unshrinkable
LEAD: Ronald Reagan's pledge to reduce the size of the Government was a cornerstone of his Presidential campaign.
He asserted, in his first Inaugural address in 1981, that ''it is time to check and reverse the growth of government, which shows signs of having grown beyond the consent of the governed.''


San Juan Journal; Violence Turns Don Juan Tale Ugly
LEAD: His name is Antonio Garcia Lopez but in the rugged Central Cordillera he is better known as Tono Bicicleta - Tony Bicycle.
Police helicopters this week circled over the mountains' green ridges, dense and wet, probing into the shadowy pockets where he might be hiding.


Fruehauf Unit Sale
LEAD: The Fruehauf Corporation has completed the sale of its 91 percent stake in Fruehauf Canada, a truck and trailer servicing operation, to FRH Acquisitions, an affiliate of the Trailmobile Group of Companies of Brantford, Ontario.
The sale totaled about $96 million (Canadian), equal to $74.5 million (American), or about $30.20 (American) a share.


CROWN CRAFTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROWN CRAFTS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
18,900,000
15,000,000
Net inc
1,253,000
877,000
Share earns
.42
.29
9mo sales
53,300,000
40,000,000
Net inc
4,082,000
1,949,000
Share earns
1.32
.65


BANK OF DELAWARE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF DELAWARE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,144,662
3,733,244
Per share
.55
.50
Shares outst
7,526,147
7,377,560
Yr net inc
16,497,335
14,269,031
Per share
2.20
1.94
Shares outst
7,489,800
7,346,348


KEYCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEYCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
8,087,000
24,299,000
Per share
.20
.71
Shares outst
33,495,279
32,803,709
Yr net inc
79,973,000
88,367,000
Per share
2.25
2.66
Shares outst
33,457,203
31,397,586


INSIDE
LEAD:  Bias Question at Stanford


SOUTHEAST BANKING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHEAST BANKING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
28,192,000
23,123,000
Per share
.92
.78
Shares outst
29,140,000
27,687,000
Yr net inc
38,388,000
86,522,000
Per share
1.14
3.00
Shares outst
28,735,000
26,894,000


CB&amp;T BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CB&amp;T BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
6,386,000
5,546,000
Per share
.32
.28
Yr net inc
24,068,000
20,446,000
Per share
1.22
1.05
The company said the latest year results include a pre-tax gain of $7.3 million from the sale of a mortgage banking unit, and a $5 million special addition to loan loss reserves.


SEEQ TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEEQ TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,062,000
8,833,000
Net inc
b1,913,000
c1,047,000
Share earns
.20
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $512,000.
c-Net loss  The company said revenue for the 1987 fiscal first quarter includes $1 million from an engineering development arrangement with Motorola Semiconductor Products of Phoenix, Ariz.


DRUG TESTS RISING AS WAY TO REDUCE PRISON CROWDING
LEAD: As prison and jail populations swell beyond capacity, cities and states are increasingly using drug tests to identify the worst criminal offenders, and using treatment of drug abuse to alter their criminal behavior.


Rates Little Changed Overseas
LEAD: Interest rates were little changed in overseas trading while speculators and investors waited for the resumption of full-scale trading in the United States after yesterday's holiday.


First Medical Proton Accelerator Being Built
LEAD: THE first machine designed to aim high-energy protons at deeply embedded cancers is finally being built - 42 years after Dr.
Robert Wilson first cited the advantages of such therapy.


COMMERCE BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCE BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
10,939,000
9,774,000
Per share
1.06
.94
Yr net inc
40,073,000
39,178,000
Per share
3.89
3.75


SERVO CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SERVO CORP OF AMERICA (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,669,000
4,520,000
Net loss
79,000
b281,000
Share earns
-
.36
Yr sales
16,603,000
18,267,000
Net inc
456,000
1,133,000
Share earns
.62
1.52


FAMILY SHOPPING NETWORK reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAMILY SHOPPING NETWORK (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,851,332
2,008,105
Net inc
161,581
138,979
Share earns
.03
.03
Shares outst
5,000,000
4,000,000
9mo sales
5,772,808
4,281,917
Net inc
311,213
164,719
Share earns
.07
.04
Shares outst
4,333,333
4,000,000


STANDARD SHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD SHARES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
165,655,000
149,702,000
Net inc
3,073,000
b4,621,000
Share earns
1.17
1.76
9mo sales
487,383,000
452,191,000
Net inc
10,099,000
b13,836,000
Share earns
3.85
5.27


State House Detente
LEAD: It's been years since New York State had a governor and lieutenant governor who get along as well as Mario Cuomo and Stan Lundine.
Their rapport ought to inspire the Legislature to change the destructive rule that prevents a governor from choosing his own running mate.


Give Help Instead
LEAD: To the Editor:


Australian Open; Lendl Advances Easily to Semifinals
LEAD: Top-seeded Ivan Lendl moved into the semifinals of the Australian Open championships today, defeating the last surviving American in the men's singles, Todd Witsken, 6-2, 6-1, 7-6.


Carbide Files India Appeal
LEAD: The Union Carbide Corporation today appealed a court decision that ordered it to pay $270 million in interim relief to victims of the 1984 gas leak that killed more than 2,800 people.


Advertising; A Women's Magazine Called Cameo Arrives
LEAD: There is still another women's beauty publication on the scene.
It is called Cameo magazine; it is very big (11 by 15 inches), very slick and distributed only through beauty salons.
You remember the late Cornelius Donovan's Girl Talk, and a barbershop magazine called Dare?


Flately Still Out Sports People
LEAD: Patrick Flatley of the Islanders underwent tests yesterday to determine the extent of damage to his right knee, which he injured Sunday night at Buffalo when he was checked into the boards by Mike Ramsey.
Ari Haanpaa was summoned from Springfield, Mass., on emergency recall to replace Flatley tonight against Pittsburgh.


White of Illinois Resigns
LEAD: Mike White, the head football coach at the University of Illinois, resigned today following an investigation by the National Collegiate Athletic Association into purported recruiting violations, a university spokeswoman said.


Corrections
LEAD: The Our Towns column on Dec. 29 misstated the frequency of volunteers' meetings with recovering mental patients in the Compeer program operated by the Mental Health Association of Nassau County.
They meet once a week for one year.


SOUTH CAROLINA NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTH CAROLINA NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
13,200,000
11,100,000
Per share
.61
.52
Yr net inc
52,900,000
43,800,000
Per share
2.44
2.05


Angelo de Mojana, 82; Led Knights of Malta
LEAD: Friar Angelo de Mojana di Cologna, the Grand Master of the Sovereign Order of the Knights of Malta, died of a heart attack today at his home in Rome.
He was 82 years old.


TECHKNITS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TECHKNITS INC
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,931,332
2,680,524
Net inc
284,381
313,552
Share earns
.05
.08
Shares outst
6,300,000
4,000,000
9mo sales
7,669,264
5,439,160
Net inc
646,292
457,866
Share earns
.12
.11
Shares outst
5,277,777
4,000,000


Argentine Troops Storm Garrison And Put Down Colonel's Mutiny
LEAD: About 2,000 soldiers loyal to the civilian Government stormed an army compound today and forced the surrender of a rebellious colonel who had held the camp for three days with the support of about 100 followers, officials said.


Officers Ask Themselves Troubling Questions
LEAD: For two days the military officers at the National Defense University here grappled with ethical issues of loyalty and obedience, just and unjust wars, political responsibilities and pacifism.


A STATUE? NOW? U.S. JUDGE IS JUDGED UNWORTHY
LEAD: Ten years later, Bretons remember the catastrophe they call La Maree Noire, the Black Tide, with the intensity with which Americans recall the moment President Kennedy was shot.


AIM TELEPHONES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIM TELEPHONES INC
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,093,000
7,128,000
Net inc
341,000
b292,000
Share earns
.08
.08
Shares outst
4,345,000
3,742,000
9mo sales
22,661,000
18,164,000
Net inc
959,000
b753,000
Share earns
.24
.21
Shares outst
4,080,000
3,666,000


3d World's Prospects Called Poor
LEAD: Investment and economic growth have contracted in debtor countries since the global debt crisis began in 1982, and living standards have staggered, the World Bank said today.


Snow, High Winds and Heavy Surf Batter the West
LEAD: A storm left up to two feet of snow in the mountains of the West yesterday after hammering California's coast with 12-foot waves that destroyed a restaurant, washed away part of a hotel and damaged beach homes.


Kidnapping in Colombia
LEAD: Leftist guerrillas kidnapped the leading candidate for mayor of Bogota today, the police said.
Andres Pastrana, the 34-year-old son of former President Misael Pastrana, was reported abducted at gunpoint from his campaign headquarters.
President Virgilio Barco Vargas called an emergency meeting of his Cabinet and Mayor Julio Cesar Sanchez of Bogota said a huge search had been mounted.


More Lyme Disease Reported in Connecticut
LEAD: The incidence of Lyme disease, the nation's most commonly reported tick-carried illness, has risen 163 percent in nine years in parts of Connecticut, the state where it was first discovered, Federal researchers have reported.


Concert: Philadelphia Group
LEAD: THE Concerto Soloists of Philadelphia played a concert at Town Hall on Sunday afternoon that was notable for its three strong 18th-century pieces.
The nicest discovery was Francesco Rosetti's G minor Symphony.
He was a Bohemian despite the Italian pen name, and his music here is terse and forceful - touched by the Sturm und Drang movement but with the tenseness smoothed over by the composer's elegance.


David W. C. Clark, Lawyer, 38; Was Convicted in Stock Scandal
LEAD: David W. C. Clark, a New York lawyer implicated in the insider trading scandal that involved a columnist for The Wall Street Journal, died Saturday at his mother's home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 38 years old.


FIRST NATIONAL BANCORP (GAINESVILLE, GA) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST NATIONAL BANCORP (GAINESVILLE, GA)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,669,000
3,190,000
Per share
.47
.41
Yr net inc
14,810,000
12,895,000
Per share
1.90
1.67
Results are restated for the acquisition of Bank of Banks County (Ga.) and First State Bank of Ellijay (Ga.).


CREDO PETROLEUM CORP reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CREDO PETROLEUM CORP (OTC)
Year to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
771,000
850,000
Net inc
b182,000
c777,000
Share earns
.06
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $18,000.
c-Net loss  The company said fiscal 1986 results include a writedown of oil and gas properties of $1,479,000.


EA ENGINEERING, SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EA ENGINEERING, SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,314,000
3,083,200
Net inc
271,800
136,800
Share earns
.11
.07
Shares outst
2,552,400
1,845,800


DIVERSCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIVERSCO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,447,071
8,614,524
Net inc
271,018
b247,108
Share earns
.19
.32
Shares outst
1,451,131
768,672
9mo rev
25,859,557
23,960,355
Net inc
746,301
b598,865
Share earns
.55
.78
Shares outst
1,358,350
768,672


CARRIAGE INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARRIAGE INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
20,027,000
17,503,000
Net inc
379,000
555,000
Share earns
.08
.11
6mo sales
42,408,000
35,565,000
Net inc
1,219,000
1,210,000
Share earns
.25
.24


Dollar Moves Down in U.S. While Gold Closes Stronger
LEAD: The dollar drifted mostly lower in light domestic trading yesterday as worries about international trade suddenly arose again in the currency markets.


Stronger Yen Is Predicted
LEAD: In the coming year the yen will strengthen against the dollar, Japan's growth rate will taper off and the big trade imbalance between the United States and Japan will remain near its present level, a Japanese economist predicted today.


Stocks Up by 7.79 in Quiet Trading
LEAD: Stock prices rose moderately yesterday in quiet holiday trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average advanced 7.79 points, to 1,963.86, after rising by 39.96 points on Friday.


PARKER HANNIFIN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARKER HANNIFIN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
528,648,000
445,662,000
Net inc
b25,353,000
c21,198,000
Share earns
.55
.47
6mo sales
1,027,178,000
890,005,000
Net inc
d47,163,000
40,100,000
Share earns
1.03
.89


Gas Supplies Are Restored
LEAD: Helped by a warming trend and fewer supply disruptions than expected, the nation's largest natural gas utility restored shipments today to 850 corporate customers in Southern California.
The service had been cut off two weeks ago to avert a shortage to residential customers.
The Southern California


Jockeying Begins as Politicians Look to Chicago Mayoral Election
LEAD: Politicians generally like to open campaigns before crowds of cheering supporters.
But Acting Mayor Eugene Sawyer, whose public appearances sometimes elicit jeers as well as cheers, chose to announce his bid in a radio studio.


BRYN MAWR BANK CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRYN MAWR BANK CORP (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,275,000
2,734,000
Per share
3.02
2.52
Bryn Mawr Trust Co. became a wholly owned subsidiary of Bryn Mawr Bank Corp. effective Jan. 2, 1987, as a result of a reorganiation.


NICARAGUA FREES JAILED DISSIDENTS
LEAD: The security police today released seven opposition leaders whose arrest over the weekend provoked international protests.


NATIONAL COMMUNITY BANK OF NEW JERSEY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL COMMUNITY BANK OF NEW JERSEY
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
9,300,000
7,500,000
Per share
.90
.73
Yr net inc
34,500,000
27,400,000
Per share
3.34
2.66
Share earnings reflect a 4-for-1 stock split paid in May.


4th Generation of Fords on Way Up
LEAD: The fourth generation of the founding family moved closer to power today as Edsel B. Ford 2d and William Clay Ford Jr. were elected to the board of the Ford Motor Company.


How Nature May Draw Stone Circles
LEAD: THE ''sorted circles of Spitsbergen,'' mysterious rings of stone found in a cold Norwegian landscape, have long stood as evidence that nature does not always need human architects to pick up rocks and arrange them in harmonious patterns.


Component Of Blood Also Found In Plants
LEAD: NO one can get blood from a turnip, but it might prove possible to find the blood substance hemoglobin in one.


Kaypro's New PC
LEAD: IT was the only sensible decision, but that didn't make it any pleasanter.
Saying farewell to a faithful retainer is never easy.
Still, it had to be done, and so we pulled the plug on the old Kaypro II, closed its cover, and sent it away.


PATTERNS
LEAD: One Label Ends . .


The Unwelcome Mat
LEAD: To the Editor:


FUR VAULT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FUR VAULT INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
36,101,000
28,734,000
Net inc
1,085,000
b2,701,000
Share earns
.08
.23
6mo rev
50,030,000
38,010,000
Net inc
130,000
b2,300,000
Share earns
.01
.20


ELECTRO-CATHETER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTRO-CATHETER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,177,663
1,728,422
Net loss
140,226
323,501


CHOICE DRUG SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHOICE DRUG SYSTEMS
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,776,190
938,445
Net loss
347,835
b31,621
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
3,818,796
2,540,274
Net loss
314,086
b83,112
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


Honda's Canada Output
LEAD: The Honda Motor Company plans to increase production of its Civic and Accord cars at its subsidiary in Ontario, a Honda spokesman said today.


DPL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DPL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
248,341,000
229,582,000
Net loss
b12,145,000
c25,592,000
Share earns
-
.61
Yr rev
941,210,000
963,649,000
Net inc
b107,902,000
125,895,000
Share earns
2.60
3.05


Contributors Give Steadily To Neediest
LEAD: Uta Hagen, who celebrated her 50th anniversary in the theater last year, is a faithful contributor to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


The Dance: New Works By 6 Choreographers
LEAD: DANCE CHANCE, a producing organization directed by Patricia Tarr, celebrated its fifth anniversary with two selections of new dance at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
The previously reviewed first program and the second program, seen on Saturday night, suggested both the adventurousness and soundness of Dance Chance's plan.


Fair Price for Integrity
LEAD: Seeking public office in New York City has traditionally meant paying obeisance to real estate developers, brokerage houses and others who offer big contributions in hopes that the favor will be repaid once the beneficiary takes office.


Sales Slip in Britain
LEAD: Britain's consumer boom appeared to taper off at the end of last year, with retail sales falling a seasonally adjusted 1.1 percent in December after rising 1.05 percent in November, the Government said today.
The Department of Trade and Industry said sales rose more than 1 percent in the October-December period from the previous quarter, and were 5.5 percent higher than in the 1986 period.


More Testing Is the Wrong Answer for Education
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Debate Over Dinosaur Extinctions Takes an Unusually Rancorous Turn
LEAD: THE impact of a large comet may or may not have killed off the dinosaurs 65 million years ago.
But as the debate over dinosaur extinction rages on, personal rancor is increasingly clouding scientific issues.


EAGLE-PICHER INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EAGLE-PICHER INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
181,917,716
160,123,755
Net inc
11,704,357
11,528,358
Share earns
1.09
1.08
Shares outst
10,742,000
10,774,000
Yr sales
677,233,788
648,336,825
Net inc
39,987,525
38,808,073
Share earns
3.70
3.80
Shares outst
10,802,000
10,212,000


STERLING ELECTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STERLING ELECTRONICS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
16,467,600
12,140,000
Net inc
b440,200
c219,300
Share earns
.12
-
9mo rev
47,277,500
37,657,800
Net inc
b806,700
c276,900
Share earns
.21
-


Growing Militancy for Animal Rights Is Seen
LEAD: In response to what the authorities say they believe is a growing militancy among the most radical elements of the animal rights movement, the Federal authorities have begun to investigate, under anti-terrorism statutes, several arson cases involving research laboratories and meat companies.


Phone Companies Take Steps Against Dial-a-Porn Services
LEAD: Responding to public complaints, several telephone companies have taken steps that industry officials say are likely to inhibit the growth of telephone services that offer adult messages.


Sports People; Hope for Fernandez
LEAD: Tony Fernandez's injured elbow should be healed in time for him to start the 1988 season for the Toronto Blue Jays.


ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
97,317,000
49,479,000
Share earns
.56
.29
6mo net inc
180,300,000
114,368,000
Share earns
1.04
.67


Lawmakers on the Tube
LEAD: C-SPAN, the cable television network that brings Senate and House floor sessions live into your living room, has 43 percent more viewers than it did three years ago.
The public affairs network reports that a national poll by the Maryland Survey Research Center, taken in the final three months of 1987, showed 10.9 million households or a potential audience of 27.3 million people watching C-SPAN, an increase of 43 percent from the 1984 estimates of 7.6 million households and 19 million people.


FIRST EMPIRE STATE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST EMPIRE STATE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b6,013,000
c14,677,000
Per share
1.29
1.18
Shares outst
5,676,000
5,456,000
Yr net inc
b40,258,000
c53,317,000
Per share
4.78
4.57
b-Included $5.5 million in non-recurring acquisition costs for the quarter and year; the quarter also includes $1.4 million in after-tax losses on sale of bank investment securities, and the year includes an increase of $2.1 million in the net costs of First Operations Resource.


BANPONCE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANPONCE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,646,000
6,186,000
Per share
.98
1.07
Yr net inc
12,017,000
24,384,000
Per share
2.08
4.23


New Yevtushenko Poem Praises Stalin Victim
LEAD: In a new, previously unpublished poem that has found its way to the United States, the Soviet poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko expresses a vivid admiration and compassion for Nikolai I. Bukharin, the Bolshevik leader who was executed on Stalin's orders in 1938.


ALLIED BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIED BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
77,050,087
b4,100,925
Per share
-
.10
Yr net loss
317,963,360
17,593,136
b-Net income  The 1987 results include provisions to loan-loss allowances of $70 million in the fourth quarter and $355.9 million for the year, compared with $39 million and $219.4 million for the same periods, respectively.


ULTRA BANCORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ULTRA BANCORP (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
15,826,000
14,262,000
Per share
3.27
2.97


In Dispute on Bias, Stanford Is Likely To Alter Western Culture Program
LEAD: At Stanford University, they still talk of the day nearly a year ago when some 500 students, on a march with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, came up with a slogan for the next generation.


Why Yonkers? Long Path to an Integration Order
LEAD: The desegregation case that has preoccupied three city administrations at a cost of $10 million is entering its eighth year with a hint of settlement, but also with many here still asking, why Yonkers?


AMERICAN ELECTROMEDICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN ELECTROMEDICS CORP
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
609,000
516,000
Net inc
2,000
b15,000
b-Net loss


INTERNATIONAL SHIPHOLDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL SHIPHOLDING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
38,180,000
29,500,000
Net inc
2,237,000
1,437,000
Share earns
.56
.44
Yr rev
136,004,000
114,743,000
Net inc
6,241,000
3,281,000
Share earns
1.79
1.00


NEW CENTURY ENTERTAINENT reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW CENTURY ENTERTAINENT (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
10,633,000
1,889,000
Net loss
b6,411,000
b326,000
9mo rev
29,340,000
9,489,000
Net loss
5,784,000
277,000
b-Includes a reversal of a tax credit of $218,000 and $56,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN OF COEUR D'ALENE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN OF COEUR D'ALENE
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
450,893
771,167
Share earns
.33
.56


300,000 Sign Petitions For New Arizona Vote
LEAD: As state legislative leaders prepared to consider the impeachment of Gov.
Evan Mecham, county officials from around the state reported today that enough signatures had been validated on petitions to force an election to remove him from office.


The Dance: Hannah Kahn
LEAD: THE catholicity of Hannah Kahn's musical taste was evident in the recently choreographed works that the Hannah Kahn Dance Company brought to the Merce Cunningham Studio Sunday night.
But the program also revealed something curious about her method of dance composition.


DIME SAVINGS BANK-WALLINGORD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIME SAVINGS BANK-WALLINGORD (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,446,000
1,607,000
Per share
.27
.31
Yr net inc
6,726,000
5,165,000
Per share
1.27
-
The prior year per share amount is not available; the bank converted to stock form of ownership in July 1986.


FIRST FIDELITY BANCORP OF NEWARK, NJ reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FIDELITY BANCORP OF NEWARK, NJ (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b11,705,000
c32,353,000
Per share
-
1.10
Yr net inc
b48,537,000
119,543,000
Per share
1.45
4.12
b-After a special provision of $44.5 million for loan losses for the quarter and year.


Salomon Banker Jumps To Gibbons, Green Post
LEAD: E. Stephen Benson, a senior investment banker at Salomon Brothers Inc., is becoming the fifth general partner at Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen Inc., an investment banking firm specializing in management buyouts.


Conviction Set Aside for Man Who Contends He Paid Bribe
LEAD: A convicted rapist who maintains that his lawyer cheated on a deal to bribe his judge has been granted a new trial and is free on $50,000 bond.


PIONEER-STANDARD ELECTRONCS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIONEER-STANDARD ELECTRONCS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
63,075,009
51,144,410
Net inc
1,279,124
b267,694
Share earns
.24
.05
9mo sales
181,187,590
154,877,089
Net inc
3,378,803
b569,748
Share earns
.63
.11


NEW YORKERS SAY RACE RELATIONS HAVE WORSENED IN THE LAST YEAR
LEAD: New Yorkers say they believe relations between blacks and whites are ''generally bad'' in the city and have worsened in the last year, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.


Job Losses Also Mounting In London Financial Center
LEAD: The ax is falling more slowly on employment in London's financial district than on Wall Street, but some analysts warn that it may eventually cut deeper.


Advertising; A Meredith Publisher In AIDS Fund Drive
LEAD: Stephen R. Burzon, publisher of Meredith's Metropolitan Home magazine, announced plans yesterday for a major fund-raising effort in behalf of the fight against AIDS.
He hopes to be able to donate at least $300,000 to the Design Industries' Foundation for AIDS.
During Designers Saturday Week in early October the magazine will have a show house on the East Side with its various rooms being done by some of the biggest names in interior decoration.


Elizabeth Holtzman Is No Ordinary Lawyer Criticizing a Judge
LEAD: To the Editor:


There's Gold in Archival Labyrinth
LEAD: The vast labyrinth of public records and archival repositories in the nation's capital has long been a gold mine for historians and other scholars.
But now a new type of investigator is discovering gold there.


SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
332,473,000
251,906,000
Net inc
22,833,000
37,647,000
Share earns
.46
.76
6mo sales
558,536,000
440,944,000
Net inc
37,630,000
62,111,000
Share earns
.76
1.26


HUBCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUBCO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,166,915
1,216,838
Per share
.30
.31
Yr net inc
b5,251,002
4,481,284
Per share
1.34
1.15
b-Includes a non-recurring gain of $400,157 on the sale of a bank branch, and a loss on the sale of securities of $143,773.


PIONEER SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIONEER SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,252,000
b1,515,000
Per share
.37
.44
b-After extraordinary tax benefits of $1,006,000 for the latest quarter and $902,000 for the year-ago period.
The latest first quarter is after the placement of $1.5 million into the bank's general loan loss reserves, and includes a gain of about $399,000 from the Dec.


Dr. King Honored in Observances Around the Nation
LEAD: Martin Luther King 3d laying a wreath at the tomb of his father yesterday in Atlanta on the observance of Dr.
King's 59th birthday.
With him were, from left, Dr.
King's sister, Christine Ferris; Senator Sam Nunn; Mayor Andrew Young, and Coretta Scott King, Dr.
King's widow.
Articles, pages B1 and B3.


Prices of Copper Are Higher On Worry About Inventory
LEAD: Copper futures prices advanced yesterday as concern deepened on the Commodity Exchange in New York and the London Metal Exchange about dwindling inventories of the metal.
As usual, the low level of copper stocks has raised questions about how good the metal that remains in exchange warehouses is.


FIDELITY MEDICAL SUPPLY CO reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIDELITY MEDICAL SUPPLY CO
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
170,143
20,600
Net loss
2,394,250
b1,764,841
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $16,770.


ST PAUL BANCORPORATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ST PAUL BANCORPORATION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
6,374,000
5,317,000
Per share
.54
-
Yr net inc
20,211,000
b20,060,000
Per share
1.70
-
b-Includes penalties of $724,000 from early payment of FHLB advances.


Sports People; 2 Steelers Retire
LEAD: John Stallworth, a wide receiver, and Donnie Shell, a safety, are retiring after 14 seasons with the Pittsburgh Steelers.
A team spokesman said yesterday that the Steelers will announce plans on Friday to honor the 35-year-old veterans of Pittsburgh's Super Bowl victories in 1975, 1976, 1979 and 1980.


COMMERCIAL INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCIAL INTERNATIONAL CORP
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
18,382,629
14,877,910
Net loss
58,479
c224,327
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
34,097,650
28,554,507
Net loss
b67,624
c256,276
Share earns
-
.06


BIRTCHER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIRTCHER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,453,200
1,690,300
Net inc
125,700
b640,800
Share earns
.06
-
6mo rev
2,822,400
3,308,700
Net inc
201,900
b841,400
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


AMERICAN LIST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN LIST CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,054,710
888,781
Net inc
405,990
229,776
Share earns
.15
.08
9mo rev
5,562,584
3,759,452
Net inc
1,417,438
1,152,529
Share earns
.51
.41


VINTAGE ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VINTAGE ENTERPRISES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
8,299,000
10,369,000
Net loss
397,000
1,286,000
9mo rev
26,277,000
32,427,000
Net loss
1,051,000
1,258,000


Canadiens Triumph
LEAD: Stephane Richer scored two third-period goals tonight as the Montreal Canadiens held on to beat Edmonton, 6-4, snapping the Oilers' seven-game unbeaten streak.


Profits Show Recovery at Five Computer Makers
LEAD: Five major computer manufacturers today reported earnings for the fourth quarter of 1987 that met or exceeded Wall Street's expectations.


DESIGNHOUSE INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DESIGNHOUSE INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
4,565,000
5,660,000
Net loss
143,000
108,000
6mo sales
9,066,000
10,138,000
Net loss
256,000
409,000


Careers; Drug Testing Common for Job Seekers
LEAD: DRUG testing of prospective employees has become almost routine at many major companies, according to results of a new survey issued by the Interface Group, a Washington recruiting concern.
Meanwhile, a survey made by the University of Michigan finds that the use of cocaine among young adults has declined, perhaps partly because of fears about testing by employers.


Advertising; Addendum
LEAD: Earle Palmer Brown's Atlanta office, Burton-Campbell/EPB, has been renamed Earle Palmer Brown/ Atlanta.


Brand-New Net Sparks a Victory
LEAD: Things were different for the Nets tonight in many respects.
They had two new players on the roster.
They had a new starting center.
They had three players score more than 20 points each.
And they won.


LIBERTY NATIONAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIBERTY NATIONAL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
7,075,000
6,346,000
Per share
.69
.62
Yr net inc
25,413,000
22,671,000
Per share
2.48
2.25


DECOR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DECOR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
5,839,275
4,564,116
Net loss
780,005
b72,049
Share earns
-
.04
6mo sales
11,571,756
8,782,002
Net loss
1,033,835
b142,963
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income


China's Car Output Up
LEAD: China produced 445,000 cars in 1987, up more than 20 percent from 369,000 in 1986, the New China News Agency said today.
Domestic sales in the first nine months of 1987 came to 319,000 vehicles, up 40 percent over the 1986 period, the agency said.


HARLAND, JOHN H CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARLAND, JOHN H CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
71,740,457
68,008,239
Net inc
11,948,617
10,032,927
Share earns
.35
.29
Yr sales
287,732,265
266,116,314
Net inc
43,553,238
36,461,489
Share earns
1.26
1.06


Trust Their Peace Plan
LEAD: Central America's five presidents made a bold decision last weekend.
Their plan called for Nicaragua and the United States to take simultaneous steps toward peace - steps neither side liked.
With the plan's fate hanging in the balance, the presidents leaned hard on the Sandinistas to go first.
The strategy seems to have succeeded.


STUDY AFFIRMS LINK OF PERSONALITY TO ILLNESS
LEAD: A MAJOR new study links personality traits with illness on such a broad scale that some psychologists depict being neurotic as a key factor in susceptibility to disease.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Thursday about automobile sales for early January misstated the daily selling rate of Honda of America.


TV Review; 'Things My Mother Told Me'
LEAD: OFTEN dabbling in sensitive subjects, the kind that fit easily into tidy object lessons, programs for younger viewers can occasionally topple over into heavy-handed theatrics.
Take for instance ''Things My Mother Told Me,'' tomorrow's ''Afterschool Special'' on ABC at 4 o'clock.
Eager to insure that viewers don't miss the point, the little drama is exaggerated to the point of possibly inducing hives.


Insurer's Head Faces $4.2 Billion Decision
LEAD: Leo E. Denlea Jr.'s career in finance has meant managing money for companies including the Mobil Oil Corporation and the International Basic Economy Corporation, a Nelson Rockefeller venture.


Walter L. Strauss, Author and Expert On Old Masters Art
LEAD: Walter L. Strauss, a writer, publisher and authority on Old Master drawings and prints, died of a heart attack last Thursday at Madison Avenue and 56th Street.
He was 65 years old and lived in Scarborough, N.Y.


GERMANTOWN SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GERMANTOWN SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,841,000
1,765,000
Per share
.46
-
Yr net inc
8,077,000
7,071,000
Per share
2.01
-
There are no per share earnings for the year-ago periods because Germantown Savings Bank converted to a stock savings bank in April 1987 from a mutual.


Vote on Contra Aid Thrown Into Turmoil
LEAD: Nicaragua's professed willingness to suspend its state of emergency and begin direct talks with the rebels could make it harder for the Reagan Administration to get them more military aid, Democratic and Republican lawmakers and key Congressional aides say.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD:  ''I wasted 12 weeks of my life in the hospital.
I was not insane when they picked me up - I was homeless.''  - Joyce Brown, about to be released from forced hospitalization.  [ A1:6. ] ''The lawyers won, and the patient lost.''  - Maureen McLeod, a city attorney.


Homeless Woman to Be Released After Being Forcibly Hospitalized
LEAD: Joyce Brown, the homeless woman who challenged a Koch administration program to forcibly hospitalize mentally ill street people, will be released this week, city officials said yesterday, 12 weeks after she was picked up on an East Side sidewalk.


In Human Rights Court, Honduras Is First to Face Death Squad Trial
LEAD: In the first case ever tried by the Inter-American Court on Human Rights in which a Government has been put on trial, Honduras is being accused here of maintaining army death squads that caused the ''disappearance'' of civilians suspected of being leftists.


SOLITEC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOLITEC INC (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,510,000
4,481,000
Net inc
b4,000
c1,615,000
Share earns
-
-
Shares outst
4,836,000
2,794,000
Yr rev
13,483,000
13,237,000
Net inc
b202,000
c6,485,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
3,656,000
2,680,000


TRIAD SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRIAD SYSTEMS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
29,569,000
27,231,000
Net inc
1,346,000
833,000
Share earns
.15
.11
Shares outst
9,406,000
7,732,000
The share earnings and shares outstanding are fully diluted.


Steel Output Up 3.8%
LEAD: Steel production rose to about 1.86 million tons in the week ended Saturday, an increase of 3.8 percent from the previous week's 1.79 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute reported yesterday.
The industry's production amounted to 86.6 percent of capacity, compared with 83.4 percent in the previous week.


Knicks Outgun Hawks, 110-102
LEAD: Dominique Wilkins of the Atlanta Hawks scored 45 points yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden, but it was not enough.
The Knicks used 28 points from Gerald Wilkins, Dominique's younger brother, 20 from Patrick Ewing, a first triple-double from Mark Jackson and a trapping, harassing defense in the second half to win, 110-102.


Sportswear Stays Up Later and Becomes Dressier
LEAD: Sportswear isn't sportswear any more.
Instead of navy blazers, tailored shirts and gray flannel pants, it's plunging necklines, chiffon skirts and lace T-shirts.
This indigenous branch of American fashion is changing its nature.
Instead of sportswear's traditional sturdy, casual look, the clothes are flirty, feminine and infinitely dressier.


First Chicago Posts $96.5 Million Loss in Quarter
LEAD: The First Chicago Corporation reported a $96.5 million fourth-quarter loss yesterday, largely because of a $240 million reserve against its loans to third-world nations.


BAYBANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAYBANKS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
18,565,000
16,528,000
Per share
1.18
1.12
Yr net inc
b74,222,000
58,852,000
Per share
4.90
4.10
b-After an extraordinary credit of $4,820,000 from cumulative effect of change in accounting.


Bork Not Expected to Return To Full-Time Teaching Post
LEAD: Judge Robert H. Bork, who failed to win Senate confirmation to the United States Supreme Court, probably will not return to teaching full time at Yale University after he steps down from the bench, the dean of the Yale Law School said today.


Iron From Exploding Star
LEAD: Observations made by astronomers aboard a high-flying airplane have found an extremely unusual form of iron in the debris ejected by an exploding star.
The existence of this type of iron, scientists say, implies that the temperature of the explosion must have been even higher than previously suspected.


RESERVE INDUSTRIES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RESERVE INDUSTRIES CORP
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,013,024
1,277,054
Net inc
b363,030
c444,455
Share earns
.18
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $84,700.
c-Net loss


MICRO MASK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICRO MASK INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
9,155,000
5,792,000
Net inc
b827,000
c495,000
Share earns
.37
-
b-After a tax credit of $332,000.
c-Net loss


Murdoch Raises Stake in Pearson
LEAD: The News Corporation, owned by Rupert Murdoch, has increased its stake in the Pearson Group P.L.C., a diversified British company that publishes The Financial Times, to 20.4 percent, from 19.8 percent.
The Australian media company and its subsidiaries now hold 44.20 million Pearson shares, Pearson said.


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, JANUARY 19, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-10


Amendment Made To Carteret Offer
LEAD: The Home Group Inc., a New York insurance company, and Carteret Bancorp Inc., which owns the Carteret Savings Bank of Morristown, N.J., said they had amended the takeover agreement that was reached last August.
Under the revised deal, Home Group's offer price was reduced to $19 a share in cash, or about $232 million, from $22.50 a share, or about $320 million.


Bethlehem Sets Price Increases
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation will increase its prices from $20 and $30 a ton on certain steel products.
The steelmaker increased its base price for carbon and other brands of its steel plates by $20 a ton, or 4.5 percent, to $465 a ton, Gary Graham, a spokesman for the nation's third-largest steel producer, said.


Recital: Mitsuko Shirai Sings
LEAD: MITSUKO SHIRAI, accompanied by her husband, Hartmut Holl, brought to Alice Tully Hall Sunday night a lieder program invested with unusual care and thoughtfulness.
First there was the music itself - mostly from familiar composers but chosen with an ear for freshness.


FIRST COMMERCE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST COMMERCE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,848,000
b3,647,000
Per share
.38
-
Yr net inc
19,210,000
3,552,000
Per share
1.51
.05
b-Net loss  The company said provisions for loan losses in the latest quarter and year were $5,444,000 and $22,518,000, respectively, and $15,716,000 for the year-ago quarter and $38,185,000 for the year.


FIFTH THIRD BANCORP (CINCINNATI, OHIO)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIFTH THIRD BANCORP (CINCINNATI, OHIO)(O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
16,022,000
16,934,000
Per share
.81
.86
Yr net inc
67,510,000
56,091,000
Per share
3.43
3.01
The per share earnings adjusted to reflect the 3-for-2 stock split paid Oct.


SCHACHER, GREENTREE &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCHACHER, GREENTREE &amp; CO
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
65,333
40,062
Net loss
43,564
203,169
6mo sales
198,288
143,431
Net loss
25,070
364,218


STRATEGIC PLANNING reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STRATEGIC PLANNING (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
13,227,000
9,035,000
Net inc
1,351,000
733,000
Share earns
.34
.22
Shares outst
3,921,000
3,339,000


Advertising; SSC&amp;B:Lintas Wins Motorola
LEAD: SSC&amp;B:Lintas Worldwide has won the Motorola corporate account for the United States and Europe after a six-month review of 10 agencies.
The budget is $5 million.
Initially, the competition included Motorola's former agency, Young &amp; Rubicam, which had had the account since 1978.
By October, however, the list came down to Lintas:New York, J.


FINANCIAL NEWS NETWORK reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FINANCIAL NEWS NETWORK (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
12,577,285
6,665,254
Net inc
1,411,355
1,306,807
Share earns
.12
.11


TEREDATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEREDATA CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,424,000
10,256,000
Net inc
b2,975,000
c864,000
Share earns
.21
.08
Shares outst
14,026,000
11,351,000
6mo rev
34,391,000
19,585,000
Net inc
b4,625,000
c1,309,000
Share earns
.34
.12
Shares outst
13,525,000
11,238,000


Rights for the Aged, Long Overdue
LEAD: For most Americans, ''home'' means familiar faces, familiar furniture and a measure of control over one's own life.
For 1.3 million older adults, however, it means a space in a nursing home facility - and a loss of freedom and comfort.


CBS Says People Meter Errors Cause Big Losses
LEAD: The new ''people meter'' system of measuring television audiences, meant to be a revolutionary breakthrough in determining who is watching which programs, has already cost the three major networks $40 million to $50 million in lost advertising revenues because of errors in the system, according to several executives at one of the networks.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the Pan Am Corporation contained a reference that incorrectly stated the position of the Independent Union of Flight Attendants on one of the company's top executives.
The union is seeking the ouster of the current management, including Martin R. Shugrue Jr., vice chairman; it has not sent a letter to the board in his support.


OLD STONE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OLD STONE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b10,050,000
8,057,000
Per share
1.14
.89
Yr net inc
b14,210,000
29,051,000
Per share
.83
3.32
Shares outst
6,900,000
6,200,000
b-After tax credits of $849,000 for the quarter and $865,000 for the year.


Must Drug Terror Rule in Colombia?
LEAD: Terrorism's grip on the judiciary in Colombia must be broken.
Terrorism flouts the good intentions of President Virglio Barco, sets free that country's biggest drug dealer, Jorge Ochoa, and destroys bilateral cooperation on drugs.
If one individual is most responsible for the flood of cocaine into the United States and the violence and crime linked with it, it would be Mr.


KENNAMETAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENNAMETAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
101,831,000
83,406,000
Net inc
5,735,000
3,547,000
Share earns
.56
.35
Shares outst
10,256,000
10,157,000
6mo sales
195,906,000
167,885,000
Net inc
10,680,000
7,099,000
Share earns
1.04
.70
Shares outst
10,241,000
10,143,000


CONCHEMCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONCHEMCO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,235,000
4,987,000
Net inc
210,000
185,000
Share earns
.37
.32
Shares outst
569,216
572,393
Yr sales
21,302,000
20,828,000
Net inc
1,047,000
881,000
Share earns
1.84
1.53
Shares outst
570,459
574,039


Yields Changed In Bond Tables
LEAD: The calculation of the yields of some United States Treasury bonds has been changed in tables distributed by The Associated Press.


The Inspector Of Jails
LEAD: And now let us turn our attention to Ivan Rakhmanin, an inspector of prisons in the Soviet Union, and to the letter he wrote to The New York Times on instructions from the Central Committee of the Communist Party.


PENNSYLVANIA REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNSYLVANIA REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,809,897
b3,376,751
Per share
.34
.41
b-Includes a gain on sale of real estate of $78,035 and $1,062,495 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Standoff Goes On at Polygamist's Utah Compound
LEAD: More than 150 officers wearing fatigues and armed with automatic weapons ringed the compound of a slain polygamist today as 14 relatives, including a suspect in a church bombing, remained inside for a third day awaiting his ''resurrection.''


French Pupil Ordered Home
LEAD: A foreign exchange student has been ordered to return to France because she visited her homeland for Christmas week instead of staying to watch Americans celebrate the holidays.


'Izzy, Did You Ask a Good Question Today?'
LEAD: To the Editor:


By Design: Elegant Pearls
LEAD: A pearl necklace has always been one of the luxuries women aspire to and many have obtained.
Because pearls run the gamut from fake to fabulous, a strand can range in price from $10 to $1 million.


Doing the Impossible
LEAD: IN WORLD War II, the Army Air Forces boasted, ''The difficult we do at once; the impossible takes a little longer.'' Dr.
Richard R. Green, New York City's newly appointed Schools Chancellor, has paraphrased that confident slogan: ''No task will be evaded merely because it is impossible.''


Candelaria Joins Yanks as No. 3 Starter
LEAD: The Yankees may have bolstered their corps of starting pitchers yesterday by adding John Candelaria to their staff.
General Manager Lou Piniella immediately pronounced Candelaria the team's third starter, but questions existed over how effective the left-hander might be.


S.A.S. to Buy 9 Boeing Jets
LEAD: The Boeing Company won a $660 million contract today from the Scandinavian Airlines System for nine twin-engined 767 jets, wresting a major sale from Airbus Industrie, the European consortium, and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.


DEPOSIT GUARANTY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEPOSIT GUARANTY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,338,000
7,829,000
Per share
.67
.97
Yr net inc
25,640,000
33,674,000
Per share
3.17
4.15


Our Towns; A City Struggles Over an Honor For Dr. King
LEAD: Last spring, Walter Fields got the idea to rename First Street here after the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. ''Neither the city nor Bergen County has any honor after Dr.
King,'' he said. ''No street, no building, no park, no school, nothing.''


TRITON ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRITON ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
42,138,000
18,583,000
Net loss
b8,766,000
2,190,000
6mo rev
83,316,000
34,097,000
Net loss
b8,046,000
5,251,000
b-Includes a loss of $6,594,000 from the redemption of notes.


BURLINGTON COAT FACTORY WAREHOUSE reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURLINGTON COAT FACTORY WAREHOUSE (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
141,021,000
112,130,000
Net inc
3,762,000
3,512,000
Share earns
.32
.30
Yr rev
490,595,000
391,608,000
Net inc
20,262,000
17,326,000
Share earns
1.73
1.48


ARGONAUT GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARGONAUT GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b102,200,000
c10,600,000
Share earns
8.73
.91
Yr net inc
b170,800,000
c22,800,000
Share earns
14.59
1.95
b-Includes gains of $75.9 million and $105.3 million for the quarter and year, respectively, on sales of investments.


Radioactive Powder Leaks
LEAD: About 200 pounds of a low-level radioactive powder leaked early today from a rooftop vent at a federally owned uranium-processing plant, officials said.
Contamination from the uranium powder appeared limited to the immediate area and no trace was detected outside the 1,050-acre plant site, said Pete Kelley of the Westinghouse Materials Company of Ohio.


Law Bars Sale of a Jet Used by Congressmen
LEAD: A House committee chairman has quietly prevented the Army Corps of Engineers from selling an executive jet that has been used by members of Congress and called wasteful by the Army's auditors.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


IN RETIRING, REP. LUJAN PUTS NEW MEXICO IN TURMULT
LEAD: Ever since Manuel Lujan Jr., the Republican Representative from New Mexico's First Congressional District, announced that he would not seek an 11th term, the state's political life has been in turmoil.


NAFCO FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NAFCO FINANCIAL GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,436,000
1,320,000
Share earns
.42
.39
b-Included extraordinary income of $151,000 from gains on the repurchase of debentures and a gain of $426,000 from the sale of the operations of Mueller Co., a wholly owned realty brokerage subsidiary of Nafco.


Theory on Earth's Core
LEAD: A geologist from the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute has challenged a fundamental belief about conditions on the Earth when it formed 4.5 billion years ago.
He says the young planet was hot at its center rather than cold.


Dyncorp Board Meets on New Bid
LEAD: Directors of Dyncorp, a diversified technology company based in McLean, Va., have met to consider dropping one merger agreement for a sweeter rival proposal.
A company spokesman said a decision was expected to be announced today.


Hoffman Lifts Sterling Bid; Suitors Seen
LEAD: Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company announced last night that it was raising its hostile takeover offer for Sterling Drug Inc. to nearly $4.4 billion, hours after Sterling rejected its initial $4.2 billion bid.


NORTH CAROLINA FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH CAROLINA FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
683,805
264,284
Share earns
.36
.11


Theater Owner In Venture Talks
LEAD: AMC Entertainment Inc., one of the nation's largest movie theater chains, said it had been negotiating to form a venture to run the theaters it now operates in a major Northeastern metropolitan area.
AMC said only that the company with which it was negotiating was a major entertainment company.


Sports People; Howe Is Dismissed
LEAD: Steve Howe is out of a major league pitching job again.
After a struggle with drug abuse, alcohol was the problem this time, Howe's attorney said Sunday.


Gephardt's Iowa Campaign Resurges
LEAD: Representative Richard A. Gephardt has chalked up his 118th day of Presidential campaigning in Iowa, hoping to translate a recent upswing in his popularity into solid support at Iowa's Democratic caucuses on Feb. 8.


HUNT MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUNT MANUFACTURING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 29
1987
1986
Sales
42,061,000
36,578,000
Net inc
3,482,000
3,020,000
Share earns
.33
.29
Yr sales
150,291,000
136,710,000
Net inc
12,378,000
7,959,000
Share earns
1.16
.75


CENTRAL &amp; SOUTH WEST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL &amp; SOUTH WEST CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
560,468,000
548,689,000
Net inc
82,013,000
85,746,000
Share earns
.79
.82
Yr rev
2,432,372,000
2,555,102,000
Net inc
402,053,000
389,282,000
Share earns
3.92
3.75


Chess: Timman Crushes Ljubojevic With 4 1/2-1 1/2 Match Victory
LEAD: The Dutch grandmaster Jan Timman not only defeated Ljubomir Ljubojevic in the 1987 KRO Exhibition Match in Hilversum, the Netherlands, but his heavy 4 1/2-1 1/2 victory score also enabled him to take the lead in their total career games.


BRANCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRANCH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,964,000
c8,093,000
Per share
.43
.44
Yr net inc
b33,545,000
c31,256,000
Per share
1.79
1.70
b-Includes securities losses of $574,000 for the quarter and securities gains of $813,000 for the year.


Belgian Giant Sought By Italian-Led Group
LEAD: In what Belgians view as an assault on their nation, a Paris-based investment group headed by Carlo de Benedetti, the Italian financier, said today that it was starting a bid for control of Societe Generale de Belgique, a holding company that is synonymous with Belgium.


Concert: St. Luke's and Samuel Ramey
LEAD: AT Carnegie Hall on Sunday evening, the Orchestra of St.
Luke's furthered its assertion to a place at the center of this city's concert life.
It is a virtuoso ensemble, though not in the high-tech sense we tend to associate with top American orchestras, and all the more welcome for providing a contrast to them.


Norway-China Oil Talks
LEAD: Norway's state oil company, Statoil, said today that it was close to reaching an agreement with China to lead a search for oil in the South China Sea.
Haakon Lavik, a spokesman for Statoil, said the agreement would make Statoil the main operator in a 1,450-square-mile tract south of Hainan island.


Executive Changes
LEAD: Central and South West Corp., Dallas, a holding company engaged in electricity, elected as a director James M. Moroney Jr., chairman of the executive committee at A. H. Belo Corp., Dallas, a newspaper publishing and broadcasting concern.


New TV Meter Blamed for Loss
LEAD: The new ''people meter'' system of measuring television audiences has cost the three major networks $40 million to $50 million in lost advertising revenues because of system errors, according to CBS executives.


GEODYNE RESOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEODYNE RESOURCES INC
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,371,694
1,311,698
Net inc
1,165,813
b111,143
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
7,232,940
2,922,123
Net inc
1,974,617
b813,439
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss


Results Plus; Skiing
LEAD: Swiss Woman First: Brigitte Oertli of Switzerland won a special slalom yesterday in Saas Fee, Switzerland, for her first World Cup victory.
Oertli, third after the first heat, had a superb second run and finished with a combined time of 1 minute 26.57 seconds.
Vreni Schneider of Switzerland, the giant slalom world champion, went from eighth to second in the second run, finishing 23-hundredths of a second behind.


Wilson Brought the League of Nations Debacle on Himself
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSH ON OFFENSIVE AGAINST 2 RIVALS
LEAD: The sounds coming from Vice President Bush these days are growls of attack.


GENERAL MICROWAVE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL MICROWAVE CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
5,177,287
5,439,610
Net inc
291,186
261,438
Share earns
.20
.18
9mo sales
15,412,777
15,055,431
Net inc
695,574
849,587
Share earns
.47
.57


3 Bystanders Foil Robbery at BMT Station
LEAD: Three bystanders seized two men who threw a woman against a wall and grabbed her wallet at a busy midtown subway station yesterday afternoon, the transit police said.


FLORIDA NATIONAL BANKS OF FLORIDA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA NATIONAL BANKS OF FLORIDA INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
8,445,000
506,000
Per share
.32
.02
Yr net inc
32,543,000
34,389,000
Per share
1.22
1.30
The latest fourth quarter is after provisions of $20 million for possible loan losses.


NUTRITION WORLD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUTRITION WORLD INC
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,885,679
7,343,651
Net inc
176,616
123,848
Share earns
.06
.12
Shares outst
2,596,903
886,787
6mo rev
15,471,539
14,427,801
Net inc
260,540
209,442
Share earns
.12
.21
Shares outst
1,932,122
886,787


Simple Method Found To Warm Cold Hands
LEAD: A simple and inexpensive method of training the body to change the way it reacts to cold has proven highly successful in curing victims of a little-known disease that cuts circulation to the hands in cold weather, according to a researcher for the Army.


WANG LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WANG LABORATORIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
784,700,000
668,900,000
Net inc
34,100,000
b78,600,000
Share earns
.21
-
6mo rev
1,477,700,000
1,266,800,000
Net inc
56,600,000
b108,600,000
Share earns
.34
-


Sex Offender, Told to Move Away From School, Is a Fugitive
LEAD: A sex offender who was granted probation on the condition that he post a warning sign on his door has become a fugitive since a judge told him to move because he was living too close to an elementary school.


Lakers Connect on 18 in Row
LEAD: Earvin (Magic) Johnson scored 26 of his season-high 39 points in the first half and the Los Angeles Lakers made 18 straight field goals in the opening quarter on the way to a 121-110 victory today over the Houston Rockets.


Bright Light in the Harbor: S. I. Economy Flourishes
LEAD: For much of the 1980's, New York City officials have been trying, with spotty success, to steer to the other boroughs jobs that were destined to leave Manhattan.
Last year that effort stumbled badly everywhere, except on Staten Island.


PROGRAMMING &amp; SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROGRAMMING &amp; SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,533,185
2,698,501
Net inc
429,879
290,156
Share earns
.24
.16
9mo rev
13,451,170
8,915,963
Net inc
1,544,027
1,171,697
Share earns
.86
.66


MICOM SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICOM SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
56,594,000
50,858,000
Net inc
1,857,000
1,680,000
Share earns
.10
.09
9mo sales
159,529,000
145,597,000
Net inc
5,021,000
884,000
Share earns
.27
.05


Pregnant Woman Dies After Swallowing Drug
LEAD: A pregnant woman and her uncle died of drug overdoses, apparently after swallowing packets of a narcotic as the police raided an apartment here last week, a prosecutor said today.


A Woman's Fabled Soft Spot for the Cast-Iron City
LEAD: She helped save the iron-clad architecture of an earlier New York, but sees no reason to rest.
Margot Gayle is still a passionate and ubiquitous lobbyist for the city's 19th-century esthetic patrimony.


TANDY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TANDY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,302,893,000
1,196,044,000
Net inc
130,780,000
103,817,000
Share earns
1.46
1.16
6mo sales
2,141,119,000
1,938,594,000
Net inc
195,035,000
147,537,000
Share earns
2.17
1.64


2 Police Officers Suspended In Death of a Drunken Man
LEAD: Two police officers were suspended for leaving a drunken man in a park after they learned that a detoxification center was filled, officials said today.


INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH &amp; DEVELOPMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH &amp; DEVELOPMENT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,578,858
3,982,558
Net inc
867,250
139,589
Share earns
.32
.05
Yr rev
19,145,006
15,993,258
Net inc
1,902,747
438,819
Share earns
.70
.15


ELIZABETH HOLTZMAN IS NO ORDINARY LAWYER CRITICIZING A JUDGE
LEAD: To the Editor:


SECOND NATIONAL FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SECOND NATIONAL FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,240,000
2,066,000
Per share
.32
.32
Yr net inc
9,161,000
7,976,000
Per share
1.29
1.31
Shares outst
7,160,000
7,128,000


New Witness to Testify in Alaska's Costliest Case
LEAD: A new witness will testify at the retrial of John Kenneth Peel for the 1982 killing of eight people aboard a fishing boat, but otherwise the opening arguments echoed his first trial.


SILICON SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILICON SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
25,714,000
17,401,000
Net inc
2,408,000
302,000
Share earns
.34
.04
Shares outst
7,171,000
6,738,000


Texas G.O.P. Accepts All Six for Its Primary
LEAD: Despite widespread allegations of forged petitions that threatened to knock several candidates off the primary election ballot, Texas Republicans today reversed their position and said all six major Presidential candidates would be eligible to win delegates in the March 8 primary.


BURNHAM SERVICE CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURNHAM SERVICE CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
37,913,000
30,745,000
Net inc
704,000
1,319,000
Share earns
.15
.26
Yr rev
147,403,000
120,602,000
Net inc
6,165,000
5,075,000
Share earns
1.16
1.01


The Devotion of Judge Weinfeld
LEAD: Edward Weinfeld, who died Sunday at the age of 86, was the most admired judge on the Federal bench.
His sense of fairness, earnestness and commitment to doing justice were conspicuous.
His deep study and conscientious preparation won the respect and affection of lawyers - and inspired them to try to meet his standards.


Afghan Siege Over, Troops Still Duck
LEAD: Three weeks after Soviet and Afghan forces broke the prolonged siege of this dusty garrison town near the Pakistani border, Government control seems precarious.


LSB BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LSB BANCSHARES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
909,000
b1,002,000
Per share
.56
.62
Yr net inc
3,622,000
b3,597,000
Per share
2.24
2.22
b-After a gain of $111,000 from discontinued operations.


FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSN (FNMA)(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSN (FNMA)(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b195,000,000
42,200,000
Share earns
2.40
.57
Yr net inc
376,000,000
105,000,000
Share earns
4.63
1.42
b-Includes $286 million, or $3.53 a share, resulting from additional income recorded when FAS 91 was implemented.


Food Notes
LEAD:  Dumplings and Things


DIGILOG INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGILOG INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,582,054
4,303,277
Net inc
152,918
278,750
Share earns
.06
.14


CONOLOG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONOLOG CORP
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
680,685
1,604,236
Net loss
138,259
b59,818
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


GENERAL CERAMICS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL CERAMICS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
5,968,479
7,210,966
Net inc
647,707
923,991
Share earns
.20
.28
6mo sales
11,425,581
15,138,548
Net inc
1,303,675
1,899,586
Share earns
.39
.60


Eating Well
LEAD: FOLLOWING in the footsteps of other celebrities, Elizabeth Taylor has written a weight-loss book.
Unlike many other authors - including Victoria Principal, Jane Fonda and Bess Myerson - Miss Taylor gained and lost her weight in full public view.


Missile Test Is Successful
LEAD: An unarmed Minuteman missile was launched Monday night after several days of delays in a successful test, an Air Force spokesman said today.
Lieut.
Col.
Richard Hill, who observed the test, said the test rocket reached its destination at Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean, about 4,200 miles from here, in about 30 minutes.


Navratilova, Evert To Meet 76th Time
LEAD: Martina Navratilova and Chris Evert will meet in the semifinals of the Australian Open, the 76th time they will face each other.


Bidder Held Below 25% Of Belgique
LEAD: The Italian financier Carlo de Benedetti acceded to a request by the Belgian Government today to keep his stake in Societe Generale de Belgique below 25 percent of the outstanding shares.


Commuter Plane Down With 12 People Injured
LEAD: A commuter airliner with 16 people aboard crashed near here tonight, and officials said there were at least 12 people seriously injured.
There was no word on fatalities.


GEORGIA-PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEORGIA-PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,229,000,000
1,781,000,000
Net inc
112,000,000
83,000,000
Share earns
1.06
.75
Yr sales
8,603,000,000
7,223,000,000
Net inc
b458,000,000
b296,000,000
Share earns
4.23
2.70


FIRST VALLEY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST VALLEY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,516,000
3,965,000
Per share
.52
.64
Yr net inc
16,103,000
14,763,000
Per share
2.51
2.40


SOCIETY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOCIETY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
22,578,000
21,300,000
Per share
.96
.89
Yr net inc
90,935,000
84,122,000
Per share
3.75
3.43


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a computer error, an article yesterday about a survey of race relations in New York City incorrectly described responses to a question asking Hispanic residents to name a person to whom they looked for leadership during racial conflict.


COLORADO PRIME reports earnings for Year to Oct 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLORADO PRIME (AMEX)
Year to Oct 30
1987
1986
Revenue
84,547,000
-
Net inc
3,681,000
-
Share earns
.95
-
The company changed its year-end to Oct. 30 from Jan. 30.
The company said in the 12 months ended Oct.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: ALTHOUGH ground meat in any form is generally looked upon as less choice than a solid slab - hamburger as opposed to sirloin steak, for example - it has long been my contention that the ground version offers a chef or cook a great deal more latitude and fires the imagination.


FIRSTFED AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRSTFED AMERICA (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,567,000
2,348,000
Share earns
.66
.60


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: THE subject is street clocks and the New Yorkers who rely on them but take them for granted until one day when . . .
Well, listen to Richard T. Mermelstein, a lawyer who lives on Roosevelt Island and works in Manhattan in an office facing the Newsweek Building, at Madison Avenue and 50th Street, a structure topped on its north, south and west sides by a digital time and temperature sign:


Hollywood Catches a Wave
LEAD: It is Christmas in January for Hollywood this week.
Fueled by the blockbuster opening of ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' and the unstoppable ''Three Men and a Baby,'' both movies from Walt Disney Pictures, the box office went wild last weekend.


Canadian Inflation Rate
LEAD: Canada's annual inflation rate held steady at 4.2 percent in December, unchanged from the annual rate in the previous month, the Government statistical agency reported today.


Humpback Whale Washes Ashore on Long Island
LEAD: A female humpback whale, 50 feet long and weighing about 100,000 pounds, was the first to wash ashore on Long Island, but the 16th humpback to have washed ashore in the last four weeks in the Northeast, according to a research director from the Okeanos Ocean Research Foundation.
He said he believed the Long Island whale died from paralytic fish poisoning, which killed the other 15 whales, which were found in Cape Cod.


DICEON ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DICEON ELECTRONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
33,981,000
22,765,000
Net inc
3,094,000
1,717,000
Share earns
.50
.30
Shares outst
6,777,000
5,751,000
Year-ago figures are restated to include the results of Symtron Corp., acquired in a transaction accounted for as a pooling of interests in May.


G.M. Plans to Drop Two Small Autos
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it planned to discontinue two cars at the end of the current model year.
The Cadillac Division will discontinue the Cimarron, a compact car introduced in 1981.
The Oldsmobile Division will retire the Firenza subcompact, which was introduced in 1982.
Sales of both cars have declined.


BRONCOS ARE STILL ON THE MEND
LEAD: They finished with the American Conference's best record after playing most of the season without their top rusher, and they won the title game in an aerial shootout as their leading receiver watched from the hospital.


Di Giorgio Plans To Buy Back Stock
LEAD: The Di Giorgio Corporation said its board had approved a restructuring and a stock repurchase program.
The company plans to buy up to 1.5 million of its approximately 8.5 million common shares at a price of $21 a share.
The company's stock closed today at $19.50 a share on the New York Stock Exchange, down 87.5 cents.


President's Door Open For Spelman Students
LEAD: Amid the bustle of registration last week for the new semester at Spelman College, several students sat in the high-ceilinged reception area of the president's office.


BANCORP HAWAII CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANCORP HAWAII CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
14,335,000
11,927,000
Per share
1.52
1.30
Yr net inc
53,943,000
46,185,000
Per share
5.73
5.07


U.S. to Resume Sending Arms to Contras
LEAD: President Reagan formally reported to Congress today that he did not believe the Nicaraguan Government was trying in good faith to comply with the Central American peace plan.
Under the law, that allowed the Administration to resume weapons shipments to the contras that had been suspended for a week.


NEWMIL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWMIL BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,293,000
2,218,000
Per share
.63
.60
6mo net inc
4,632,000
4,441,000
Per share
1.28
1.20


CLINICAL SCIENCES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLINICAL SCIENCES (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
1,000,614
577,794
Net inc
61,266
b209,882
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
7,640,243
4,231,590
9mo sales
2,828,531
1,649,510
Net inc
201,739
b192,587
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
7,635,232
3,089,224


A Tooth Tugger
LEAD: To The Living Section:


CIRCON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CIRCON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,441,000
10,637,000
Net loss
63,000
79,000
Yr sales
41,379,000
21,417,000
Net loss
1,295,000
b89,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income  Results include the operations of ACMI since its acquisition by Circon in August 1986.


FIRST CITIZENS BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST CITIZENS BANCSHARES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,709,247
6,254,583
Per share
.58
.64
Yr net inc
25,135,332
23,291,785
Per share
2.57
2.40


ENVOY IS BLAMED IN MOSCOW SPYING
LEAD: In a report completed last summer but not made public, a Presidential panel concluded that the former United States Ambassador to Moscow should be held responsible for the misconduct of marine guards there, according to a staff aide to the panel.


EVERGREEN BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EVERGREEN BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,086,000
1,557,000
Per share
.68
.51
Yr net inc
7,620,000
6,398,000
Per share
2.49
2.09


COMMAND AIRWAYS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMAND AIRWAYS INC
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,907,027
6,130,306
Net inc
831,785
193,388
Share earns
.59
.14
6mo rev
15,229,025
12,040,740
Net inc
1,530,900
524,834
Share earns
1.08
.37


The Stage: 'Vinegar Tree'
LEAD: ''THE VINEGAR TREE'' was a Broadway hit in 1930.
For visitors to Paul Osborn's comedy now at the York Theater, that information invites two interpretations - either that the present production is missing something or that the audience of 58 years ago was happily undemanding.


Rock: Tom Russell Band
LEAD: SUNDAY'S double bill at the Lone Star, featuring two Rounder Record acts, the Tom Russell Band and Bar-rence Whitfield and the Savages, was a study in the way music functions.
Both bands, neither especially dis-tinctive, pump out American dance music.
But they fill basic social needs, and by attacking different gen-res - Mr.


David Bernstein, Physician, 77
LEAD: Dr.
David Bernstein, a staff member of Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn for more than 40 years, died Friday at Maimonides after a short illness.
He was 77 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Jared French Is Dead; Figural Artist Was 82
LEAD: Jared French, a figural painter who used realist techniques to deal with metaphorical subject matter, died Friday in Rome, where he had lived for nearly 20 years.
He was 82 years old and also had a home in Hartland, Vt.


N.B.A. Union Hints at Strike
LEAD: The pro basketball union's player representatives will meet two days before the Feb. 7 All-Star Game in Chicago to discuss whether to recommend a boycott of the game, a strike or other actions to break their impasse with the owners.


Shevardnadze Leaves West Germany, Chiding West on Arms Issues
LEAD: Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union left Bonn today after a three-day visit in which he assured the West Germans that Moscow was in favor of eliminating short-range nuclear arms and chemical weapons, and of a ''radical reduction'' in conventional forces.


BANK OF GRANITE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF GRANITE
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,184,176
1,058,454
Per share
.39
.36
Yr net inc
4,549,322
3,928,136
Per share
1.52
1.32


NBC Leads in Ratings For 12th Straight Week
LEAD: NBC extended its lead over CBS and ABC with its 12th weekly ratings lead in a row thanks to football playoffs and a typically strong showing by its Thursday night lineup, according to figures released by the A. C. Nielsen Company.


Economic Scene; Electoral Politics Dictates the Script
LEAD: FOR Americans traveling or residing abroad, the shrunken value of the dollar is felt not only as a strain on the pocketbook but as a personal insult.
Feeling overcharged, overspent and over there, Americans ask: ''Is this what we're worth now - half what we were a few years ago?''


Gertrude Waldeyer, Educator, 79
LEAD: Gertrude Waldeyer, an educator and conservationist, died Sunday at the Hilaire Nursing Home in Huntington, L.I.
She was 79 years old and had lived in Queens.


IC INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IC INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,152,400,000
1,035,800,000
Net inc
b128,600,000
d61,600,000
Share earns
1.16
.54
Shares outst
110,837,000
113,108,000
Yr rev
4,027,000,000
3,516,200,000
Net inc
b251,700,000
cd136,700,000
Share earns
2.23
-
Shares outst
112,731,000
110,535,000


FIRST KENTUCKY NATIONAL CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST KENTUCKY NATIONAL CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,149,000
14,121,000
Per share
.23
.63
Yr net inc
32,378,000
50,872,000
Per share
1.45
2.28


Seton Hall Downs Providence by 82-80
LEAD: John Morton sank two free throws with 3 seconds left, and Mark Bryant blocked a layup attempt by Chris Watts of Providence just before the buzzer as Seton Hall defeated the Friars, 82-80, in a Big East Conference game tonight at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


UTAH POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UTAH POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
242,011,322
244,563,355
Net inc
39,551,702
b2,981,375
Share earns
.66
-
Yr rev
982,796,701
984,864,790
Net inc
144,806,012
102,565,746
Share earns
2.39
1.48


MOVIE STAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOVIE STAR INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
18,499,000
24,610,000
Net loss
22,000
b936,000
Share earns
-
1.12
6mo sales
31,547,000
41,383,000
Net loss
898,000
b462,000
Share earns
-
.55
b


City Ballet Elects Chairman
LEAD: The New York City Ballet has announced the election of Theodore C. Rogers as chairman of its board, succeeding Orville H. Schell Jr., who died last June.
Mr.
Rogers, a former president and chairman of the board of NL Industries Inc., has served on the New York City Ballet board and was formerly a director of the Houston Ballet.


LIPOSOME TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIPOSOME TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,319,000
1,312,000
Net loss
573,000
148,000


Bridge: Young Long Island Player Showed a Rare Consistency
LEAD: Many tournament players are capable of winning a title every year or two, when the fates, and their opponents, are kind.
But a much smaller number do well almost every time they sit down.


Budget Reductions Force Marines To Seek 3,100 Fewer Good Men
LEAD: Gen.
Alfred M. Gray, the Commandant of the Marine Corps, said today that nearly 3,100 marines would be cut from the corps and that procurement of tanks and aircraft would be slowed as budget reductions are put into effect.


Some Major League Requests
LEAD: A record 14 players, led by George Bell of Toronto and Andre Dawson of the Chicago Cubs, submitted figures of $1 million or more for salary arbitration yesterday.
Bell, at $2,105,000, and Dawson, at $2 million, became the first players in the 13-year history of salary arbitration to break the $2 million barrier.


FIRST INDIANA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST INDIANA CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,599,000
4,100,000
Per share
.72
1.86
Yr net inc
5,023,000
7,861,000
Per share
2.28
3.59


Ortega Vs. The U.S.
LEAD: The Communist dictator of Nicaragua has issued a fairly simple and understandable ultimatum to the U.S.


Chambers Denied He Had a Date With Levin, Witness Says
LEAD: Only hours before telling the police that he had killed Jennifer Levin, Robert E. Chambers Jr. told a friend of hers that he had not seen Miss Levin since they left a bar together, the friend testified yesterday.


Chief Executive Named At The New Yorker
LEAD: S. I. Newhouse Jr., the chairman of Advance Publications Inc., announced yesterday that Steven T. Florio, 38 years old, had been named the chief executive of The New Yorker, a new title at the magazine.


Madonna's Stage Debut Is Planned for March
LEAD: Madonna is to make her stage debut at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center this spring, in David Mamet's ''Speed-the-Plow.'' The play is scheduled to begin an 8- to 10-week run March 29.


Real Estate; Envisioning Brooklyn as Office Center
LEAD: NEXT month a pioneering group of employees of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company will cross the East River, leading a relocation from Manhattan to a new 19-story office tower nearing completion in downtown Brooklyn.


EQUIMARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EQUIMARK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,224,000
c2,619,000
Per share
.09
.06
Shares outst
38,806,000
33,293,000
Yr net inc
b14,316,000
c5,792,000
Per share
.31
.09
Shares outst
36,681,000
31,879,000


Books of The Times
LEAD:  CAPTIVITY CAPTIVE.
By Rodney Hall. 214 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $15.95.


A Morning Cola Instead of Coffee?
LEAD: It's morning in Arnold, Mo., and, as he has on most days for 10 years, Tim Ernst is having a Coca-Cola for breakfast.


BISHOP GRAPHICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BISHOP GRAPHICS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,562,000
2,583,000
Net loss
b248,000
c481,000
Yr rev
9,971,000
11,868,000
Net loss
b538,000
c538,000
b-After tax credits of $236,000 for the quarter and $456,000 for the year.


STANDARD PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD PRODUCTS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
126,185,000
118,528,000
Net inc
7,760,000
7,496,000
Share earns
.70
.66
6mo sales
228,950,000
221,014,000
Net inc
12,202,000
13,871,000
Share earns
1.10
1.19


Nylon and Teflon, 50, Take On New Roles
LEAD: IT might seem too soon, according to the memories of some people, but 1988 marks the 50th anniversary of the introduction of two synthetic materials that ushered in the golden age of polymer chemistry: nylon and Teflon.
A half-century later, both materials are still widely used staples in the industrial world and continue to generate innovative new uses.


About New York; Dancer's Moves: Choreographing An Apartment
LEAD: Dani Nikas moved to Brooklyn last week.
It was her 18th or 19th move since she hit town in autumn.
Getting settled here can be hard on people.


Former Head of Bates Discusses Sale Furor
LEAD: Ted Bates Worldwide parlayed Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's burning desire to be the biggest agency in the world into the Bates sale for $507.4 million, said Robert Jacoby, Bates's former chief executive, in a signed page 1 article in Adweek this week.


ZZZZ Best Pleas Filed
LEAD: Barry J. Minkow, the 21-year-old millionaire, and nine others pleaded not guilty today to charges of racketeering, securities fraud and tax fraud.
Mr.
Minkow was indicted last week by a Federal grand jury.


CORVUS SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORVUS SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
7,641,000
9,986,000
Net inc
b2,994,000
c1,083,000
Share earns
.10
-
6mo rev
15,823,000
22,409,000
6mo rev
15,823,000
22,409,000
Net inc
b3,267,000
c4,954,000
Share earns
.11
-


Components Expected For I.B.M. PS/2 Clones
LEAD: A group of small computer companies will announce Wednesday that they have succeeded in making chips and software that will allow computers to be built that are compatible with the new PS/2 line of personal computers from the International Business Machines Corporation.


Dukakis, in Annual Address, Looks to New Hampshire and Beyond
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, making what he hopes is his last State of the State Address, said tonight that running for the Democratic Presidential nomination had been ''an extraordinary experience'' and that he had tried his best ''to make you proud of me and of what this commonwealth represents.''


Viola Re-signs
LEAD: Frank Viola, the Minnesota Twins' ace left-hander who was voted the most valuable player in the World Series, will remain with the Twins at least through 1989.
He signed a two-year contract Monday worth $2.9 million.


British Phone Booths Saved
LEAD: Britain has designated 1,000 telephone booths as national landmarks, the Environment Department announced today.
The traditional red boxes have been a familiar sight since 1936.
But British Telecom, in a modernization drive, has so far replaced 20,000 of 50,000 with a new design.


New York's Presidential Booby Traps
LEAD: Just to get on the ballot, candidates in New York must overcome pointless legal obstacles that stud the state's 300-page election law.
The rules encourage the nitpicking that has marred countless campaigns for local office.
Now those same legal nits could taint the Presidential races in New York's April 19 primary.


Trade Coalition Formed to Urge The Recycling of Plastic Bottles
LEAD: A newly formed coalition of chemical and packaging companies announced today that it was joining in a campaign to encourage the recycling of plastic bottles to help stem the nation's growing surfeit of garbage.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Mixed Japan Trade Picture


A Visiting Dissident
LEAD: Milovan Djilas, the venerable Yugoslav Communist dissident, is due to visit Washington next month on his first trip to the United States in almost 20 years.


ETHYL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ETHYL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
470,639,000
390,364,000
Net inc
52,921,000
45,796,000
Share earns
.44
.36
Yr sales
1,720,338,000
1,579,254,000
Net inc
193,319,000
177,734,000
Share earns
1.57
1.40


FIRST COMMERCIAL BANCHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST COMMERCIAL BANCHARES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,413,000
1,156,000
Share earns
.40
.35
Yr net inc
5,587,000
4,854,000
Share earns
1.61
1.45
The company said share earnings for 1986 have been adjusted to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split approved on Sept.


TV Reviews; '48 Hours,' Series From CBS News
LEAD: WE were there, so to speak, at Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas; ''48 Hours,'' the new CBS News series, visited last night.
What was the hospital like?
It was attractive and intense, for one thing; it was full of television reporters, for another. ''48 Hours'' was really a public-television documentary with wings.


FIRST REPUBLICBANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST REPUBLICBANK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
347,800,000
b9,100,000
Per share
-
.26
Yr net loss
656,800,000
b54,000,000
Per share
-
1.65
b-Net income  The latest fourth quarter loss reflects a loan loss provision of $340 million and a writedown of foreclosed assets of $53 million.


Humidifiers Are Good For Dry Skin in Winter
LEAD: To the Editor:


EFI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EFI CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Revenue
1,752,156
1,448,895
Net inc
308,611
b258,656
Share earns
.03
.03
Shares outst
9,942,581
8,717,416
9mo rev
4,441,559
3,577,022
Net inc
654,812
b521,786
Share earns
.07
.06
Shares outst
9,556,897
8,717,416


Sandinistas Warn Political Foes And Briefly Hold 5 in Opposition
LEAD: A strongly worded editorial in the official Sandinista newspaper Barricada today warned that the Government's recent decision to restore suspended civil rights ''should not be misinterpreted as a blank check for irresponsibility and subversion.''


Council Panel Backs Campaign Limits
LEAD: A New York City Council committee yesterday unanimously approved a plan for public financing of city election campaigns, culminating months of effort by the Koch administration to respond to the calls for political reform that grew out of the municipal corruption scandals.


CITICORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITICORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
642,000,000
306,000,000
Per share
1.89
1.01
Yr net loss
1,138,000,000
b1,058,000,000
Per share
-
3.57
b-Net income  The per share earnings reflect a 100 percent stock dividend declared on Oct.


Moscow Grants U.S. Couple An Asylum From Capitalism
LEAD: An American couple who came to Moscow as tourists have been granted political asylum after choosing life in the Soviet Union as an ''alternative to capitalism,'' the Foreign Ministry spokesman said today.


Japan News Cuts Treasury Prices
LEAD: Prices for short- and long-term Treasury securities declined modestly yesterday.


Citicorp Notes Yield 9.409%
LEAD: Citicorp is offering $250 million of 9 3/8 percent notes due 1993 at a price of 99.896, to yield 9.409 percent, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


SECURITY PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SECURITY PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
39,400,000
b124,300,000
Per share
-
1.15
Yr net inc
15,700,000
455,100,000
Per share
.01
4.23
b-Net income  The latest quarter loss included a $350 million credit loss provision for developing-country debt, and included gains of about $27 million from sales of redundant operations resulting from the acquisition of Rainier Bancorporation in the third quarter.


Australian Trade Deficit
LEAD: Australia's current account deficit, the measure of exports of goods and services, fell to $467 million in December, from $590 million in November, according to official statistics released today.
If the present trend continues, the country could end the financial year in June with a current account shortfall of more than $8.5 billion, analysts said.


DINNER BELL FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DINNER BELL FOODS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
74,000,000
72,500,000
Net inc
1,675,000
969,000
Share earns
2.52
.87
Shares outst
663,870
1,113,767


BANK OF NEW HAMPSHIRE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF NEW HAMPSHIRE CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,549,000
1,718,000
Per share
.59
.66
Yr net inc
6,273,000
6,573,000
Per share
2.40
2.70


Takeover Bid Cleared By Robins
LEAD: The A. H. Robins Company said yesterday that it had accepted a sweetened takeover offer from the American Home Products Corporation, one of three bidders seeking the pharmaceutical company.


Ex-Chief to Return To General Homes
LEAD: James W. Olafson, who founded the General Homes Corporation in 1973, agreed yesterday to return as president and chief operating officer of the Houston-based development concern as it begins its rebuilding strategy.


At the Nation's Table; San Francisco
LEAD: AT the San Francisco International Airport, people are heading for their departing flights armed with sleek black cartons inscribed with the words Jetty Box.
Their packages are the work of a restaurant and caterer called Vivande, Porta Via, which has been packing in-flight picnics since its opening in 1981 in downtown San


IMMUCOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMMUCOR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
2,044,022
1,572,065
Net inc
b359,102
c187,012
Share earns
.09
.06
Shares outst
4,044,355
3,189,651
6mo sales
3,969,540
3,209,488
Net inc
b655,476
c409,161
Share earns
.18
.13
Shares outst
3,710,352
3,170,473


AMSERVE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMSERVE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,439,168
1,412,087
Net inc
187,436
b22,274
Share earns
.07
-
6mo rev
2,937,140
2,884,450
Net inc
429,250
b5,909
Share earns
.17
-
b-Net loss


HONEYWELL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HONEYWELL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,985,100,000
1,617,100,000
Net inc
86,100,000
b492,800,000
Share earns
1.99
-
Yr sales
6,679,300,000
5,378,200,000
Net inc
253,700,000
b398,100,000
Share earns
5.75
-
Shares outst
44,089,171
45,099,941


NASA Challenge: Space Station Power
LEAD: ENGINEERS designing the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's permanent space station are planning for the most part to use already developed, ''off the shelf'' technology to create the station, which will be assembled in earth orbit in the mid-1990's.
But one of their more demanding challenges will be supplying electricity to the station - 15 times more power than an


Hanoi Rejects U.S. Plan on Private Aid
LEAD: Hanoi rejected as inadequate today the Reagan Administration's plan to make it easier for private organizations to give humanitarian aid to Vietnam.


Study Says Quitting Smoking Reduces Risk of Stroke by 50%
LEAD: Cigarette smokers who give up the habit cut their risk of stroke by about 50 percent, and even longtime smokers benefit from quitting, a new study indicates.


82.1% Capacity Rate Is Highest Since 1980
LEAD: The nation's industry operated at 82.1 percent of capacity in December, the highest level in almost eight years, as smokestack America continued to benefit from the falling dollar abroad.


Guidance on Dolls
LEAD: To The Living Section:


FIRST VIRGINIA BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST VIRGINIA BANKS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
13,769,000
11,882,000
Per share
.67
.58
Yr net inc
56,293,000
50,512,000
Per share
2.75
2.49


City Opera Beginning 6-Week National Tour
LEAD: A six-week national tour of Rossini's ''Barber of Seville,'' presented by the New York City Opera National Company, will begin tomorrow at the Tropicana Hotel in Atlantic City.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article from Moscow on Saturday about a meeting between Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Andrei D. Sakharov misidentified the group headed by Jeremy Stone.
It is the Federation of American Scientists.


VIDEO DISPLAY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIDEO DISPLAY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
6,652,551
7,009,588
Net inc
624,734
452,601
Share earns
.15
.11
9mo sales
21,481,539
18,433,496
Net inc
b2,249,232
1,182,718
Share earns
.53
.29


A Belgian Executive Amid Hushed Halls
LEAD: Despite what must have been the company's most shattering news since it was founded in 1822, the marble halls of Societe Generale de Belgique headquarters retained their habitual hush today.


Jazz: Hamiet Bluiett
LEAD: THE baritone saxophonist Hamiet Bluiett brought a jubilantly noisy nine-piece big band to Carlos 1 (432 Avenue of the Americas, below 10th Street) Monday for the beginning of an indefinite stay of Monday nights.
Mr.
Bluiett, one quarter of the World Saxophone Quartet, has been leading a big band off and on for the last decade, and has ideas about what he wants from his orchestra.


An 'Active Partnership' That Spurs Learning
LEAD: In the early 1980's, Columbia Park Elementary School in Landover, Md., was in trouble.
On the average, its students, most of them black and from low-income families, could not crack the 50th percentile, or upper half, on national or local standardized tests.
Discipline was so weak that officials suspended 20 to 30 students a year for five consecutive years.


BANKERS FIRST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKERS FIRST CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,112,000
2,544,000
Per share
.40
.45
Yr net loss
8,810,000
b8,024,000
Per share
-
1.66
b-Net income  The latest periods included provisions for loan losses of $350,000 for the quarter and $17,778,000 for the year, and losses on the sale of real estate of $2,308,000 and $2,049,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


CITIZENS FIRST BANCORP, NJ reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS FIRST BANCORP, NJ (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
7,165,000
5,819,000
Per share
.41
.35
Yr net inc
26,541,000
21,742,000
Per share
1.54
1.32
The per share earnings restated to reflect a previously declared 6-for-5 stock split scheduled for distribution Feb.


A Black Doll's History
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Howard Beach Judge Refuses to Drop Count
LEAD: The judge in the Howard Beach attack case yesterday denied a defense motion to throw out a key charge against seven young men who are still to be tried in the case.


Life in the 30's
LEAD: AT 2 o'clock in the morning I am awakened by the appearance of a person no taller than a fire hydrant, only his black eyes visible over the horizon of the mattress. ''What do you want?'' I whisper. ''Nothing,'' he whispers back.


'Phantom': Scalpers' Bonanza
LEAD: Inside the hotel, tickets to ''Phantom of the Opera'' were unavailable at any price. ''I don't have anything to do with that show,'' the man behind the theater-tickets counter at the Sheraton Centre said yesterday at lunch time.
He threw up his hands and shrugged in response to a question he'd had a hundred times before.


AMERICAN CAPITAL MANAGEMENT &amp; REEARCH reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CAPITAL MANAGEMENT &amp; REEARCH (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
22,200,000
30,100,000
Net inc
4,600,000
7,700,000
Share earns
.19
.32
Yr rev
106,700,000
121,900,000
Net inc
29,800,000
36,800,000
Share earns
1.23
1.52


Yonkers Agrees To Back a Plan For Integration
LEAD: Yonkers officials told a Federal judge yesterday that they accepted his demand to integrate the city's neighborhoods and that the City Council would meet today to formally commit itself to a plan to do so.


WELLS FARGO &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WELLS FARGO &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
111,200,000
78,400,000
Per share
1.95
1.36
Yr net inc
50,800,000
273,500,000
Per share
.52
5.03
Shares outst
53,805,000
50,875,000
The 1986 earnings included the results of the former Crocker National Corp.


Offer Accepted By Dyncorp
LEAD: The board of Dyncorp announced today that it had accepted an offer from an investment group led by its president and chief executive, Dan R. Bannister, to take the company private.
The offer valued the company at about $226 million.


Banks Split On 3d-World Loan Issue
LEAD: With a barrage of earnings reports, a schism emerged yesterday between the big New York banking companies and their regional counterparts over how to deal with loans to financially troubled third-world countries.


HEART FEDERAL SAVINS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEART FEDERAL SAVINS &amp; LOAN ASSN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,807,000
1,578,000
Share earns
.42
.36
Yr net inc
7,142,000
7,646,000
Share earns
1.70
1.76


CHIPS &amp; TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHIPS &amp; TECHNOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
32,405,000
16,459,000
Net inc
5,604,000
3,080,000
Share earns
.39
.24
Shares outst
14,220,000
13,069,000
6mo sales
61,982,000
29,885,000
Net inc
10,295,000
5,342,000
Share earns
.73
.44
Shares outst
14,121,000
12,073,000


DE LAURENTIIS ENTERTAINENT reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DE LAURENTIIS ENTERTAINENT (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
20,516,000
14,578,000
Net loss
15,656,000
2,106,000
9mo rev
46,043,000
44,248,000
Net loss
36,181,000
2,664,000
The company said the loss in the latest third quarter and 9-month resulted from revenues not being sufficient to cover costs relating to revenues, selling, general and administrative expenses and interest expense incurred by the company.


CITIZENS &amp; SOUTHERN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS &amp; SOUTHERN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
49,668,000
41,106,000
Per share
.79
.68
Yr net inc
157,933,000
155,848,000
Per share
2.52
2.63
Shares outst
60,072,178
57,223,687
The latest periods had provisions for possible credit losses of $23,972,000 for the quarter and $72,858,000 for the year, compared with $24,493,000 for the year-ago quarter and $77,088,000 for 1986.


HOMETOWN BANCORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOMETOWN BANCORP (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
111,000
125,000
Per share
.12
.20
Shares outst
1,041,718
547,978


CB&amp;T FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CB&amp;T FINANCIAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
826,000
526,000
Per share
.60
.45
Yr net inc
2,821,000
2,228,000
Per share
2.08
2.10


AUTOINFO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUTOINFO
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
836,000
669,000
Net loss
82,000
194,000
6mo rev
1,671,000
1,253,000
Net loss
251,000
347,000


DOMINION BANKSHARES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOMINION BANKSHARES CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
18,110,000
12,049,000
Per share
.54
.35
Yr net inc
70,588,000
54,284,000
Per share
2.10
1.64
The per share figures have been adjusted to reflect a 100 percent stock dividend paid in September 1986.


ADAPTEC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADAPTEC INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,936,000
15,319,000
Net inc
431,000
1,613,000
Share earns
.06
.23
9mo rev
43,231,000
40,703,000
Net inc
3,106,000
b4,907,000
Share earns
.41
.72


New York to Give Welfare Grants In Cash to Single Homeless People
LEAD: The Koch administration has agreed to provide modest cash welfare grants to the 10,000 single men and women living in New York City's homeless shelters, city officials said yesterday.


Henley Seeks to Oust Santa Fe Management
LEAD: A multibillion-dollar battle for control of the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation erupted yesterday with the announcement by Michael D. Dingman, chairman of the Henley Group Inc., that he would wage a proxy fight to unseat the management of the railroad, oil and real estate giant.


A Choice for Polish Draftees
LEAD: The Government said today that it would formally propose legislation to introduce substitute service for youths who refuse to go in the army.


Israel Kills 3 Guerrillas Near Lebanese Border
LEAD: Israeli soldiers killed three Arab guerrillas infiltrating from Lebanon into Israel early today, the military command said.


Chrysler May Sell Its Acustar Unit
LEAD: At least three companies are reported to be interested in acquiring Acustar Inc., an auto parts supplier formed in May by the Chrysler Corporation as a wholly owned subsidiary.
Chrysler and Acustar refused to comment on the report, which appeared in The Detroit News today.
The three companies -the United Technologies Corporation, the ITT Corporation and Harvard


COMPUTER RESEARCH CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER RESEARCH CO (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,341,264
2,334,976
Net inc
103,607
82,266
Share earns
.03
.02
The company said share earnings for both quarters were adjusted for a 2 1/2-for-1 stock split on June 12, 1987, and for the purchase by the company of 102,500 shares of its common stock on the open market during the first quarter.


FALCON PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FALCON PRODUCTS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,643,000
8,423,000
Net inc
794,000
b66,000
Share earns
.49
-
Yr sales
32,583,000
30,550,000
Net inc
1,108,000
b159,000
Share earns
.69
-
b


Swiss Trade Deficit Up
LEAD: Switzerland's trade deficit widened in 1987 as a rising tide of imports swamped a small increase in exports, the Federal Customs Office said today.
The trade deficit totaled 7.69 billion Swiss francs, or about $5.63 billion, compared with a gap of 6.51 billion francs in 1986.
A strong domestic economy drew 6.9 percent more imports into Switzerland on an inflation-adjusted basis, but exports grew by only 1.1 percent.


DIGITAL DIAGNOSTIC reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGITAL DIAGNOSTIC
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
605,757
548,696
Net loss
787,444
589,328


Chemical Bank
LEAD: The Chemical Bank said it had sold its Chicago-based merchant processing business to the Electro Data Corporation of Denver.
Terms were not disclosed.
Chemical announced in November that it would discontinue the service as part of its program to streamline its operations.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 20, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-14


New Study Indicates One in 3 Tend To Get Risky Form of Cholesterol
LEAD: About one of every three Americans inherits a tendency to produce a form of cholesterol that appears to be linked with an unusually high risk of heart disease, research released today shows.


Salt Lake City Hospital Offering
LEAD: Salt Lake City is tentatively offering $81.6 million of hospital revenue refunding bonds with a maximum yield of about 8.17 percent for an issue due in 2015 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


DAMON BIOTECH reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAMON BIOTECH (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,140,203
555,614
Net loss
334,458
2,819,759
Shares outst
21,871,174
21,558,835


AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,150,000,000
1,227,000,000
Net inc
89,319,000
151,072,000
Share earns
.46
.78
Yr rev
4,788,000,000
4,948,000,000
Net inc
502,460,000
507,171,000
Share earns
2.60
2.62


DIONEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIONEX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,726,000
13,365,000
Net inc
2,835,000
2,137,000
Share earns
.30
.23
6mo sales
32,745,000
25,954,000
Net inc
5,504,000
4,243,000
Share earns
.58
.45


Tennessee Democrat Elected To Vacant Seat in Congress
LEAD: Bob Clement, a Democrat and the son of a former Governor, defeated his Republican opponent today in a special election to fill Tennesse's vacant Congressional seat.


Rockwell Profit Increases 29.1%
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation said today that its earnings rose 29.1 percent in its first quarter even as the company's aerospace profits fell 23 percent as B-1B bomber production neared completion.


Nothing to Cheer About in Anyone's Economy
LEAD: To the Editor:


CORESTATES FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORESTATES FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
42,585,000
b12,597,000
Per share
1.03
.26
Yr net inc
162,296,000
b123,601,000
Per share
3.91
2.94
b-After a charge of $24,526,000 for early redemption of debt for the quarter and year.


ISRAEL DELEGATION INVITED TO SOVIET
LEAD: The Soviet Union said today that it had agreed to allow an official Israeli delegation to visit Moscow.


CHARTER FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHARTER FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
296,000
c3,625,000
Share earns
.08
1.00
6mo net inc
b2,149,000
c6,271,000
Share earns
.59
1.73
b-Includes a tax credit of $79,000.
c-Includes tax credits of $1,174,000 and $2,070,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


ACTION STAFFING reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACTION STAFFING
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
15,359,000
6,807,000
Net inc
115,000
79,000
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
8,402,000
6,431,000


MERCHANTS NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCHANTS NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
10,728,000
7,749,000
Per share
.73
.53
Yr net inc
17,139,000
33,191,000
Per share
1.17
2.31


Will Riot Role Blunt Israelis' Warrior Spirit?
LEAD: Since early December, the Israel Defense Force, envied among armies of the world for courage and performance, has been playing an unaccustomed role as policemen in trying to put down Palestinian riots in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
It is hardly a role that the combat-oriented army relishes.


CHEMICAL FABRICS CORP reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEMICAL FABRICS CORP (OTC)
13wks to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,895,000
6,943,000
Net inc
b760,000
71,000
Share earns
.17
.02
Shares outst
4,536,000
4,357,000
26wk sales
16,337,000
12,864,000
Net inc
b1,044,000
c351,000
Share earns
.23
-
Shares outst
4,542,000
4,279,000


CROWN ANDERSEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROWN ANDERSEN INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,184,673
2,.538,452
Net loss
177,524
b219,336
Share earns
-
.15
Yr rev
11,993,478
12,064,941
Net loss
72,783
b512,455
Share earns
-
.34
b-Net income


EMULEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMULEX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
30,416,000
25,670,000
Net inc
2,358,000
379,000
Share earns
.19
.03
Shares outst
12,241,000
13,580,000
6mo rev
59,191,000
50,685,000
Net inc
3,970,000
1,950,000
Share earns
.32
.15
Shares outst
12,433,000
13,398,000


Franklin Savings of Kansas In Inflation-Linked Offering
LEAD: The Franklin Savings Association is offering $150 million of 20-year bonds with an interest rate that will be adjusted quarterly at 3 percent above the increase in consumer prices.


The Other Ben Johnson
LEAD: WHEN people call him ''the first Ben Johnson'' or ''the real Ben Johnson,'' he smiles and asks, ''What about the original Ben Jonson?'' A Columbia education comes in handy sometimes.


MERIDIAN BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERIDIAN BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
18,224,000
21,845,000
Per share
.47
.58
Yr net inc
79,537,000
77,396,000
Per share
2.07
2.06
The results for all periods have been restated to include the acquisition of Delaware Trust Co., on a pooling of interests basis.


MCI to Reduce Its Phone Rates
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation said it would reduce its long-distance telephone rates by about 3.5 percent on March 1, matching rate reductions announced earlier by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


The Homeless Find a Haven At Residence
LEAD: There is nothing fancy about the corniced, four-story, red-brick building on West 40th Street into which Joyce Brown moved last night.


New Jet Coaches
LEAD: The Jets have named Wally Chambers as new defensive line coach and Mike Faulkiner as the coach of their defensive backs.
Chambers played for the Chicago Bears and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and then was defensive line coach at Temple.
Ray Callahan moved from defensive line coach to special assistant to Coach Joe Walton.


Gene Deal for Beckman
LEAD: Beckman Instruments Inc. has signed an agreement with British Bio-technology Ltd. to distribute the British company's line of synthetic genes.
The synthetic genes, sold under the trademark Designer Genes, produce proteins used in research, the company said.
Until now, researchers have had to grow their own genes for medical research.


Sugar Prices at 4-Year High On Philippine Storm News
LEAD: The price of world sugar futures soared to more than 10 cents a pound yesterday for the first time in more than four years.
Analysts cited fears that a storm had further damaged the Philippines' already battered sugar cane crop.


Trust and a Fortune Cookie: Blind Date Is Back in Fashion
LEAD: It was a blind date.
They decided to meet by the Dumpster in front of Jeremy's Ale House, a popular hangout at South Street Seaport.
Expectations were low.


SHAW INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHAW INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
209,421,000
177,201,000
Net inc
7,375,000
8,560,000
Share earns
.46
.50
6mo sales
400,938,000
341,763,000
Net inc
14,257,000
15,136,000
Share earns
.88
.89


The Pop Life; Hall of Fame Inductees
LEAD: The Beach Boys, the Beatles, the Drifters, Bob Dylan and the Supremes will be inducted into the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame this evening during the organization's third annual dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
Three other artists -Woody Guthrie, Leadbelly and Les Paul -will also be inducted as early influences on rock music.


Safety Panel Urges More Controls On Connecticut Building Projects
LEAD: Stricter controls on construction projects in Connecticut were proposed today by a gubernatorial advisory committee appointed after the collapse last April of an apartment complex in Bridgeport that killed 28 construction workers.


Electoral Math
LEAD: To the Editor:


Joyce Brown, Hopeful, Savors Her New World
LEAD: Joyce Brown, the first person picked up under a New York City program to remove mentally ill homeless people from the streets, walked out of Bellevue Hospital Center yesterday after being forcibly hospitalized for 84 days.


The Interpublic Group Seeks Phillips-Ramsey
LEAD: The Interpublic Group of Companies Inc., which had the acquisition craze before the Saatchis appeared, has just announced a plan to buy Phillips-Ramsey of San Diego and Phoenix.
It will be its first acquisition since its deal for the United States arm of Geers Gross Advertising was completed earlier this month.


Nordic Skier Is Barred
LEAD: Kerry Lynch of Denver, the Nordic Combined specialist, was barred from international competition at least until the end of 1988 after acknowledging he practiced blood doping at the last world championship.
The International Ski Federation announced the ban yesterday in Bern, Switzerland.
The exact length of the suspension will be determined later, but it includes next month's Winter Olympics.


CABOT MEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CABOT MEDICAL (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,320,000
2,372,000
Net inc
b306,000
123,000
Share earns
.05
.02
Yr sales
14,744,000
10,548,000
Net inc
b1,098,000
558,000
Share earns
.17
.09
b-Includes a gain from the prepayment of a promissory note of $103,000 for both the quarter and year.


PRINTRONIX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRINTRONIX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Sales
31,697,000
32,950,000
Net inc
477,000
b1,362,000
Share earns
.10
.29
9mo sales
90,171,000
95,049,000
Net loss
556,000
c1,844,000
Share earns
-
.38


A Donation To Neediest Is a Tribute
LEAD: A native New Yorker who migrated to Hollywood some 13 years ago and became a leading film producer, Daniel Melnick, has sent $1,000 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


LOMAS &amp; NETTLETON MORTAGE INVESTORS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOMAS &amp; NETTLETON MORTAGE INVESTORS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
25,001,613
18,609,829
Net inc
7,510,872
7,078,785
Share earns
.64
.61
Shares outst
11,704,208
12,464,879
6mo rev
48,548,234
36,389,591
Net inc
14,782,610
14,723,754
Share earns
1.26
1.27
Shares outst
11,704,208
12,464,912


Tharp Foundation Chief
LEAD: AhEON Fwearwn Luckman has been appointed executive director of the Twyla Tharp Dance Foundation Inc.
Ms.
Luckman, who has been the director of development at the foundation, was previously director of the 92d Street Y Dance Center.


U.S. Calls Haiti Voting 'Clouded' but Vows to Work With Winner
LEAD: The State Department issued a carefully understated rejection today of the legitimacy of the elections Sunday in Haiti, but said that the United States would deal with whatever government emerges.


Japanese Trade Report Shows Mixed Picture
LEAD: Japan said today that its trade surplus with the United States rose in December and for all of last year, although its global trade surplus declined in 1987 for the first time in five years.


Further Decline in Minority Enrollment Is Feared
LEAD: Without support from Federal and state governments, minority participation in higher education will steadily decrease, experts said here today at the 70th annual meeting of the American Council on Education.


City Ballet: 'Tombeau de Couperin'
LEAD: THOSE who complain that George Balanchine's ballets all look alike, in effect, pay tribute to his strength of vision.
What this view means, of course, is that his signature is immediately recognizable.


Alfonsin Sees Democratic Gains in Rebel's Arrest
LEAD: Speaking hours after the surrender of the leader of the latest wave of army mutinies here, President Raul Alfonsin on Monday night described the failure of the rebellions as proof that ''democracy in this country has been consolidated.''


HORIZON BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORIZON BANCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
11,610,000
8,474,000
Per share
1.28
.93
Yr net inc
44,478,000
34,639,000
Per share
4.91
3.81


UST INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UST INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
153,712,000
132,517,000
Net inc
33,602,000
26,000,000
Share earns
.59
.45
Yr sales
576,092,000
517,996,000
Net inc
130,871,000
103,938,000
Share earns
2.25
1.83


MICROCOM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROCOM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,876,000
6,728,000
Net inc
1,116,000
c925,000
Share earns
.29
.30
Shares outst
3,895,000
3,063,000
9mo sales
23,887,000
17,899,000
Net inc
b3,541,000
c2,183,000
Share earns
.94
.70
Shares outst
3,754,000
3,132,000


Taylor Poetry Award Goes to Richard Wilbur
LEAD: Richard Wilbur, the poet laureate of the United States, has been chosen as the second winner of the Aiken Taylor Award for Modern American Poetry.


Stop Rounding Up Those Wild Horses
LEAD: To the Editor:


EAGLE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EAGLE FINANCIAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
499,000
b457,000
Share earns
.35
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $78,000.
The company went public in February 1987.


HRUDEY BURNED BY PENGUINS
LEAD: Kelly Hrudey tried to differentiate between which of the six Penguin goals were his fault, which were the product of defensive laxity and which were pure credits to the opposition's offense, but he ultimately gave up.


FIRST PENNSYLVANIA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST PENNSYLVANIA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b11,262,000
c10,253,000
Per share
.26
.18
Shares outst
38,051,000
23,324,000
Yr net loss
b53,918,000
cd36,625,000
Per share
-
.68
Shares outst
37,266,000
23,241,000


Rangers Trounced After 3-0 Advantage
LEAD: Dave Taylor scored two goals and assisted on another, leading the Los Angeles Kings from a three-goal deficit to a 6-3 victory over the Rangers tonight.


The Worm and the Apple: Squawks; Painful Gibberish Underground
LEAD: The New York City Transit Authority undoubtedly thought it was doing riders a favor when it installed public address systems on subway platforms.
But instead of offering information, the screeching sound systems only add to the subway's assault on the ears.
The P.A. racket earns the T.A. a worm.


PEOPLES SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,260,000
2,880,000
Per share
.38
.87
Yr net inc
4,846,000
3,644,000
Per share
1.47
1.10
The year-ago fourth quarter included a non-recurring distribution from the Mutual Savings Central Fund equal to 49 cents per share.


EDUCATION: LESSONS
LEAD: Richard Jungkuntz flew across country this week to sit in conference with some of higher education's most powerful leaders.
It is the last time this provost of a small Lutheran college will formally attend such a gathering.
This spring, at the age of 70, he plans to end his 30-year career as an educator and retire to the tennis courts.


PENNWALT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNWALT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
300,472,000
263,797,000
Net inc
b16,972,000
c12,574,000
Share earns
1.34
.88
Yr rev
1,142,750,000
1,050,421,000
Net inc
b52,438,000
c51,947,000
Share earns
4.02
3.64


Boyd F. Morgan, Stuntman, 72
LEAD: Boyd F. (Red) Morgan, a stuntman who doubled for John Wayne in dozens of Westerns and boasted of falling off 2,000 horses in front of cameras without injury, died of heart failure Jan. 8.
He was 72 years old.
Mr.
Morgan, who was born in Waurika, Okla., served in the Navy during World War II and coached high school football before becoming a stuntman in 1948.


Icahn Raises Texaco Stake
LEAD: The financier Carl C. Icahn said today that he had increased his stake in Texaco Inc. to 14.5 percent, from 13.3 percent.
The stock purchases cost him about $110 million.


MORGAN, JP &amp; CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORGAN, JP &amp; CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
224,100,000
190,100,000
Per share
1.21
1.02
Yr net inc
83,300,000
872,500,000
Per share
.39
4.74
The latest periods' nets are after provisions for credit losses of $30 million for the quarter and $960 million for the year, compared with the year- ago periods of $55 million for the quarter and $265 million for 1986.


PENNBANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNBANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
9,582,000
7,855,000
Per share
.73
.60
Yr net inc
33,117,000
29,887,000
Per share
2.52
2.28


Excerpts From School Poll: What Administrators Think
LEAD: A recent survey by the National Center for Education Information found an ''amazing similarity of views among superintendents and principals in public schools in this country'' on a wide variety of education issues.
Following are excerpts from the report, which analyzed the responses of 3,577 elementary and secondary school administrators: 1,704 superintendents, 1,349 principals in public schools and 524 principals in private schools.


Who Killed Palme? Doggedly, the Hunt Goes On
LEAD: By now, the 22-month-old hunt for the killer of Prime Minister Olof Palme has become a workaday job.


CALIFORNIA FIRST BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALIFORNIA FIRST BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
12,014,000
8,347,000
Per share
.89
.64
Yr net inc
40,124,000
30,733,000
Per share
3.01
2.37
The bank said its provisions for loan and lease losses was $67.4 million for 1987, compared with $52.3 million a year ago.


UNITED JERSEY BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED JERSEY BANKS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
22,351,000
17,001,000
Per share
.61
.51
Shares outst
33,423,000
32,318,000
Yr net inc
86,593,000
69,972,000
Per share
2.46
2.13
Shares outst
32,981,000
31,745,000


FIRST FLORIDA BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FLORIDA BANKS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
13,344,000
12,508,000
Per share
.84
.79
Yr net inc
48,337,000
b47,152,000
Per share
3.02
2.97
b-Included a gain of $3,254,000 from the sale of securities and other assets.


CENTRUST SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRUST SAVINGS BANK (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
24,368,000
22,088,000
Per share
2.15
2.13


Devils Still Winless At Captial Centre
LEAD: Capital Centre continues to be the only arena in the National Hockey League where the Devils have never won.


REYNOLDS METALS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REYNOLDS METALS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,155,900,000
1,014,600,000
Net inc
b80,000,000
c76,300,000
Share earns
1.50
1.67
Shares outst
53,100,000
44,000,000
Yr rev
4,317,200,000
3,910,000,000
Net inc
b219,500,000
c191,800,000
Share earns
4.33
4.09
Shares outst
49,700,000
43,800,000


FIRST COMMERCIAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST COMMERCIAL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
620,378
b928,835
Per share
.16
-
Yr net inc
1,549,417
b593,533
Per share
.53
-
b-Net loss


U.S. Believes Plan to Ease Out Panama's Leader Is Still Alive
LEAD: The Reagan Administration believes that a Panamanian plan to move the military-backed Government of Gen.
Antonio Manuel Noriega toward democracy remains a viable framework for negotiations despite a rift between the Panamanian leader and the plan's author, State Department officials said today.


A Dearth of Strategic Thinkers
LEAD: With the imminent departure of Under Secretary of Defense Fred C. Ikle, who announced his resignation last weekend, there remains no one at senior political levels of the Reagan Administration's national security apparatus who could be termed a strategic long-range thinker.


DOVER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOVER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
434,168,000
373,766,000
Net inc
31,418,000
23,151,000
Share earns
.94
.68
Yr sales
1,585,526,000
1,439,844,000
Net inc
111,702,000
83,829,000
Share earns
3.31
2.42


Courts Should Hire Impartial Technical Consultants
LEAD: To the Editor:


FOUNTAIN POWERBOAT INDUSRIES reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOUNTAIN POWERBOAT INDUSRIES
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
10,024,533
4,811,360
Net inc
b119,260
c59,772
Share earns
.03
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $45,600.
c-Net loss


FIRST MARYLAND BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST MARYLAND BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
11,752,000
8,985,000
Per share
.81
.67
Shares outst
14,384,304
13,485,342
Yr net inc
45,340,000
36,054,000
Per share
3.18
2.68
Shares outst
14,243,376
13,456,632


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We will not allow any support from the outside by commodities, not by countries, not by organizations.
There are commodities and once all the shops will be open there will be no shortage of any commodity.''  - Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin, of Israel.  [ A1:6. ]


Philadelphia Journal; On the Amtrak 7:30 to New York: Adventures of Commuting 2 Hours
LEAD: It is 6:30 on a dark January morning, and some of the hardy ones who hurry shivering into the welcoming warmth of Philadelphia's elegant old 30th Street Station have been up since 5 o'clock.
They quickly pick up coffee, doughnuts, bagels and The Philadelphia Inquirer and join the line for the 6:50 train to New York.


Opera: 'Mefistofele,' By Boito, in Philadelphia
LEAD: As the third installment in its cycle of operas devoted to the Faust theme - the first was Gounod's ''Faust'' in 1984 and the second, Berlioz's scenic cantata ''The Damnation of Faust'' in 1985 - the Opera Company of Philadelphia presented a new staging of Boito's ''Mefistofele'' on Monday night at the Academy of


A Powder For Testing Conductivity
LEAD: ONE of high tech's current buzzwords is ''superconductivity,'' the capacity for a material to conduct electricity without friction if the material is cooled to low enough temperatures.
The discovery that some substances become superconducting at much higher temperatures than previously thought electrified scientists last year, leading to speculation about superconductivity uses ranging from high-speed trains to superfast electronic components.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MAHINES CORP (IBM)(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MAHINES CORP (IBM)(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,011,000,000
16,945,000,000
Net inc
2,087,000,000
1,390,000,000
Share earns
3.47
2.28
Shares outst
599,600,000
607,300,000
Yr rev
54,217,000,000
51,250,000,000
Net inc
5,258,000,000
4,789,000,000
Share earns
8.72
7.81
Shares outst
603,000,000
612,800,000


Liz Taylor at 55: Thin Again, and Wiser
LEAD: Elizabeth Taylor swirled a carrot stick in a gray-colored dip made of yogurt, Roquefort cheese and spices.
In ''Elizabeth Takes Off,'' the diet book just published by G. P. Putnam's Sons, the actress recounts her five-year battle with fried chicken and fancy desserts, observing, rather wistfully, that her life has been perceived as black or white.


HILTON HOTELS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HILTON HOTELS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
220,404,000
197,012,000
Net inc
b58,361,000
c26,174,000
Share earns
2.35
1.05
Yr rev
843,847,000
740,366,000
Net inc
b139,856,000
c97,839,000
Share earns
5.59
3.92


COMMERCIAL CREDIT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCIAL CREDIT (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
234,900,000
283,800,000
Net inc
b4,500,000
c3,100,000
Share earns
.11
.07
Yr rev
912,300,000
1,020,900,000
Net inc
b23,700,000
c45,900,000
Share earns
.48
1.17


Bell Atlantic Rebuts Panel In Inquiry on G.S.A. Bids
LEAD: The Bell Atlantic Corporation yesterday rebutted a Senate committee's accusations that one of its officials had admitted receiving confidential bid information from a Government employee about a telephone-switching contract.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bell Atlantic Corp., Arlington, Va., a telecommunications holding company, said its New Jersey Bell unit would run fiber optic cable to homes as part of a technical trial this year.


AMERIFIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERIFIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,306,000
b3,059,000
Share earns
.29
-
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $335,000 for the latest quarter and $216,000 for the year- earlier period.


Cuba, North Korea Prepare to Be Hosts
LEAD: Despite their announced intention not to participate in the Seoul Olympics later this year for political reasons, Cuba and North Korea are proceeding with preparations for other games to be held in their capital cities.


End of a Tradition
LEAD: Most people think of Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist as a rather traditional sort, but he is about to break a tradition established 18 years ago by his predecessor, Warren E. Burger.


ATLANTIC FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTIC FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
292,984
270,004
Per share
.37
.35
9mo net inc
885,245
670,443
Per share
1.13
.91
The bank is based in Baltimore, Md.


Judge Rebuffs Secord On Evidence for Jury
LEAD: A Federal judge refused today to order a grand jury to review Congressional testimony that a target of the Iran-contra investigation, Richard V. Secord, says exonerates him.


Mitel-G.E. Deal
LEAD: Mitel Inc., the United States subsidiary of the Mitel Corporation of Canada, said it had agreed to acquire the General Electric Company's RCA Telephone Systems Business.
RCA Telephone Systems Business sells private branch exchange systems to small and medium-sized businesses.


CREATIVE COMPUTER APPLICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CREATIVE COMPUTER APPLICAIONS
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
874,328
703,862
Net loss
102,937
485,808


NATIONAL CONVENIENCE STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL CONVENIENCE STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
200,218,000
189,100,000
Net inc
1,249,000
b553,000
Share earns
.06
-
6mo sales
425,565,000
394,479,000
Net inc
2,557,000
984,000
Share earns
.11
.04


CONSULTANTS GET ROBERTSON FUNDS
LEAD: The Presidential campaign of Pat Robertson, in contrast to other candidates, made unusually large payments to a few consultants last year, a new study shows.
By doing this, the campaign has avoided disclosing how it is spending millions of dollars.


Samuel Regenstrief, 78, Is Dead
LEAD: Samuel Nathan Regenstrief, an Austrian immigrant who founded one of the world's largest dishwashing machine companies and became a millionaire-philanthropist, died Sunday at his home in Connersville, Ind., near Indianapolis.
He was 78 years old.


Contras Agree to Attend Truce Talks
LEAD: The political leadership of the Nicaraguan rebels agreed today to hold cease-fire talks next week with a delegation of the Managua Government.


FLANIGAN'S ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLANIGAN'S ENTERPRISES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 27
1987
1986
Sales
6,824,000
6,867,000
Net inc
b71,000
c1,046,000
Share earns
.08
-
Yr sales
29,533,000
36,183,000
Net inc
b1,780,000
c3,170,000
Share earns
1.91
-


ALICO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALICO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
2,304,830
2,425,045
Net inc
178,887
485,828
Share earns
.02
.07


7 Weeks to Super Tuesday: Key Questions Awaiting Answers
LEAD: Nationally, the news nowadays is about Iowa and New Hampshire.
But in the South, all the talk is about Super Tuesday.


FNW BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FNW BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,830,000
1,937,000
Per share
.62
.42
Yr net inc
10,909,000
9,317,000
Per share
2.36
2.02


Australian Open Semifinalists
LEAD: Ivan Lendl, above, defeating Todd Witsken yesterday in Melbourne and Pat Cash, who won his match against Michiel Schapers.
Lendl and Cash are to face each other in the semifinal round of the Australian Open.
Page B13. (Reuters)


Central American Agreement: Nicaragua as Target
LEAD: The Central American peace treaty is in danger of being converted into a series of demands directed only at Nicaragua, rather than retaining the broad force of an accord binding on all major countries in the region, according to diplomats and Government officials here.


Louisiana Bans Commercial Catching of Redfish
LEAD: Louisiana has temporarily banned commercial fishing for redfish, in an effort to keep the species from becoming extinct.


Shots Fired in Standoff With Utah Polygamists
LEAD: Shots were fired this afternoon from a house where members of polygamous family believed responsible for a church bombing continued a standoff with the authorities for a fourth day.


The Work and the Apple: Squawks; Christmas Memories, and Mulch
LEAD: January brings snow, ice, post-holiday letdown - and a sudden profusion of used Christmas trees that block Manhattan sidewalks.
This year's abundant crop reflects softness in the local mulch market.


TV Reviews; Ron Reagan In a Special On Cinemax
LEAD: THERE is Ronald Reagan, the President, and there is Ron Reagan, the dancer, journalist and television host who is likely to pop up anywhere from ''Saturday Night Live,'' cavorting in his underwear, or as the star of his very own cable-television special, aptly titled ''Ron Reagan Is the President's Son.


Foote, Cone Gets President
LEAD: Stanley H. Katz, the chairman and chief executive of FCB/Leber Katz Partners, has named J. Charles Taney Jr. president of its Foote, Cone &amp; Belding subsidiary.


Advertising; Gains Seen In Drive On Drugs
LEAD: THE members of the advertising community, who have been involved in the public-service advertising war on drugs, are taking as proof of the effectiveness of their efforts the Government's report last week that substantially fewer high school seniors were trying cocaine.


The Stage: Jan Munroe
LEAD: JAN MUNROE, a Los Angeles-based performance artist who made his New York debut at Performance Space 122's downstairs space on Friday evening, is a one-man portrait gallery of Southern rural Americana.
In ''Alligator Tails,'' he offered a spoken collage of characters from his Florida hometown of Quincy.


ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,680,000,000
2,870,000,000
Net inc
b192,900,000
149,400,000
Share earns
.71
.53
b-Included a gain equal to 18 cents a share from a tax adjustment related to previously recorded deferred taxes on the B-1B aircraft program.


Ward Blames Reagan For Poor Racial Climate
LEAD: New York City Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward said yesterday that he believed race relations in New York had deteriorated significantly in recent weeks.
But he insisted that much of the blame lay not with Mayor Koch and the police, but with President Reagan, whose policies ''have built up the kind of tension that we're seeing in this city today.


HOMEOWNERS FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOMEOWNERS FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b8,465,000
9,549,000
Share earns
1.00
1.37
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $2,742,000 from early extinguishment of debt.


A New Weapon Is Seen in Cancer Fight
LEAD: SUBSTANCES that undergo a chemical reaction when exposed to light are likely to become a new weapon in the treatment of cancer.
Known as porphyrins, they are given to patients intravenously and concentrate in cancer tumors.
When exposed to light, they give off energy that kills the cancer cells.


Sweden to See Vikings
LEAD: The National Football League, which has played preseason games in England, Japan, Mexico and Canada, will make its debut this summer in Sweden.
The Chicago Bears and the Minnesota Vikings have agreed to play a preseason game in Goteborg.
The game will be sponsored by Volvo North America.
The Jets and the Cleveland Browns will meet in a preseason game in Montreal, and Joe Browne, an N.F.L.


INTERNATIONAL DAIRY QUEEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL DAIRY QUEEN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
43,409,065
36,908,248
Net inc
2,516,904
1,802,338
Share earns
.26
.19
Yr rev
210,604,292
183,286,352
Net inc
14,907,607
12,053,952
Share earns
1.54
1.25


Indian Analyst Turns Freudian Eye On His Compatriots
LEAD: A FREUDIAN view of Indian behavior and mythology hardly seems far-fetched in a country where the Hindu god Shiva is worshiped in the form of a phallic symbol and the mother goddess is often depicted as a violently destructive and castrating ogre.
Yet Dr.
Sudhir Kakar is one of only 25 practicing psychoanalysts in the entire country.


CONGRESS STREET PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONGRESS STREET PROPERTIES
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
259,000
1,094,000
Net loss
75,000
b741,000
Share earns
-
.59
b-Net income


In Jerusalem, Shopkeepers on the Front Line
LEAD: The main street of Arab East Jerusalem was a long line of closed, gray steel shutters today as Palestinian shopkeepers refused to open their stores for the 13th day in a row.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, a report in the Briefing column of the Washington Talk page on Monday misidentified a Yugoslav folk music ensemble.
It is Ivo Lola Ribar.


ISRAELIS INVOKING EMERGENCY POWER IN EAST JERUSALEM
LEAD: Seeking to quell Palestinian protests, Israel reportedly prepared to impose emergency police powers in East Jerusalem tonight for the first time since it annexed the Arab sector almost 21 years ago.


Free Reading of Austen
LEAD: The actors Barbara Feldon and Michael Tolan will give a free reading from works by Jane Austen on Thursday at 6 P.M. at the Donnell Library Center, 20 West 53d Street.
Among the works from which they will read are ''Pride and Prejudice,'' ''Persuasion'' and published letters by the author.
The reading is part of a free series of events at public libraries throughout the city.


CALIFORNIA MICRO DEVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALIFORNIA MICRO DEVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,319,000
2,313,000
Net inc
437,000
205,000
Share earns
.11
.06
Shares outst
4,159,000
3,660,000
6mo rev
12,916,000
4,556,000
Net inc
785,000
290,000
Share earns
.19
.09
Shares outst
4,116,000
3,066,000


Snyder Defended
LEAD: Jimmy (the Greek) Snyder, who was dismissed by CBS over racial remarks he made last week, ''spoke the truth'' and was repeating statements made by black leaders, according to Roy Innis, the chairman of the Congress of Racial Equality.
Among the remarks Snyder made during a televised interview on Friday was a comment that blacks are better athletes than whites because of breeding techniques that go back to the Civil War.


Helping Real Estate Developers Is Not Landmarks Panel's Job
LEAD: To the Editor:


DUQUESNE SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DUQUESNE SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,007,000
8,636,000
Net inc
2,707,000
1,920,000
Share earns
.25
.18
Share earnings reflect a 2-for-1 stock split in February 1987.


Smaller Processor Does a Big Job Well
LEAD: DOWNSCALING is the buzzword in kitchen appliances today, as major manufacturers reach out to small families and people who live alone.


CHASE MANHATTAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHASE MANHATTAN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
154,000,000
158,000,000
Per share
1.66
1.79
Yr net loss
895,000,000
b585,000,000
Per share
-
6.63
b-Net income  The latest fourth quarter net included a net gain of $39 million from the sale of real estate in Japan.


Andrew Dempsey, 46, A Magazine Executive
LEAD: Andrew J. Dempsey, the president and chief executive officer of Times Mirror Magazines, died of lung cancer yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old.
Late last year, Mr.
Dempsey was instrumental in negotiating Times Mirror's $167.5 million acquisition of four magazines - Field &amp; Stream, Skiing, Home Mechanix and Yachting - from Diamandis Communications Inc.


Executives
LEAD: *
Abraham &amp; Straus Department Stores, Brooklyn, a division of Federated Department Stores Inc. named Joseph Pennacchio senior vice president and general merchandise manager.


CRESTMONT FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRESTMONT FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,327,000
c4,290,000
Share earns
.68
-
9mo net inc
b7,316,000
c10,560,000
Share earns
2.13
-
b-Reflects after-tax gains on the sale of mortgage loans and securities of $793,000 for the quarter and $1,802,000 for the 9 months.


Withdrawal of Nominee
LEAD: Kenneth Bergquist, a Justice Department official who had been nominated to become the Pentagon's top civilian aide in charge of special forces and unconventional warfare, has withdrawn his name from consideration, according to a military industry newsletter.


American Medical
LEAD: American Medical International Inc., an operator of hospitals, said it had placed its British operations under a new holding company and was considering the sale of an unspecified minority interest to reduce the parent company's debt.


Prosecutor Says Nofziger 'Cashed In' on Reagan Ties
LEAD: Lyn Nofziger, President Reagan's former political director, repeatedly violated Federal ethics laws when he became a powerful Washington lobbyist and ''cashed in'' on his ties to the President, a prosecutor charged today.


Fire Destroys a Row of Stores in Mount Vernon
LEAD: Firefighters battling a five-alarm fire that destroyed a row of stores along Gramatan Avenue in Mount Vernon early yesterday.
It took more than 50 firefighters five hours to control the blaze, which started in a doughnut shop and caused more than $1 million in damage.
Three firefighters were injured, none seriously.


QUANTUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUANTUM CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
56,689,000
33,934,000
Net inc
4,666,000
694,000
Share earns
.51
.08
9mo sales
146,356,000
88,857,000
Net inc
5,184,000
5,861,000
Share earns
.56
.63


Enter a New French Superchef
LEAD: ONCE in every decade, France seems to produce a chef who is acclaimed as the heir to a tradition of greatness.


PARK COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARK COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
41,338,000
38,313,000
Net inc
6,065,000
5,318,000
Share earns
.44
.39
Yr rev
149,427,000
136,938,000
Net inc
17,071,000
14,923,000
Share earns
1.24
1.08


JUNO LIGHTING reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JUNO LIGHTING (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
15,022,000
11,552,000
Net inc
2,966,000
2,078,000
Share earns
.32
.23
Yr sales
52,600,000
42,756,000
Net inc
9,788,000
7,461,000
Share earns
1.07
.81


Colombian Drugs and Rebels Upset Venezuela
LEAD: Venezuela has called for joint action with Colombia to control the growing activities of Colombian drug traffickers and leftist guerrillas along and inside this country's western borders.


BALTIMORE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALTIMORE BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b9,528,000
cd5,750,000
Per share
.75
-
Yr net inc
b27,027,000
d10,452,000
Per share
2.13
.82
b-After an extraordinary gain of $1,990,000 from extinguishment of debt for the quarter and year.


Market Place; New Uncertainty On Lockheed
LEAD: THE price of the Lockheed Corporation's stock has been depressed for some time by concerns about military spending cuts and increasing pressure on contractors to share costs of developing new military hardware.
Now, there is new uncertainty for investors in Lockheed, which some analysts believe is building a new high-flying, lightning-fast spy plane that will be designed to evade enemy radar and infrared sensors.


Nunn Seeks Shield for Missiles Fired in Error
LEAD: Senator Sam Nunn said today that the United States should consider developing a limited anti-missile defense system to protect American territory from accidental missile launchings by other nations.


U.S. Eases Stand on Membership For Moscow in Economic Groups
LEAD: President Reagan has opened the door to Soviet membership in the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, provided that Moscow makes good on its talk of economic reforms, according to a policy document the White House is expected to release within days.


7 States on Final List for U.S. Atom Smasher
LEAD: The Government announced today that seven states were finalists in the competition for a $4.4 billion atom smasher.


FIRST BANCORP OF OHIO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST BANCORP OF OHIO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
9,124,000
8,893,000
Per share
.84
.82
Yr net inc
33,897,000
31,385,000
Per share
3.12
2.89


Astronauts, Worried Over Shuttle Flaws, Want an Extra Test
LEAD: Senior astronauts, concerned about flaws in a test of a booster rocket for the space shuttle last month, have asked that the shuttle not be cleared to fly again until the booster passes at least three more tests.


FLORIDA STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA STEEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
112,596,479
74,371,802
Net inc
1,572,877
3,233,165
Share earns
.26
.54
The company said the latest quarter includes a charge of $2,100,000 related to the shutdown of a plant.


'Long March' Ends for One Reagan Chief as Short One Begins for Another  One of the Last of the Old Guard Looks Back
LEAD: In the beginning there was ''the team,'' whose members had been recruited in the 1970's for ''the Cause, with a capital C,'' at the start of ''the Long March'' to the Presidency of Ronald Reagan.
As the second term draws to an end, the tone has changed, because the natural process of departures and deaths has stripped the original phalanx of almost all of its centurions.


Hope Golf Starts Today
LEAD: he 29th annual Bob Hope Chrysler Classic begins its five-day, 90-hole run Wednesday over four desert courses.
This year, however, the tournament will not include PGA West, where Corey Pavin birdied the final hole to win the 1987 tourney.


INDIANA NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDIANA NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,782,000
11,233,000
Per share
.45
.89
Yr net inc
27,052,000
42,972,000
Per share
2.11
3.49
The latest periods included after- tax provisions of $7,260,000 for the quarter and $22,440,000 for the year, as additions to its reserves for foreign loans.


I.B.M. Net Rises 50.4% In Quarter
LEAD: In a long-awaited and somewhat muted rebound, the International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that its fourth-quarter net income rose 50.4 percent, to $2.09 billion, after a year of cost-cutting measures that John F. Akers, the company's chairman, declared ''are beginning to pay off.


COMERICA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMERICA INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
24,327,000
19,038,000
Per share
2.15
1.70
Yr net inc
71,432,000
61,911,000
Per share
6.20
5.45
The company said the higher year earnings occurred despite additional loan loss provisions of $36 million in the second quarter for potential Latin American loan losses.


Panel Says Presidents Should Plan for Temporary Succession
LEAD: When the next President is inaugurated a year from Wednesday, his staff, doctor and wife must be better informed about the disability provisions of the 25th Amendment to the Constitution than his precedessors have been, a private commission said today.


Tyson Takes New Approach
LEAD: Larry Holmes may get a break from Mike Tyson.
To Tyson, it turns out, Holmes is just another opponent, and the undisputed heavyweight champion bears his challenger no ill will.


Taste of Mexico Becomes Harder to Find
LEAD: SANTIAGO MONEO is out of work.
But Mr.
Moneo is not just another faceless New Yorker who is unemployed.
He is the sole proprietor of Casa Moneo, and the closing of his store has had repercussions throughout the New York food world.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


French Pupil Ordered Home
LEAD: A foreign exchange student has been ordered to return to France because she visited her homeland for Christmas week instead of staying to watch Americans celebrate the holidays.


Meaning of Christmas
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Seton Hall Tops Providence
LEAD: Ramon Ramos of Seton Hall and Shamsid-Deen Abdul of Providence going up for a rebound last night at the Meadowlands.
Seton Hall scored an 82-80 victory.
Page B12. (NYT/Ruby Washington)


Cramped Convention
LEAD: Leaders of the Democratic Party are trying to prepare their troops for the fact that the 1988 national convention hall, the Omni in Atlanta, is going to be a tight fit next July.


Another Phone Concern Held Talks With Meese
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d met with executives of Pacific Telesis, a regional Bell telephone company, while his financial manager held about $10,000 in telephone stock for him, a company spokeswoman said today.


Concert: The Philomusica
LEAD: HAYDN, Mozart and a light, tart Neo-Classical homage to them made up the New York Philomusica's program Monday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
The Haydn was a curio: a pair of trios for violin, viola and cello cobbled by the composer out of his own piano sonatas.
It was profitable in those days to publish music in multiple versions for home consumption, which remains the best use for these arrangements; playing them in a concert is certainly not objectionable but not particularly enlightening either.


Nearly All G.O.P. Delegates Challenged in Michigan Race
LEAD: Nearly all the delegates elected in last week's Republican county conventions in Michigan have been challenged, increasing the likelihood of competing state Republican conventions in Grand Rapids later this month.


AFG INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AFG INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
488,380,000
405,885,000
Net inc
b58,360,000
c53,322,000
Share earns
2.32
2.23
Shares outst
25,209,081
23,869,992
b-Includes a gain of $13.9 million, or 55 cents a share, on the sale of GenCorp securities.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.94
n.a.
6.13
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.92
n.a.
9.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.33
n.a.
5.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.44
n.a.
6.83
30-YR.


CPAC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CPAC INC
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
2,700,000
2,600,000
Net inc
230,000
213,000
Share earns
.11
.08
9mo sales
9,400,000
8,300,000
Net inc
820,000
555,000
Share earns
.40
.22


Sterling Drug Obtains $2 Billion to Fight Bid
LEAD: Sterling Drug Inc. disclosed today that a leading New York bank had agreed to arrange a $2 billion line of credit to help the company ward off a hostile takeover offer of nearly $4.4 billion from Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company of Switzerland.
Sterling did not identify the bank.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Sterling said the $2 billion could be used for ''acquisitions, stock repurchases and extraordinary dividends.


ASPEN RIBBONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASPEN RIBBONS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,353,187
2,970,090
Net inc
274,367
205,558
Share earns
.08
.06
6mo rev
8,517,481
5,977,473
Net inc
508,782
363,420
Share earns
.15
.11


IU Acts to Avoid Neoax Takeover
LEAD: The IU International Corporation said it was negotiating with unnamed third parties ''concerning an extraordinary transaction, which could involve an acquisition or recapitalization of the company,'' in order to defeat a proposed $520.6 million tender offer from Neoax Inc.
Neoax, a custom-vehicles maker based in Stamford, Conn.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Jan. 15
Jan. 8
Jan. 16
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
6.7
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
2.8
Gasoline stocks
233.8
231.5
246.2
Distillate stocks
132.0
135.9
149.8
Crude imports, daily
5.6
3.9
3.9
Product imports, daily
2.7
2.2
1.7
Crude stocks
342.5
343.1
328.2
Crude production, daily
8.2
8.2
8.4
Refinery utilization (%)
83.5
83.4
82.2


Jordan Offers to Pay
LEAD: For their roles in a brawl involving Rick Mahorn on Saturday night that cost the Detroit Piston power forward $5,000 and a one-game suspension, four members of the Chicago Bulls were assessed fines totaling $3,500 by the National Basketball Association.
Yesterday, Michael Jordan, who was knocked to the floor by Mahorn - the action that caused the brawl - offered to pay the fines for the Chicago players.


Dollar Declines on Report Of Bigger Japanese Surplus
LEAD: Japan's report of a growing trade surplus with the United States helped push the dollar lower against the yen yesterday.


Cheryl Pierson Leaves L.I. Jail
LEAD: After serving 3 1/2 months in jail for arranging her father's murder, 18-year-old Cheryl Pierson was released today and celebrated by riding in a limousine and feasting on a diner breakfast and later on a belated Christmas dinner.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about ceremonies honoring the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King included an erroneous identification provided by police officials and Mayor Koch's office for a woman who protested Mr.
Koch's appearance at the Convent Avenue Baptist Church.
She was not Beverly Weston.


MANUFACTURERS HANOVER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANUFACTURERS HANOVER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Per share
.18
1.57
Yr net loss
1,140,000,000
b377,200,000
Per share
-
7.99
b-Net income  The latest quarter results reflect a restructuring and other special charges totaling $117 million primarily relating to the exiting of certain businesses, a sharpening of focus in selected markets, the closing of domestic offices, and a staff reduction of about 2,500.


Film: An Early Bergman
LEAD: WATCHING Ingmar Bergman's ''Three Strange Loves'' now - 39 years after it was made - is like opening a time capsule whose contents are familiar though they're being seen for the first time.
Titled ''Torst'' (''Thirst'') in Swedish, the film opens today at the Film Forum in what is apparently its first New


DS BANCOR reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DS BANCOR
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
590,000
1,315,000
Per share
.27
.59
Yr net inc
3,970,000
4,945,000
Per share
1.79
2.23
The company said the decline in earnings during the latest fourth quarter was in part due to a $333,000 loss in investment securities, compared with a gain of $258,000 for the year-ago period.


DOMAIN TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOMAIN TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
13,191,000
6,178,000
Net loss
b179,000
cd204,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo sales
25,105,000
13,886,000
Net inc
b626,000
d1,056,000
Share earns
.09
.18
Shares outst
7,172,000
5,820,000


F.C.C. Refuses Waiver for Murdoch on TV Station and Newspaper
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission yesterday dismissed Rupert Murdoch's petition for an extension of waivers that allowed him to retain ownership of a newspaper and television station in both New York City and Boston.


Political Memo; Babbitt's Moment in the Media Sun
LEAD: The story of Gary Hart's rocky relations with the press is old news.
The new story is about Bruce Babbitt: Mr.
Babbitt, languishing at the back of the pack, is getting a lot of positive attention these days, and it is starting to get on the nerves of the other Democratic Presidential campaigns.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW - WORKING GROUP ON CONTRACT  PRACTICES - 10 A.M.
AND 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council  COMMISSION ON INTERGOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS IN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL FIELDS - 10 A.M.


Justices Refuse to Hear North's Plea to Block Walsh Inquiry
LEAD: The Supreme Court refused today to hear a petition by Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North to block the independent prosecutor's investigation of the Iran-contra affair.


INCSTAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INCSTAR CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,655,400
2,082,000
Net inc
b258,700
112,700
Share earns
.08
.04
9mo sales
9,530,900
6,168,500
Net inc
b502,700
617,600
Share earns
.16
.20
b-Includes tax credits of $35,500 for the quarter and $78,300 for the 9 months, and the 9 months also includes a loss of $51,300 on early extinguishment of debt.


DELCHAMPS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELCHAMPS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
210,626,000
189,032,000
Net inc
1,046,000
642,000
Share earns
.16
.10
6mo sales
432,265,000
379,170,000
Net inc
3,074,000
2,635,000
Share earns
.47
.39


CAMBEX CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAMBEX CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Revenue
3,258,402
2,917,500
Net inc
b261,647
b101,400
Share earns
.13
.05
Shares outst
1,940,000
1,900,000
b-Includes extraordinary tax credits of $85,000 and $44,000 for the latest quarter and year-ago period, respectively.


FORST-HUNTER INTERNATIONAL TRADE reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORST-HUNTER INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,409,643
2,495,045
Net loss
b179,636
c118,825
6mo rev
5,988,232
5,558,507
Net inc
b50,437
436,723
Share earns
.01
.05
b-Includes a charge of $55,017 for the quarter and a gain of $28,575 from investment and job credits and tax loss carryovers, all for the 6 months.


Quebecor's Plans
LEAD: Quebecor Inc., a newsprint and publishing company, said it was negotiating a multimillion-dollar acquisition that could be completed in about two months.
Quebecor's president, Pierre Peladeau, said the deal would be for ''many, many, many millions'' of dollars.
He declined to give further details.


KRUEGER, W A CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KRUEGER, W A CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
99,317,000
81,707,000
Net inc
4,162,000
4,209,000
Share earns
.13
.13
Yr sales
346,362,000
299,302,000
Net inc
16,954,000
16,831,000
Share earns
.54
.54


FIRST ILLINOIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST ILLINOIS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
6,061,000
4,845,000
Per share
.24
.19
Yr net inc
22,866,000
16,388,000
Per share
.88
.68


ARISTECH CHEMICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARISTECH CHEMICAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
241,900,000
176,000,000
Net inc
21,400,000
11,400,000
Share earns
.84
.44
Yr sales
918,800,000
750,800,000
Net inc
69,700,000
43,900,000
Share earns
2.71
1.70


PAULEY PETROLEUM reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAULEY PETROLEUM (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
35,963,000
37,718,000
Net inc
b256,000
c3,000,000
Share earns
.09
1.03
b-Included $444,000 resulting from a change in accounting for refinery material and supply inventory.


RAYONIER TIMBERLANDS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAYONIER TIMBERLANDS LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
11,166,000
19,930,000
Net inc
6,154,000
14,052,000
Share earns
.37
.69
Yr sales
68,719,000
64,681,000
Net inc
46,446,000
44,351,000
Share earns
2.34
2.25


Ban Greed? No: Harness It.
LEAD: Program trading . . . index arbitrage . . . portfolio insurance . . .
While regulators struggle to understand the implications of new ''derivative securities,'' it's a fair bet that most small investors have come to a simple conclusion.
These all sound like tools for hustlers.
They make it possible for speculators like Gordon Gekko, the villain in the movie ''Wall Street,'' to profit at the expense of honest investors.


Two Homeless Men Set Afire by Youths At a Bus Terminal
LEAD: Two homeless men were set on fire while they slept early yesterday in an isolated area of the Port Authority Bus Terminal, the police said, and two teen-agers were arrested shortly afterward when witnesses spotted them near Times Square.


Food Notes; A French Staple That's Made in America
LEAD: SOME American cheese makers are now producing fromage blanc, long a staple in France.
Fromage blanc is like an extremely smooth cottage cheese made from whole or skimmed milk.
It is eaten either spiced or sweetened, often with fruit, and is also used in cooking.


BHA GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BHA GROUP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
9,301,000
9,083,000
Net inc
455,000
347,000
Share earns
.21
.18


'Long March' Ends for One Reagan Chief as Short One Begins for Another  New Secretary of Commerce Sees Gains Ahead
LEAD: In the view of Commerce Secretary C. William Verity Jr., who joined the Administration on Black Friday - Oct. 19, the day the stock market plunged and threw the world's financial markets into turmoil - the Reagan revolution is still to be won.


Wine Talk
LEAD: THERE being no rule of thumb on this sort of thing, let's make one up: A bottle of wine to go with dinner at home should not cost more than the rest of the meal.


A Ballet by Massine And Colors by Lacroix
LEAD: THESE are very busy days for the French designer Christian Lacroix.
The American Ballet Theater's new production of ''Gaite Parisienne'' - with costumes by Mr.
Lacroix - had its premiere yesterday in Tampa, Fla.
On Sunday, Mr.
Lacroix will introduce his eagerly awaited second couture collection in Paris.


CRITICARE SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRITICARE SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,443,000
1,979,000
Net inc
627,000
381,000
Share earns
.10
.07
Shares outst
6,270,000
5,082,000
6mo rev
6,196,000
3,523,000
Net inc
1,104,000
676,000
Share earns
.18
.13


Panel Vote Set for Nominee
LEAD: The Senate Judiciary Committee has scheduled a vote for Jan. 27 on Judge Anthony Kennedy's nomination to the Supreme Court, a committee spokesman said today.
The nomination of Judge Kennedy, a 51-year-old Federal appellate court judge from California, is expected to be approved by the committee and sent to the full Senate for final confirmation.


Jean Mitry, Film Historian, 83
LEAD: Jean Mitry, a film historian and co-founder of the Cinematheque Francaise, died of cancer Monday.
He was 83 years old.


BANC ONE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANC ONE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
66,693,000
46,498,000
Per share
.68
.49
Shares outst
98,606,000
91,262,000
Yr net inc
208,867,000
199,803,000
Per share
2.17
2.13
Shares outst
95,463,000
91,125,000


Report Faults School in Case Of Slain Girl
LEAD: Signs of child abuse on Lisa Steinberg, the 6-year-old girl who the authorities say was beaten to death, should have been noticed by personnel at her public school in Greenwich Village, according to a report by the city's Board of Education.


Brendan Sexton, 77, Ex-U.A.W. Dept. Head
LEAD: Brendan Sexton, a former director of the education department of the United Auto Workers union, died of lung disease Sunday at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.


A New Raider Move?
LEAD: The Los Angeles Raiders have called a news conference for today amid speculation that Tom Flores will step down as coach.
A Raider spokesman, Steve Hartman, said only that the team would make a ''significant announcement.'' The Raiders recently completed a 5-10 season, the team's worst since Al Davis, the team's managing general partner, took over in 1963.


Courts Should Hire Impartial Technical Consultants; The Chaplin Suit
LEAD: To the Editor:


MELLON BANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MELLON BANK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
234,000,000
b15,000,000
Per share
-
.42
Yr net loss
844,000,000
b183,000,000
Per share
-
6.20
b-Net income  The latest periods' losses are after a $180 million addition to loan loss reserves for the quarter and $635 million for the year, and expenses related to business and benefit-plan restructuring of $44 million for the quarter and about $46 million for the year.


California Women Receiving Millions To Settle Bias Case
LEAD: In a multimillion dollar settlement, the State Farm Insurance Company has agreed to pay damages and back pay to women who were refused jobs as insurance sales agents in California over a 13-year period.


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Thursday about an exhibition at the New-York Historical Society gave an incorrect date for the Blizzard of 1888.
It was March 12.


Angelo de Mojana, 82; Led Knights of Malta
LEAD: Friar Angelo de Mojana di Cologna, the Grand Master of the Sovereign Order of the Knights of Malta, died of a heart attack Monday at his home in Rome.
He was 82 years old.


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 20, 1988
LEAD:  International


AMERICAN MUSEUM OF HISTORIAL DOCUMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MUSEUM OF HISTORIAL DOCUMENTS
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
545,567
238,073
Net inc
18,919
b121,074
Yr rev
1,875,265
1,344,933
Net loss
161,510
103,525
b-Net loss  Share earnings in the latest quarter was less than one cent.


Regan Questions M.T.A. Over Awarding of Leases
LEAD: The New York State Comptroller yesterday asserted that the real-estate department of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has made ''inconsistent and questionable'' decisions in awarding leases, and said he has referred the matter to the United States Attorney in Manhattan.


The Medium Goes Elite
LEAD: Glued to Sunday's televised football, I was astonished by the high volume of commercials for goods and services which are of little or no use to most football fans.


Stage: 'The Last Resort' And a Geriatric Revolt
LEAD: IN ''The Last Resort'' six people make life at a Long Island nursing home more lively than their keepers or relatives can stand.
This place may be the last resort of the families that sent their elders to it, but to its inmates the last resort is escape, and even if the plotting of their breakout is hilariously inept, you keep hoping they will make it.


Tornadoes Hit Mississippi Valley, Killing 5 in Western Tennessee
LEAD: Tornadoes and thunderstorms swept over the lower Mississippi Valley yesterday, killing at least five people in western Tennessee, while blowing snow and drifts up to 14 feet high in the Plains stranded hundreds of travelers.


Hearings on G.O.P. Are Delayed
LEAD: Confronted with Republican challenges of its jurisdiction, the State Commission on Integrity in Government today postponed what were to be its first major hearings.


RESULTS
LEAD:  Skiing  Tomba Gains 7th Cup Victory: Alberto Tomba of Italy yesterday won his seventh World Cup race of the season in a giant slalom at Saas Fee, Switzerland, widening his lead over the defending champion, Pirmin Zurbriggen of Switzerland, in the overall standing.
Tomba skied the two fastest heats to finish with a total time of 2 minutes 33.42 seconds.


Dole Urges Caution Toward Soviet Union and Distrust of Gorbachev
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole said tonight that if elected President he would he would shape a relationship with the Soviet Union marked by ''caution'' and essential distrust for the Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Coke Unit Faces Layoffs
LEAD: Citing fewer soft-drink bottlers in the United States, the Coca-Cola Company said today that it would lay off about 8 percent of the management workers in its domestic bottling operations.
About 200 of the 2,500 employees of the Coca-Cola U.S.A. division will be laid off ''over the next several weeks,'' said Randy Donaldson, a company spokesman.


Key Unilever Executive Plays Down New Role
LEAD: If the past is any precedent, Morris Tabaksblat's promotion to become Unilever's regional director for North America bodes well for his career.


ANALYSTS INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANALYSTS INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
17,052,000
13,862,000
Net inc
735,000
713,000
Share earns
.20
.20
6mo rev
33,175,000
25,910,000
Net inc
1,438,000
b177,000
Share earns
.40
-


AMERICAN SAVINGS FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN SAVINGS FINANCIAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
948,000
1,624,000
Per share
.44
.75
6mo net inc
1,726,000
3,227,000
Per share
.80
1.49


2 Killed, 2 Hurt as Crane Collapses In Jersey
LEAD: A construction crane lying across the top of a dormitory that was under construction at Seton Hall University in South Orange yesterday.
At right, rescue workers guiding a basket holding an injured worker.


View From the Canvas: Losers Rate Tyson
LEAD: Since he knocked out Trevor Berbick for the World Boxing Council title in November 1986, Mike Tyson has been a busy fighter.


Stage: 'Woza Albert!' Performed at City College
LEAD: WHEN ''Woza Albert!,'' the acclaimed two-man South African play, was first presented in New York several years ago, high-powered political South African ''township'' theater was a something of a novelty.
Since then, Lincoln Center's Woza Africa Theater Festival and its production of ''Sarafina!'' have familiarized us with an emotionally charged genre of spare, confrontational theater that transfuses political anger into ritualistic communal affirmation.


Nokia Oy Buys Stake in Ericsson
LEAD: The Finnish high-technology company Nokia Oy said it had bought a controlling interest in the data systems division of the Swedish telecommunications giant L. M. Ericsson.
The sale, in which Nokia acquired an 80 percent share of the Ericsson division, makes Nokia the largest computer company in Scandinavia and the second-biggest


Washington Talk: Briefing; Rebellion by Mayors
LEAD: Thirty or more American mayors are lining up against President Reagan's plan to provide more aid for the rebels fighting the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua.


Executives
LEAD: Bacardi Imports Inc., Miami, the U.S. marketer of Bacardi rum, named Eduardo Sardina and Rodolfo Ruiz executive vice presidents.
It also named Steven Naclerio senior vice president.


CONTINENTAL ILLINOIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINENTAL ILLINOIS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
235,800,000
b43,500,000
Per share
-
.16
Yr net loss
609,500,000
b164,400,000
Per share
-
.60
b-Net income and after tax credits of $17.6 million for the quarter and $66.2 million for the year.


AMERICAN BANK OF CONNECTICUT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN BANK OF CONNECTICUT (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,245,000
1,064,000
Per share
.58
.49
Yr net inc
5,006,000
4,368,000
Per share
2.31
2.02


Dart in $834 Million Bid for Stop and Shop
LEAD: The Dart Group Corporation yesterday announced an $834 million offer for the Stop and Shop Companies, a chain of supermarket and discount department stores.


SOFTWARE PUBLISHING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOFTWARE PUBLISHING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,000,000
8,700,000
Net inc
2,500,000
1,200,000
Share earns
.34
.17


Children's Haircuts Without the Tears
LEAD: Having her hair cut was not Sydney Blumstein's idea, but her mother's.
Sydney, who is 3 years old, thought her long dark hair was just fine the way it was, until the video screen before her in a midtown hair salon lit up with a cartoon tape starring Mickey Mouse.


Record Profit for Volvo
LEAD: Volvo, the Swedish auto maker, today reported record pretax profits for 1987 of 9 billion crowns, or about $1.5 billion, substantially better than some analysts had expected.
Most had said the company would do well to match its 1986 profits of 7.5 billion crowns.
The 1987 figure included October's 1.15 billion crown sale of Volvo's 49.6 percent stake in the Hamilton Oil Corporation, a Denver-based oil and gas company.


BRISTOL-MYERS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRISTOL-MYERS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,360,649,000
1,204,959,000
Net inc
b174,071,000
151,702,000
Share earns
.61
.53
Yr sales
5,401,159,000
4,835,866,000
Net inc
b709,644,000
589,519,000
Share earns
2.47
2.07
Shares outst
287,123,000
285,152,000


Arizona Impeachment Hearings Open
LEAD: A committee of the Arizona House of Representatives opened hearings tonight to consider the impeachment of Governor Evan Mecham.


Shake-Up at Pan Am Is Expected Today
LEAD: The board of the Pan Am Corporation expects to change the company's top management today, a board member said yesterday.


Advances in Breast Reconstruction Ease the Trauma of Cancer
LEAD: Dramatic improvements in the art and science of breast reconstruction have transformed the experience of surgery for breast cancer for many women, reducing the long-term trauma.


STANADYNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANADYNE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
137,050,000
120,005,000
Net inc
14,881,000
2,422,000
Share earns
1.03
.17
Yr sales
543,571,000
492,763,000
Net inc
41,871,000
21,131,000
Share earns
2.90
1.47


Photo of Syrian troops moving into the Shatila refugee district, which was devastated during a three-year siege (AP) Shiites End Siege of 2 Palestinian Areas in Beirut
LEAD: Hundreds of Shiite militiamen withdrew today from positions around two Palestinian refugee districts in south Beirut, ending a three-year siege.


Heineken Chief Sets Retirement
LEAD: Alfred H. Heineken, who helped Heineken Breweries N.V. grow from a Dutch domestic beer supplier to a worldwide company, will retire next year, the company said today.


CF&amp;I STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CF&amp;I STEEL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
76,370,000
49,557,000
Net inc
1,278,000
b2,152,000
Share earns
.19
-
Yr sales
252,500,000
197,055,000
Net loss
9,880,000
20,971,000
b-Net loss  The company said prior year results are after tax benefits of $1,306,000 in the fourth quarter and $4,148,000 in the full year.


Not Too Late for a Palestinian-Israeli Solution
LEAD: To the Editor:


WILLAMETTE INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILLAMETTE INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
379,507,000
317,929,000
Net inc
38,664,000
26,424,000
Share earns
1.53
1.04
Yr sales
1,431,624,000
1,200,155,000
Net inc
121,339,000
74,665,000
Share earns
4.78
2.94


Nets Fall to the Warriors
LEAD: Tim McCormick of the Nets being guarded by Otis Smith and Terry Teagle of the Warriors in the first half last night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Nets lost, 103-101, on a disputed shot.
It was Golden State's first victory on the road this season, leaving the Nets as the only team in the league without a victory away from home.


NORWEST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORWEST CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
48,700,000
33,200,000
Per share
1.57
1.00
Yr net loss
29,800,000
b121,700,000
Per share
-
3.64
b-Net income  The latest year loss reflects the second quarter addition of $204 million to the allowance for credit losses related to international loan exposures.


COMMERCIAL NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCIAL NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
514,000
926,000
Per share
.12
.22
Yr net loss
21,521,000
b577,000
Per share
-
.14
b-Net income  The latest year loss is after a charge of $22 million from an addition to loan- loss reserves made in the third quarter.


Brazil's Trade Surplus
LEAD: Brazil had a trade surplus of $11.15 billion in 1987, with exports totaling $26.21 billion, the second highest ever, the Government said today.
Imports came to $15.06 billion.
The surplus was 33.8 percent higher than the 1986 figure of $8.33 billion.


Bankers Trust Net Soars; Irving Has Loss in Quarter
LEAD: The Bankers Trust New York Corporation, corporate parent of the Bankers Trust Company, yesterday reported extraordinarily high net income for the fourth quarter - nearly triple its earnings a year ago - mainly because of huge profits from its foreign-exchange and bond-trading activities.


An Umbrella of Fog, but the Rain Came Through Anyway
LEAD: Haze obscured the top of the Manhattan skyline as seen from the Brooklyn Promenade on a day that featured rain, rain and more rain.
Today is expected to be drier, with decreasing cloudiness and a high of about 48 degrees.
Tomorrow should be sunny and colder. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr)


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: REPAIRING large holes in wallboard - larger than four inches across - requires some ingenuity and moderate experience with some basic tools.
Unlike patches for small holes, which were discussed in last week's column, these patches must be braced from behind.
The bracing, or backing, creates a surface to which the patch can be fastened.


No Emergency Seen in East Jerusalem
LEAD: The Minister of Police said today that he had no immediate plans to use emergency powers to impose curfews in Arab East Jerusalem or order striking shops there to open.


Results Plus
LEAD:  N.H.L.


REAGAN WILL LIMIT AID FOR ABORTIONS
LEAD: Despite the certainty of a legal challenge, President Reagan will soon announce rules prohibiting abortions and abortion counseling by family planning programs that receive Federal funds, White House officials said today.


GATEWAY BANK (NORWALK, CONN) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GATEWAY BANK (NORWALK, CONN)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,975,000
4,266,000
Per share
.37
.53
Yr net inc
12,668,000
11,328,000
Per share
1.59
1.42


Advertising; Shaffer Clarke Signs With a New Agency
LEAD: Roman &amp; Tannenholz has become the agency for Shaffer Clarke &amp; Company, a subsidiary of Britain's U. B. Holdings P.L.C.
The budget should be around $1.5 million, according to the agency.
And that is more than has been spent recently through Maged &amp; Behar.


Bristol-Myers Net Up 14.8%
LEAD: The Bristol-Myers Company, citing a strong rise in profit and in domestic and international sales, reported yesterday that it fourth-quarter earnings rose 14.8 percent on a 13.3 percent increase in sales.


Market Place; Analysts Term Rorer Attractive
LEAD: WHEN the A. H. Robins Company agreed Tuesday afternoon to be acquired by the American Home Products Corporation, there was a notable difference in how Robins's two other suitors took the news.


Music: Chamber Society
LEAD: THE novelty on this week's program of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, heard Tuesday evening at Alice Tully Hall, is a bristling, scherzo-like essay for clarinet, horn, piano and string trio by Peter Lieberson.
The title is ''Ziji,'' a Tibetan term associated by Mr.
Lieberson with the ''the energy of confidence,'' according to the program notes.


Al Hall, Jazz Bassist, Dies at 72; Broke Color Barrier on Broadway
LEAD: Al Hall, a jazz bassist believed to be the first black musician in a Broadway theater orchestra, died of lung cancer Monday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.


MERCANTILE BANCORPORATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCANTILE BANCORPORATION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
9,158,000
b13,789,000
Per share
-
.87
Yr net loss
24,490,000
b55,584,000
Per share
-
3.49
b-Net income  The latest periods' losses are after loan loss provisions of $47,162,000 for the quarter and $167,878,000 for the year.


Ask the Joint Chiefs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: SECRETS OF THE TEMPLE: How the Federal Reserve Runs the Country.
By William Greider. 798 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.95.


Mr. Rabin's Policy
LEAD: ''The first priority is to use force, might, beatings.'' That is the message from the man in charge of Israel's response to the Palestinian protests, Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin.


LUKENS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LUKENS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
133,225,000
104,602,000
Net inc
6,569,000
bc258,000
Share earns
1.16
-
Yr sales
502,537,000
405,297,000
Net inc
21,662,000
c8,774,000
Share earns
3.87
1.72
Shares outst
5,593,000
5,094,000


Iowa, or the Smoke-Filled Room?
LEAD: Why is everybody paying so much attention to Iowa?
Things are looking up for Babbitt in Iowa . . .
Dole's lead in the Iowa polls is widening . . .
Hart looked rattled on TV in Iowa.
Who made Iowa the national barometer?
Why should we care what happens in the Iowa precinct caucuses on Feb. 8?
Let's go back to the old way and let the political professionals pick the candidates.


Dole Critizices Kemp Leaflet On Social Security Measures
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole accused Representative Jack F. Kemp today of trying to scare elderly voters by sending out a brochure that criticizes Mr.
Dole's votes on Social Security.


Profit Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Alcan Aluminium Ltd.
$136,000,000
+123.0
American Home Products
215,200,000
+7.9
AMR Corp.
(805,000)
-
Apple Computer Inc.
121,400,000
+107.5
Bristol-Myers Co.
174,100,000
+14.8
Caterpillar Inc.
170,000,000
*-
Crazy Eddie Inc.


SOUTHTRUST CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHTRUST CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
16,136,000
14,425,000
Per share
.65
.58
Yr net inc
60,425,000
53,951,000
Per share
2.44
2.24


BALL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
214,800,000
257,100,000
Net inc
12,700,000
11,200,000
Share earns
.54
.48
Yr sales
1,054,100,000
1,093,400,000
Net inc
66,300,000
59,400,000
Share earns
2.80
2.52


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Personally, I worry that if we ease up too much, the contras will take advantage.
You don't want to let your enemies act openly.''  - German Mendoza Huete, of the official Voice of Nicaragua radio, on recent arrests.  [ A10:2. ]


Metro Matters; Today's Outrage May Inspire Tomorrow's Vote
LEAD: Two demonstrations are planned in New York City today - one to register outrage through civil disobedience and another to persuade outraged people to register to vote.


Cuomo and Moynihan Fighting Over Who Lost Big U.S. Project
LEAD: New York's highest officials, among them Governor Cuomo and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, are caught up in a bitter political dispute over who is to blame for what is widely viewed as the state's embarrassing fumbling in efforts to attract a $4.4 billion Federal project.


PNC FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PNC FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
22,796,000
72,134,000
Per share
.31
1.10
Shares outst
67,693,000
64,333,000
Yr net inc
204,848,000
286,307,000
Per share
2.96
4.44
Shares outst
67,150,000
63,136,000


Dance: Jazzdance Troupe, With Danny Buraczeski
LEAD: DANNY BURACZESKI has hit the jackpot with the new choreography his jazz dance company will be presenting this week.
There is a haunting piece of interplay between Willie Ruff, the master French horn player, and Mr.
Buraczeski; a surprisingly effective work about victims of Argentina's recent military dictatorship; and an abstract bluesy piece with a sophisticated commissioned score.


INTERMEC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERMEC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
23,000,342
17,317,435
Net inc
1,526,748
1,104,181
Share earns
.25
.18
9mo rev
60,524,463
48,141,178
Net inc
3,410,608
2,766,150
Share earns
.56
.46


AMR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,882,055,000
1,498,565,000
Net loss
805,000
b6,569,000
Share earns
-
.11
Yr rev
7,197,974,000
6,018,175,000
Net inc
198,407,000
279,132,000
Share earns
3.28
4.63


Drug Use Blamed in Rail Crash
LEAD: A Federal safety agency said today that impairment from drug use and a failure to require automatic braking devices on freight trains were responsible for a fatal collision between an Amtrak passenger train and a string of freight locomotives last year.


White House Berates the Foes of Contra Aid
LEAD: The White House attacked Congressional opponents of renewed aid to the contras today, saying their criticisms of the Administration's Central America policy were ''outrageous'' and tantamount to ''surrender.''


Congressmen Claim an Accord With Hanoi to Resettle Amerasians
LEAD: Vietnam and the United States have agreed to move thousands of children of American servicemen and the children's immediate relatives to America within two years, two Congressmen said here today.


A.T.&amp;T. Plant Will Be Closed
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said today that it would close a manufacturing plant employing 3,300 workers in this central North Carolina city, where it has had operations for more than 40 years.
The factory - part of


Housing Plan Approved In Yonkers Council Vote
LEAD: The City Council took a step tonight that it had long avoided, voting to approve a plan for construction of 200 units of low-income housing in the largely white neighborhoods of east and north Yonkers.


Head of New Division At CPC International
LEAD: CPC International Inc., which makes such household foods as Skippy peanut butter, Knorr soups and Hellman's mayonnaise, announced yesterday that it had established a worldwide consumer foods group and named Richard W. Siebrasse as its president.


LACLEDE STEEL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LACLEDE STEEL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
70,010,000
58,111,000
Net inc
b4,841,000
1,573,000
Share earns
1.79
.59
Yr sales
268,128,000
236,575,000
Net inc
b7,906,000
4,021,000
Share earns
2.92
1.49


SUMITOMO BANK OF CALIFORNIA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUMITOMO BANK OF CALIFORNIA
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,540,000
3,850,000
Per share
.79
.56
Yr net inc
20,380,000
14,810,000
Per share
2.92
2.20


The Editorial Notebook; Close Sweatshops, Open Jobs
LEAD: Mass production of ready-made clothes started a century ago in New York City's old tenement ''sweatshops.'' In the wake of tragic fires, business shifted to fireproof elevator factories shoehorned into mid-Manhattan.
Now, suddenly, sweatshops are reappearing in apartment basements all over the city.


STATEWIDE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STATEWIDE BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,356,000
4,532,000
Per share
.49
.43
Yr net inc
20,374,000
17,675,000
Per share
1.87
1.85


INSIDE
LEAD:  Report on Bomber Crash


9 Survive Plane Crash in Colorado Mountains
LEAD: Investigators at the scene of a commuter plane crash yesterday.
The plane, carrying 15 passengers and two crew members, crashed in a mountainous area 10 miles east of Durango.
A survivor, Peter Schauer, walked about one and a half miles through snow four feet deep to a house for help.
Two people, including a 23-month-old girl, were treated and released, five were in good condition, and one was critically injured.


If a Doll Wears an Eye Patch, I Can Too
LEAD: IN 1981, when her 3-year-old son underwent surgery at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, Gail Zayka noticed that pediatric nurses, using teddy bears and medical jargon, often failed to address the real misconceptions and fears of their young patients.


FLUKE, JOHN MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLUKE, JOHN MANUFACTURING CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Sales
51,515,000
51,150,000
Net inc
2,880,000
2,608,000
Share earns
.33
.30


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN OF (S C) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN OF (S C) (O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,407,000
b3,446,000
Share earns
.30
.73
6mo net inc
2,635,000
b4,683,000
Share earns
.56
.99
b-Includes tax credits of $1,512,000 and $2,148,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Pop: Daniel Ponce Ensemble
LEAD: LATE last year, Daniel Ponce, a Cuban conga drummer, released ''Arawe,'' one of the most ambitious Latin albums of the decade.
On ''Arawe,'' Mr.
Ponce's band pulls together rhythms and melodic ideas from traditional and pop music all around the Americas: Cuban rumbas, New York jazz and funk, Brazilian samba, Dominican merengue, Puerto Rican bomba and plena, and Yoruba rhythms that look back to West Africa.


U.N. Chief Asks Panel For Mideast Peace Plan
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar will ask the five permanent members of the Security Council to begin a new Middle East peace initiative modeled on their efforts to end the Iran-Iraq war, according to senior United Nations officials.


Music: Mahler's 9th, by the Philadelphia
LEAD: MAHLER did not believe in moderation as a way of making his musical point.
As an artist, he lived a life of unquiet desperation, both victimized and motivated by a nameless dread.
However, at times in his last completed symphony, the turbulent and emotionally searing No. 9, he seems to be desperately searching for even more immoderate ways to express himself.


Dollar Continues to Tumble And Gold Moves Lower
LEAD: The dollar slipped further in foreign-exchange trading yesterday as worries persisted about the United States trade gap with Japan.


Nets Lose on a Disputed Shot
LEAD: The Golden State Warriors came into Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight with the worst record in the league, including a franchise-record 17 consecutive road losses.
They left with a 103-101 victory, compliments of a fourth-quarter collapse by the Nets, who have the second-worst record in the league.


Cambodia Negotiators Dispute Hanoi's Role
LEAD: A second round of talks on Cambodia began near here today and ran into trouble as both sides insisted on tough conditions to settle the war that has raged in that country since 1978.


FIRST JERSEY NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST JERSEY NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
10,711,000
10,101,000
Per share
1.23
1.24
Shares outst
8,275,000
7,655,000
Yr net inc
42,044,000
37,425,000
Per share
5.00
4.57
Shares outst
7,926,000
7,628,000


STRYKER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STRYKER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,975,000
2,378,000
Share earns
.19
.15
Yr net inc
12,725,000
10,113,000
Share earns
.82
.66


Heriditary Link Studied As Colon Cancer Cause
LEAD: Scientists in Japan have found evidence that hereditary predisposition to cancer of the colon and rectum may be a result of a highly complex process involving loss of protective genes on any of several different chromosomes.


Owner of Crane in Collapse Was Fined for '84 Accident
LEAD: The company that owned the crane that collapsed at a construction site at Seton Hall University, killing two workers, was fined for a fatal crane accident in 1984, a Federal inspector said today.


ARTIST DISCOVERS HIS MURAL, REDONE
LEAD: RECENTLY, on his way to a party, the muralist Richard Haas rounded a corner at South Street and Peck Slip in lower Manhattan, and was startled to see that a mural he had painted in 1978 on a Con Edison substation had been changed.


THE DESIGNING PROCESS
LEAD: THE thin line separating design and fashion becomes thinner in April when the American version of Elle, sister of the French fashion magazine, inaugurates a series of features on design and architecture.
The same month, Esquire magazine will also start a design feature, ''Living Quarters.''


Sanofi Drops Bid For A.H. Robins
LEAD: Sanofi S.A. said it was dropping out of the race for the A. H. Robins Company, which made the Dalkon Shield birth control device.


Foreign Trawlers Accused of Violating U.S. Zone
LEAD: Federal officials meeting in Anchorage today began investigating evidence that foreign trawlers may have been fishing illegally in rich American waters off the Aleutian Islands in Alaska.


FIRST BANK SYSTEM (INCN) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST BANK SYSTEM (INCN)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
42,500,000
54,900,000
Per share
.69
.92
Yr net inc
49,600,000
202,900,000
Per share
.73
3.42
The 1987 results included a provision of $160 million taken in the second quarter to build reserves for losses on loans to less developed countries.


Some Yields A Bit Lower
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were unchanged to slightly lower for the week ended yesterday.


Report on Adviser to Meese Describes Investment Fraud
LEAD: The investment adviser to Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d transmitted ''over $1 million in apparently ill-gotten gains'' from some of his clients to Hong Kong accounts from 1985 to 1987, according to an affidavit by a Federal investigator looking into Mr.
Meese's affairs.


JEFFERSON BANKSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERSON BANKSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,781,000
3,516,000
Per share
.82
.76
Yr net inc
13,438,000
12,245,000
Per share
2.91
2.66


COMMERCE BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCE BANCORP INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,303,000
657,000
Per share
.45
.29
Yr net inc
4,203,000
2,737,000
Per share
1.51
1.18
The year-ago results have been restated to reflect the acquisition on Jan.


Crazy Eddie Reports a Loss
LEAD: Crazy Eddie Inc., a financially troubled retailer of electronics products, said yesterday that it had lost $73 million in its third quarter that ended Nov. 29.
In the quarter a year earlier, Crazy Eddie posted net income of $3.7 million.


NATIONAL-STANDARD CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL-STANDARD CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
68,948,000
57,726,000
Net inc
b7,450,000
c4,815,000
Share earns
1.90
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $2,845,000 and also included a gain of $4.3 million on the settlement of pension liabilities.


Ethics Unit Investigating Elections Board
LEAD: The New York State Commission on Government Integrity disclosed yesterday that it is investigating the State Board of Elections as part of its inquiry into campaign contributions to Poughkeepsie Town Board candidates by a shopping mall developer.


GROVE BANK FOR SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROVE BANK FOR SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
539,000
773,000
Per share
.37
.53
Yr net inc
2,308,000
2,164,000
Per share
1.57
-
The bank went public in August 1986.


Advertising; New Fashion Magazine Fills Its Editor Post
LEAD: Gay Bryant, former editor of Family Circle, is now editor of Model, a fashion and beauty magazine for a younger crowd that will make its debut in June as a joint venture between Family Media and Times Mirror Magazines, with Family Media managing the show.


Two Fords Discuss Goals
LEAD: Edsel B. Ford and William Clay Ford Jr. say they want to be treated like any other mid-level executives at the Ford Motor Company.


Japanese Cut 'Last Emperor'
LEAD: When Bernardo Bertolucci's epic ''The Last Emperor'' opens in Japan on Saturday it will not be quite the same film that audiences in the United States and Europe got to see.


Soviet Official Says Press Harms Army
LEAD: The Soviet Defense Minister, in a rare television appearance, has sharply criticized the Soviet press for undermining public respect for the Soviet Army.


George D. Clahr, 53, A Contact Lens Expert
LEAD: George D. Clahr, a New York City ophthalmologist and expert in the use of soft contact lenses, died of cancer of the colon yesterday at his home in New Milford, Conn.
He was 53 years old.


OLD CRAFTS, NEW LAMPS
LEAD: JACK CUNNINGHAM makes early-American lamps the way craftsmen made things 150 years ago.
He uses many of the tools used in the 19th century to trim the metal and fold the pieces together, and hand-solders each joint -as many as 75 in one lamp.


Final Seconds in a B-1's Cockpit Are Pieced Together by Air Force
LEAD: It took less than three minutes for a new B-1 bomber to crash into the Colorado desert last September after it struck a bird the size of a turkey that ripped through electrical, hydraulic and fuel lines to ignite a catastrophic fire.


College Basketball; Kentucky Shocked By Florida, 58-56
LEAD: Vernon Maxwell scored 19 points and Dwayne Schintzius added 18 tonight as Florida, despite going scoreless over the final 3 minutes 24 seconds, upset Kentucky, 58-56, in a Southeastern Conference game.


Illegal Contributiaons to Hart Reported
LEAD: Gary Hart faced new allegations today about the finances of his 1984 and 1988 Presidential campaigns but asserted he had no knowledge of any possible wrongdoing.


BOATMEN'S BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOATMEN'S BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
21,523,000
20,773,000
Per share
1.09
1.07
Shares outst
19,077,202
18,928,511
Yr net inc
81,360,000
78,052,000
Per share
4.14
4.00
Shares outst
19,064,648
18,910,511


MICHIGAN NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICHIGAN NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
20,663,000
13,871,000
Per share
1.36
.92
Yr net inc
73,930,000
52,220,000
Per share
4.85
3.59
Shares outst
15,243,000
14,224,000


Assassinated Leaders
LEAD: To the Editor:


World Soybean Output
LEAD: The world output of soybeans in 1987-88 is smaller than had been forecast, according to an Agriculture Department report on Tuesday.
World production was estimated at 101 million metric tons, down 1.4 million tons from last month's forecast.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, JANUARY 21, 1988
LEAD:  Markets


Washington Talk: Football and the Gourmet; Some Hot Recipes From Red Hot 'Skins
LEAD: A newly published Washington cookbook gives top billing to Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d for 12 recipes submitted by his wife, Ursula, who admits her husband is no whiz in the kitchen.


Zimbabwe Share Prices
LEAD: Industrial share prices hit record levels on the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange this week, passing an index figure not seen since the country's first year of independence.
The index measuring price movements for shares of the 50 industrial companies listed on the exchange hit 487.2 Monday, its highest level in seven years, then rose further Tuesday to 488.5.


CATERPILLAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CATERPILLAR INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,241,000,000
1,775,000,000
Net inc
170,000,000
c148,000,000
Share earns
1.67
-
Yr sales
8,180,000,000
7,321,000,000
Net inc
b350,000,000
76,000,000
Share earns
3.51
.77


CARTER-WALLACE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARTER-WALLACE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
112,934,000
103,324,000
Net inc
9,013,000
7,636,000
Share earns
.59
.50
9mo sales
355,722,000
330,225,000
Net inc
29,991,000
25,242,000
Share earns
1.98
1.66


PACER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACER CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,480,004
2,155,777
Net inc
b533,871
c495,704
Share earns
.25
.24
9mo rev
6,696,599
5,138,172
Net inc
b1,233,651
c888,597
Share earns
.58
.44
b-Includes a tax benefit of $185,700 and $446,700 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


George F. McGrath, 70, Is Dead; Ex-Correction Chief in New York
LEAD: George F. McGrath, New York City Commissioner of Correction in the Linday administration and an authority on penology, died yesterday at his home in Boston.
He was 70 years old.


Advertising; A Captive Audience for Magazine
LEAD: COPIES of Harrowsmith magazine will suddenly appear in waiting rooms of doctors, dentists and even some veterinarians across the country next month under the sponsorship of General Foods.


Eurobond Deal By G.M.A.C.
LEAD: The General Motors Acceptance Corporation is offering $200 million of 8 3/4 percent noncallable Eurobonds due 1991 at 101 1/8 through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley International.


The Greatest Tragedy
LEAD: It couldn't have happened at a more appropriate time than the eve of the Martin Luther King birthday observances: Jimmy Snyder, a sports tipster known also as The Greek, was fired from his television job for a number of remarks claiming that blacks had been bred since the Civil War to be better athletes than whites.


CROSSLAND SAVINGS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROSSLAND SAVINGS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
21,434,000
b31,854,000
Per share
.75
2.00
Yr net inc
100,136,000
b101,232,000
Per share
5.28
6.34
b-After tax credits of $17,303,000 for the quarter and $57,752,000 for the year.


STARTS IN HOUSING TUMBLE BY 16.2%, WORST IN 3 YEARS
LEAD: Housing starts plunged an unexpectedly steep 16.2 percent in December, the sharpest monthly decline in more than three years, the Commerce Department said yesterday.


EXCHANGE STUDIES SUSPENDING TRADE IN VOLATILE STOCKS
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange will consider a proposal to halt trading temporarily in individual stocks if their prices rise or fall by a certain amount, the exchange's chairman, John J. Phelan Jr., said in an interview yesterday.


10 Killed in Taiwan Crash
LEAD: Ten people died when a Taiwan Airlines commuter plane crashed into a mountain on Orchard Island, 170 miles southeast of Taipei, the Government said today.
One man survived.
The British-built Britten-Norman 2, a propeller-driven plane, had taken off Tuesday morning from the fishing port of Taitung, 160 miles south of Taipei, for a 20-minute flight to Orchid Island.


Critic's Notebook; Conserving Asia's Arts Without Stifling Them
LEAD: ONE thing that fascinated this sympathetic neophyte on a recent three-week dash through Southeast Asia was the varied ways in which traditional performing arts are being preserved and offered to the public.
There seemed to be three general categories: fairly unself-conscious manifestations of traditional behavior, more or less compromised presentations for tourists, and scholarly efforts to preserve traditional arts in the face of the inexorable onslaught of


AFTER SPACE MARATHON, SOVIET ASTRONAUT LAUDS EXERCISE PLAN
LEAD: A strict and ''very monotonous'' new exercise regimen by a Soviet astronaut paid off in a smooth and relatively quick readjustment to Earth's gravity after 326 days in space, the astronaut, Col.
Yuri V. Romanenko, said today.


Janice Raskin, Singer On Radio, Dies at 77
LEAD: Janice Raskin, a singer who performed on radio programs, died of colon cancer yesterday at a nursing home in Del Mar, Calif.
She was 77 years old.


The Stage: Alaskan Myth, 'Summer Face Woman'
LEAD: ''THE Summer Face Woman,'' Dave Hunsaker's meditation on Aleut history and mythology, begins with a nifty nugget of musical humor, as six of its cast members gather to sing a rock-and-roll version of Johnny Horton's 1960 hit, ''North to Alaska.'' The sight of a group of actor-singers who include several Alaska natives joining together in a tune that celebrates Alaskan territory as a new American frontier ripe for conquest, sets us up for a bracing indictment of marauding exploitation.


CONSTELLATION BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSTELLATION BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,905,000
3,601,000
Per share
.80
.60
Yr net inc
17,972,000
14,306,000
Per share
2.94
2.37


A Flamboyant Leader of Protests
LEAD: From his manner of dress to his celebrity connections to the high-profile demonstrations he has led over the last 15 years, the Rev.
Al Sharpton has been one of the more flamboyant civil-rights advocates in New York.


Vd Mehta to Discuss Modern Indian Culture
LEAD: Contemporary Indian culture will be discussed by the writer Ved Mehta on Feb. 16 at 7 P.M. at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street.
Robert Oxnam, president of the Asia Society, will interview Mr.
Mehta, a novelist and contributor to The New Yorker magazine.


RUSSELL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RUSSELL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
132,647,000
118,333,000
Net inc
14,764,000
12,943,000
Share earns
.37
.33
Yr sales
479,880,000
437,520,000
Net inc
46,334,000
43,282,000
Share earns
1.17
1.08


Stanadyne Board Rebuffs Emhart
LEAD: The board of Stanadyne Inc. formally rejected the $40-a-share bid from the Emhart Corporation, as ''inadequate and not in the best interests of stockholders,'' and authorized the management to ''explore alternatives for maximizing shareholder value.''


Newspaper Merger Planned
LEAD: The Columbia Record, the afternoon newspaper in South Carolina's capital city, will cease publication after the April 1 issue and its staff will be merged into its sister morning newspaper, The State, the newspapers' publisher announced today.


FIRST COLONIAL BANKSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST COLONIAL BANKSHARES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,652,900
2,525,700
Per share
.31
.29
Yr net inc
b10,345,300
c8,023,000
Per share
1.20
1.01
Shares outst
8,316,000
7,588,500
b-After a gain of $516,000 from an accounting change.


Arms and Allies: NATO A-Arsenal Cuts Disputed
LEAD: France and Britain are lobbying the Reagan Administration to prevent West Germany from maneuvering NATO into conceding further reductions of nuclear weapons on the European central front.
At stake, some European officials argue, is the future agenda of the Atlantic alliance.


FIRST INTERSTATE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST INTERSTATE BANCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
95,000,000
b84,845,000
Per share
-
1.79
Yr net loss
556,200,000
b337,934,000
Per share
-
7.19
b-Net income  The company said the fourth quarter loss reflected the provision of $180 million for possible loan losses on the company's non-trade related credits extended to lesser developed countries.


In Morning Game-Show Slot, ABC Turns to Practical Matters
LEAD: THE camera pans to wooden beams and a roaring fire.
This is the setting for ABC's new late-morning television program ''Home.'' The network calls it a ''how-to talk show'' that will not be discussing life styles of the rich and famous but nitty-gritty subjects like home remodeling, bulk buying, fancy meals under $25, and a thousand uses for a glue gun.


Doctor and Patient; Physicians May Bungle Key Part of Treatment: The Medical Interview
LEAD: The physicians' art, so often reflected in the ability to communicate with patients through an interview, is in trouble, according to researchers who are bringing light to this traditionally private corner of medicine.


Chambers and Levin Didn't Seem To Be Intoxicated, Bartender Says
LEAD: John A. Zaccaro Jr., who said he was the bartender on the night in August 1986 that Robert E. Chambers Jr. met Jennifer Levin at a Manhattan bar, testified yesterday that he did not recall seeing Mr.
Chambers or Miss Levin intoxicated that night.


Upper East Side Has Become a Dirty Shame
LEAD: To the Editor:


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (FORT MYERS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (FORT MYERS)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,048,177
3,013,335
Share earns
.66
.97


The American Family Is Adjusting To Teen-Agers' Work-Spend Ethic
LEAD: LaDONNIA FULLMER, a 17-year-old high school senior in Los Altos, Calif., works 25 hours a week and earns $500 a month doing housework and baby-sitting.
She has an A average. ''My parents can't afford to pay for me to buy the clothes I want or to go out with friends,'' she said. ''I wouldn't have to work if I didn't want any of those things.


Film: 'Half of Heaven,' From Spain
LEAD: ''HALF OF HEAVEN,'' the appealing Spanish movie that begins a run at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema today, is a quiet comedy, a low-temperature romance, a matter-of-fact fantasy.
It's all about Rosa, a cheerful, affectionate, diligent girl who works her way up from the family farmhouse to running Madrid's most fashionable restaurant.


Super Bowl Notebook; Coaching Aides Begin Annual Scramble
LEAD: This is scramble time for the National Football League's assistant coaches - Super Bowl season is when heads roll.
And for the assistants on the Broncos and Redskins, the courtship is on.
When there are openings for a head coach, the names of assistants on winning teams always surface.


Long Terms Urged For Three in Attack
LEAD: The prosecutor in the Howard Beach attack case urged the judge yesterday to sentence three white teen-agers convicted in the case to 10 to 30 years in prison because ''raw racial hatred'' had motivated them to attack three black men.


Yustin Sirutis, Boxing Coach, 79
LEAD: Yustin Sirutis, a former Golden Gloves heavyweight boxing champion and a coach for many years at the City College of New York, died Jan. 6 in Rincon, P.R., after a long illness.
He was 79 years old and lived in Rincon.


Vacancy Rate Shows a Dip
LEAD: National office va= cancy rates fell in 1987, the first decline in six years, according to a study by Coldwell Banker Commercial Group, a unit of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.


GENCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENCORP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
451,000,000
511,000,000
Net inc
b254,000,000
c36,000,000
Share earns
8.01
.53
Shares outst
31,713,000
67,019,000
Yr sales
1,619,000,000
1,537,000,000
Net inc
b475,000,000
c130,000,000
Share earns
9.87
1.94
Shares outst
48,139,000
67,007,000


POPE &amp; TALBOT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POPE &amp; TALBOT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
106,789,000
81,958,000
Net inc
7,190,000
8,451,000
Share earns
.59
.69
Yr rev
426,908,000
310,228,000
Net inc
28,129,000
15,815,000
Share earns
2.33
1.31


34 Treated After a Chemical Is Sprayed in Subway Station
LEAD: At least 34 people were treated for eye and respiratory injuries after being sprayed with a Mace-like chemical on a subway platform during last evening's rush period, officials said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, said it would spend $1.90 billion this year to expand and improve its facilities, an increase of 9 percent above the $1.74 billion it spent last year on capital expenditures.


LORAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LORAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
373,600,000
165,200,000
Net inc
18,700,000
13,300,000
Share earns
.76
.55
9mo sales
1,030,000,000
475,300,000
Net inc
51,700,000
39,600,000
Share earns
2.10
1.62


ALBERTO-CULVER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALBERTO-CULVER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
133,536,000
112,737,000
Net inc
b6,809,000
3,281,000
Share earns
.48
.23
b-Includes a non-recurring after-tax gain of $2.3 million from the sale of Lamaur Inc.


The Bricks of Scholarship
LEAD: Disagreements between scientists are meant to be resolved by data.
But when facts are elusive, even scientists occasionally throw aside the professional pretense of objectivity and tear into each other with invective, shameless appeals to authority and arguments that are unabashedly ad hominem.
Take the ruckus that has erupted over the demise of the dinosaurs.


HARRIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARRIS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Revenue
501,409,000
533,782,000
Net inc
24,169,000
20,125,000
Share earns
.60
.49
6mo rev
1,015,717,000
1,010,938,000
Net inc
44,077,000
36,375,000
Share earns
1.08
.89


AMERON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
85,680,000
85,491,000
Net inc
b3,116,000
5,146,000
Share earns
.64
1.06
Yr sales
308,191,000
314,705,000
Net inc
b16,368,000
13,022,000
Share earns
3.37
2.70


Town Forgives the Past And Honors Janis Joplin
LEAD: For years communities across the country have been making their peace with the troubled 60's, usually with belated homecomings for the men who fought in the nation's least popular war.


Philippe de Rothschild, 85, Dies; Maker of Chateau Mouton Wine
LEAD: Baron Philippe de Rothschild, a member of the Rothschild banking family, owner of Chateau Mouton-Rothschild in Bordeaux and a tireless champion of French wines, died at his home in Paris yesterday after a long illness.
He was 85 years old.


Nicaragua Seeks to Move Up Truce Talks With the Contras
LEAD: A Nicaraguan official said here today that the Sandinista Government wanted to open direct cease-fire talks with the Nicaraguan contra rebels on Thursday, a week earlier than scheduled.


UNITED TECHNOLOGIES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED TECHNOLOGIES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,822,800,000
4,494,700,000
Net inc
172,500,000
b228,000,000
Share earns
1.32
-
Yr rev
17,376,500,000
15,878,900,000
Net inc
591,700,000
c72,700,000
Share earns
4.52
.27


APPLE COMPUTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APPLE COMPUTER INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Sales
1,042,442,000
662,253,000
Net inc
121,368,000
58,473,000
Share earns
.92
.45


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in the Business People column yesterday omitted the effective date for Morris Tabaksblat's new duties at Unilever N.V. as regional director for North America and chairman of its Lever Brothers Company.
The date is May 4, when Gordon K. G. Stevens will retire.


Russian, in Spain, Suggests Talks Over Central America
LEAD: The Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, proposed today that Moscow and Madrid open talks to improve Central America peace hopes.


ZURN INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZURN INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
94,594,000
101,029,000
Net inc
4,538,000
4,864,000
Share earns
.37
.40
9mo sales
304,226,000
278,733,000
Net inc
b13,827,000
b12,898,000
Share earns
1.13
1.06


PENNVIEW SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNVIEW SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
255,000
b453,000
Per share
.52
-
b-After a tax credit of $105,000.
The latest first quarter is the first full quarter of operations for the company since conversion to stock form.


Bank-Failure Causes Cited
LEAD: A study of bank failures from 1979 to 1987 shows that although troubled regional economies had an obvious impact, much of the blame had to be placed on poor managers, the Comptroller of the Currency, Robert L. Clarke, said today.


Keep the Pressure On the Sandinistas
LEAD: Congress will soon vote on whether to renew military aid to the Nicaraguan democratic resistance.
For all its apparent complexity, the issue before Congress and the nation is quite simple.


MICROSOFT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROSOFT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
155,896,000
80,985,000
Net inc
35,329,000
19,697,000
Share earns
.63
.35
6mo rev
258,532,000
147,765,000
Net inc
56,588,000
35,521,000
Share earns
1.02
.64


Pennsylvania Issue
LEAD: A $160 million issue of Pennsylvania general obligation bonds was offered yesterday with yields ranging from 5.20 percent for bonds due in 1989 to 6.55 percent in 1998 and 7.40 percent in 2008 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The bonds are rated A-1 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp;P.


Patricia Anne Hoffman Friedman Modern-Furniture Manufacturer
LEAD: Patricia Anne Hoffman Friedman, executive vice president and a partner in International Contract Furnishings, an importer and manufacturer of modern office and residential furniture, died of cancer Tuesday at New York Hospital.
She was 44 years old.


La Meri, 89, a Dancer, Teacher And Specialist in Ethnic Repertory
LEAD: La Meri, the dancer, teacher, writer and dance ethnologist, died in a San Antonio hospital on Jan. 7.
She was 89 years old.


SOVRAN FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOVRAN FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
59,973,000
50,701,000
Per share
1.01
.87
Yr net inc
217,437,000
189,442,000
Per share
3.67
3.26


HERS
LEAD: WHEN I was small, my family sailed on the Chesapeake.
Once, we ran aground.
Erma was beaming.
When she ran aground, she did so solidly.


U.S. Ends Curb On Photographs From Satellites
LEAD: Reversing decades of Federal policy, President Reagan has acted to allow civilian American satellites to make photographs as sharp as their foreign competitors', removing constraints on taking more highly magnified pictures of the Earth, White House officials said yesterday.


FIRST TENNESSEE NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST TENNESSEE NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,905,000
8,415,000
Per share
.12
.56
Yr net inc
32,850,000
45,568,000
Per share
2.19
3.05
The latest periods included provisions of $11.5 million in the quarter and $22.4 million for the year in reserves for loan risks related to less developed countries.


N.B.A. Notebook; Richardson Starts Bid for Reinstatement
LEAD: ''Have you been arrested or charged with any crimes since being disqualified from the National Basketball Association?


Norway Bank Change
LEAD: The managing director of Norway's biggest bank, hit by losses and a stock trading scandal, said today that he had resigned because the bank lost money in 1987.
Leif Terje Loeddesoel, managing director of Den norske Creditbank, said in a letter to the board that he was resigning because of the group's net loss of 1.5 billion crowns, or about $235 million, last year.


ARCHITECTS TO CREATE IVORY TOWERS
LEAD: ARCHITECTS, unlike dancers or gymnasts, are still considered young at the age of 40.
Many are just receiving the commissions that will showcase their talents.


Summer's Colors Bloom in Glass Houses
LEAD: LET'S face it: a majority of gardeners - even the most acquisitive - will never own an elegant glass palm house.
But the truth never stopped any horticulturist from dreaming, and with snow and slush a reality, thoughts of tropical species beckon.
As indoor gardening has become more tempting, interest in the the city glass house for winter growing has increased, and the result is a variety of styles and prices for a variety of uses.


GREAT NORTHERN NEKOOSA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT NORTHERN NEKOOSA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
782,600,000
534,800,000
Net inc
56,700,000
37,100,000
Share earns
1.04
.69
Yr sales
2,589,000,000
2,039,200,000
Net inc
200,600,000
b85,300,000
Share earns
3.68
1.60


Argentina to Purge Officers In Effort to Buoy Democracy
LEAD: Bolstered by the failure of an army revolt here this week, President Raul Alfonsin's Government is planning a purge of extremist middle-ranking officers in the hope of securing more solid military support for Argentina's fragile democracy.


DAUPHIN DEPOSIT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAUPHIN DEPOSIT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
8,718,000
7,050,000
Per share
.78
.63
Yr net inc
34,847,000
30,758,000
Per share
3.12
2.76


North Korea Added to Terror List
LEAD: The United States today put North Korea on its list of nations that support international terrorism, citing its role in the bombing of a South Korean jetliner last November that left 115 people dead.


Farmers Group Rejects Offer
LEAD: The Farmers Group Inc. today rejected a $4.2 billion takeover bid from the United States arm of the British tobacco conglomerate B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C., saying the offer was inadequate and not in the best interests of shareholders.


GLENFED INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GLENFED INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
593,922,000
546,998,000
Net inc
35,115,000
c35,685,000
Share earns
1.20
1.23
6mo net inc
b80,540,000
c75,681,000
Share earns
2.75
2.60
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $5,152,000.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. There are cracks in a ceiling of our 1867 house.
One contractor says the plaster has separated from the lath and recommends that the entire ceiling be taken down and replastered.
A second contractor says that the plaster may have separated only in some areas, and that if he tapes the cracks, smooths out the plaster and inserts long screws into the beams, the ceiling will hold.


ZYMOS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZYMOS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 1
1987
1986
Sales
8,294,000
5,231,0-00
Net loss
2,833,000
2,421,000
Yr sales
25,223,000
18,493,000
Net loss
10,802,000
8,400,000


Alternative Therapies for Fighting Osteoporosis
LEAD: In the battle to stem the growing epidemic of osteoporosis and bone fractures, researchers are looking for alternative therapies to halt the rapid loss of bone that occurs in the first few years after a woman reaches menopause.


FIRST ALBANY COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST ALBANY COMPANIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,590,000
15,556,000
Net inc
194,000
1,212,000
Share earns
.06
.35


GATEWAY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GATEWAY BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,084,000
713,000
Per share
.38
.26
Yr net inc
4,262,000
2,851,000
Per share
1.49
1.21
The bank is based in Staten Island.


Big Gains in Computer Industry
LEAD: Buoyed by strong sales of its newer products, Apple Computer Inc. today reported the highest quarterly revenue and earnings in its history.


County Chiefs Joining to Press Regional Goals
LEAD: At a meeting yesterday in the Nassau County Executive's office in Mineola, L.I., were, from left, Deputy Mayor Robert Esnard of New York City; Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Westchester County Executive; Thomas S. Gulotta, the Nassau County Executive; Patrick G. Halpin, the Suffolk County Executive, and John R.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: ONE morning, my third-grade classmate Clive didn't have his arithmetic homework ready.
When our teacher asked him where it was, Clive didn't bat an eye. ''My cat ate it,'' he replied.


AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,213,358,000
1,192,804,000
Net inc
215,203,000
199,370,000
Share earns
1.47
1.34
Shares outst
146,017,000
148,630,000
Yr sales
5,028,272,000
4,926,512,000
Net inc
845,081,000
778,824,000
Share earns
5.73
5.18
Shares outst
147,469,000
150,320,000


Newark Council Overrides a Veto On AIDS Exams
LEAD: The Newark City Council overrode the Mayor's veto tonight and approved an ordinance mandating AIDS testing for prostitutes and their clients.


Interest Rates Post a Modest Drop
LEAD: Interest rates fell modestly yesterday as traders were encouraged by Government data showing a steep drop in housing starts and a smaller-than-expected rise in consumer prices.


'88 Bond Activity Is Brisk; 30-Year Offerings Stressed
LEAD: New financing activity in the corporate bond market is off to a brisk start this year, with an especially heavy supply of 30-year offerings.


CARTERET BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARTERET BANCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,276,000
7,846,000
Per share
.30
.59


Belgique Issues Much Of Disputed New Stock
LEAD: Societe Generale de Belgique, the vast holding company resisting an attempt by the Italian financier Carlo de Benedetti to build a substantial stake in Belgium, disclosed today that it had proceeded with its plan to issue at least 12 million shares of new stock.


JOHNSON WORLDWIDE ASSOCITES reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSON WORLDWIDE ASSOCITES (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Sales
49,000,000
34,679,000
Net inc
777,000
b993,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


ALCAN ALUMINIUM LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALCAN ALUMINIUM LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,894,000,000
1,504,000,000
Net inc
136,000,000
b61,000,000
Share earns
.81
.35
Yr rev
6,878,000,000
6,056,000,000
Net inc
433,000,000
b277,000,000
Share earns
2.52
1.63


Kastellaun Journal; If Missiles Go, Will Rebels Be Without a Cause?
LEAD: Sweeping her hand over the frozen, wind-swept field, Beate Ronnefeldt tried to evoke the moment almost four years earlier when a quarter of a million people gathered there with signs and songs, united in passionate opposition to the new cruise missiles being deployed behind the forest line and barbed wire.


Children Cited In Donations To Neediest
LEAD: Emma Myers, 4 years old, of Brooklyn saw homeless people every day and wanted to do something for poor children.
Her mother, Susan B. Myers, told her about The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, and they sent a gift of $10.


New Envoy: Native Son For Vienna
LEAD: A new American Ambassador, Henry Anatole Grunwald, presented his credentials today to President Kurt Waldheim.


New York Area Costs in '87 Up 5.9%
LEAD: Consumer prices for the New York-northeastern New Jersey area rose slightly in December, ending 1987 on a ''welcome quiet note'' after a 12-month increase of 5.9 percent, the largest in six years, Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, regional commissioner of labor statistics, said yesterday.


Washington Talk: Foreign Press Corps; Lively Beat Keeps Visitors on Toes
LEAD: While some merchants of doom see the United States as a waning power in the world, up against mounting economic and political competition from Asia and Europe, there are those who find the daily happenings of this capital city of ever more interest.





SMITH, A O CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SMITH, A O CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
236,197,000
231,238,000
Net inc
2,023,000
c8,225,000
Share earns
.13
.86
Yr sales
970,424,000
910,897,000
Net inc
b18,444,000
c28,987,000
Share earns
1.74
3.07


PUGET SOUND BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUGET SOUND BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
717,000
b9,300,000
Per share
-
.59
Yr net inc
18,600,000
37,200,000
Per share
1.17
2.37
b-Net income  The latest quarter included a $9.2 million special provision for loan losses.


ALEX BROWN &amp; SON INCORPORATED reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALEX BROWN &amp; SON INCORPORATED (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
53,700,000
80,700,000
Net inc
374,000
6,500,000
Share earns
.02
.45
Yr rev
298,136,000
262,275,000
Net inc
20,580,000
22,063,000
Share earns
1.29
1.52


Arias Is Critical of Nicaragua for Detaining Foes
LEAD: President Oscar Arias Sanchez strongly criticized Nicaragua's ruling Sandinista Party on Tuesday night for arresting opposition political leaders.
The Costa Rican leader said the arrests were not in accord with the pledges Nicaragua made in the Central American peace treaty.


CURTICE BURNS FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CURTICE BURNS FOODS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Sales
193,051,000
165,892,000
Net inc
3,674,000
2,471,000
Share earns
.65
.44
6mo sales
350,811,000
304,298,000
Net inc
6,468,000
4,834,000
Share earns
1.15
.87


UNISYS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNISYS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,798,900,000
2,535,800,000
Net inc
216,900,000
b188,500,000
Share earns
1.26
-
Yr rev
9,712,900,000
7,432,400,000
Net inc
578,000,000
b43,400,000
Share earns
3.15
-


GRADCO SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRADCO SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
24,844,000
14,233,000
Net inc
b1,340,000
cd894,000
Share earns
.21
-
9mo rev
63,330,000
42,241,000
Net inc
b2,869,000
d1,114,000
Share earns
.48
.25


'Lost' Tapes by Lennon In Yearlong Radio Series
LEAD: ''The Lost Lennon Tapes,'' a yearlong weekly radio series, begins this week on stations associated with the Westwood One Radio Network.
Culled from more than 300 hours of John Lennon's taped archives, the series includes interviews, unreleased recordings (including an acoustic-guitar version of ''Strawberry Fields''), songs in various stages of development, jam sessions and other material - some of it dating back to the Quarrymen, Lennon's band before the Beatles - that was made available by Yoko Ono,


AMERITRUST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERITRUST CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
12,300,000
22,916,000
Per share
.29
.55
Yr net loss
10,120,000
b88,480,000
Per share
-
2.14
b-Net income  Results have been restated for an accounting change.


Rosewood Buys 6% Stake in Cronus
LEAD: Rosewood Financial Inc., an investment concern controlled by the Texas investor Caroline Rose Hunt, has purchased a 6 percent stake in Cronus Industries' 5.38 million shares outstanding.


Relief Convoy Ambushed
LEAD: Rebels ambushed a convoy in northern Ethiopia last Friday and burned seven trucks carrying food for famine victims, relief officials said today.
Guerrillas of the Eritrean People's Liberation Front attacked a column of trucks on the road from the port of Massawa to Asmara, the capital of Eritrea Province, the officials said.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Too Good a Cleanup?
LEAD: When new Presidents move into the White House, they invariably denude it of any reminders of their predecessors, Stuart E. Eizenstat, the former Presidential aide to Jimmy Carter, was saying yesterday.


Rockwell Picks 2 in Shuffle
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation said today that it would combine its aerospace and space operations and realign the responsibilities of two executives, adjustments that reflect the conclusion of B-1 bomber production.


Calendar: Antiques, Archeology And Art
LEAD:  Antiques Show


PACIFIC GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFIC GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,830,920,000
1,927,405,000
Net inc
148,397,000
235,998,000
Share earns
.32
.s54
Yr rev
7,185,701,000
7,816,66d1,000
Net inc
b688,517,000
1,081,223,000
Share earns
1.53
2.60


TV Anchorman Gets Suspension For Harsh Report
LEAD: John Roland, an anchorman for WNYW-TV, was suspended yesterday by the station because, the station's management said, ''his emotions prevailed over objectivity'' in an interview with Joyce Brown broadcast live on the 10 P.M. news Tuesday.


Speck in the Ocean Meets Law of the Sea
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Baseball Grievance
LEAD: The dispute between baseball players and owners over the owners' treatment of free agents reached the point yesterday where they could not tell the conspiracy cases without a scorecard.
The Players Association filed a grievance creating Conspiracy Case III.


CRAZY EDDIE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRAZY EDDIE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 29
1987
1986
Sales
68,651,000
91,125,000
Net loss
73,000,000
b3,700,000
Share earns
-
.12
9mo sales
227,180,000
230,425,000
Net loss
83,300,000
b9,800,000
Share earns
-
.32


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A brief article in some editions yesterday about Madonna's planned stage debut misstated the role she is to play in David Mamet's new play ''Speed-the-Plow'' at Lincoln Center.


CENTERRE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTERRE BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
104,000
7,230,000
Per share
.01
.94
Yr net inc
15,073,000
30,125,000
Per share
1.94
3.90
The latest quarter includes a special provision of $10 million for additions to the company's loan loss reserves.


Minister of Defense Quits in Philippines, Citing Rise of Rebels
LEAD: Defense Minister Rafael Ileto announced today that he had submitted his resignation, saying the Government had failed to address the welfare of the people, allowing the Communist insurgency to grow ''alarmingly strong.''


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Sports People; N.H.L. All-Stars
LEAD: Denis Potvin, the Islander defenseman, was among 13 players added to the Wales Conference all-star team by Coach Mike Keenan of Philadelphia yesterday.
It will be the ninth all-star game for Potvin, a three-time winner of the Norris Award as best defenseman.


'Top Gun and Beyond,' on Pilots
LEAD: ''NOVA'' flies in fighter jets tonight: ''Top Gun'' with a sense of purpose.
In fact, the program is called ''Top Gun and Beyond.'' What happens when air technology becomes so complex it exceeds a pilot's ability to use it? ''Nova,'' on Channel 13 at 10 P.M., says there are problems; it also says that jets need pilots.


Arafat Is Ready
LEAD: To the Editor:


SONOCO PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SONOCO PRODUCTS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
376,745,000
250,130,000
Net inc
b12,085,000
14,632,000
Share earns
.27
.34
Yr sales
1,312,052,000
963,796,000
Net inc
61,482,000
54,676,000
Share earns
1.40
1.25


IMPERIAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMPERIAL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,126,000
2,163,000
Per share
.30
.21
Yr net inc
11,362,000
b33,326,000
Per share
1.09
3.22
b-After gains of $25,740,000, resulting primarily from the sale of the company's insurance premium finance division.


U.S. Denies Shift on Soviet
LEAD: The White House, the Treasury and the State Department said today that the Administration's policy opposing Soviet membership in the major international economic organizations ''remains unchanged.'' The comments came in response to an article in The New York Times on Wednesday that gave an account of the President's annual National Security


Viazzi Memorial
LEAD: A memorial service for Alfredo Viaz-zi, the proprietor of Trattoria da Alfre-do, is to be held at 4 P.M.
Sunday, Jan. 31, at St.
Luke in the Fields Church, 437 Hudson Street, at Grove Street.
Mr.
Viazzi, who was 66 years old, died of a heart attack on Dec. 28 at St.
Vincent's Hospital.


Skulls Appear On the Frontier Of Urban Design
LEAD: HERE in the urban badlands where the briefcase buckaroos dwell, an icon for the 1980's is beginning to burn a trail across the changeable frontiers of decorating.


REPUBLIC NEW YORK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REPUBLIC NEW YORK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
22,100,000
35,000,000
Per share
.57
1.15
Yr net inc
17,200,000
135,600,000
Per share
.11
4.44
Republic's provision for loan losses in the latest quarter included a $10 million special provision for less developed country loan losses.


Washington Talk: Foreign Press Corps; Center Is a Home Away From Home
LEAD: Engulfed in a cloud of tobacco smoke, a group of Turkish reporters waited for a briefing by an American arms control official on the outlook for reducing conventional arms in Europe.


MOLEX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOLEX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
122,921,000
91,767,000
Net inc
14,270,000
9,474,000
Share earns
.56
.37
6mo rev
235,088,000
184,734,000
Net inc
27,025,000
20,235,000
Share earns
1.07
.80


Talking Deals; Spirit of '92 Comes To Belgium Early
LEAD: WITH his bold bid for Societe Generale de Belgique - the holding company that is said to control a third of Belgian industry - Carlo de Benedetti, the Italian entrepreneur, seems to have moved far ahead of the crowd in building a European-wide business empire.


Protest Leader: Did He Inform?
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton, a Brooklyn minister who has frequently organized displays of civil disobedience by blacks, has cooperated in at least one Federal investigation of black community groups, Government sources said.


Sports of The Times; Time for Some New Buddies
LEAD: AS of today and counting, the National Football League has still not had a new black head coach since Fritz Pollard joined the Hammond (Ind.) Pros in 1923.


Rock Hall of Fame Inducts Members
LEAD: The Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame moved into rock's second generation last night.
The Beatles, Bob Dylan, the Beach Boys, the Supremes and four members of the Drifters were inducted at the third annual hall of fame ceremony, a black-tie dinner at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel's Grand Ballroom, with speeches, tributes and a closing jam session.


ALTOS COMPUTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALTOS COMPUTER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
46,727,000
40,380,000
Net inc
b6,326,000
2,497,000
Share earns
.51
.19
Shares outst
12,441,000
13,076,000
6mo sales
87,355,000
73,000,000
Net inc
8,544,000
3,784,000
Share earns
.66
.29
Shares outst
12,872,000
13,212,000


Mobil Says It May Sell Retailer
LEAD: The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it was exploring the sale of its Montgomery Ward &amp; Company subsidiary after having received inquiries from ''some sizable companies'' interested in acquiring the retailing chain.


Gore as Candidate: Traveler Between 2 Worlds
LEAD: If politics is the art of pleasing different groups of people simultaneously, Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee, seems to have chosen the right profession.


FIRST OAK BROOK BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST OAK BROOK BANCSHARES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
876,000
669,000
Per share
.73
.56
Yr net inc
3,009,000
2,629,000
Per share
2.51
2.19


Popularity Has Its Price, and With Americana, It's High
LEAD: MOST antiques enthusiasts, even collectors of American furniture, were stunned last January when a 200-year-old Philadelphia wing chair with furry-looking feet and a frame riddled with nail holes was sold at Sotheby's to a New York dealer for $2.75 million.


Bus in San Francisco Kills 3 and Injures 15
LEAD: A bus sped out of control through a downtown intersection and ''just mowed people down'' in a rush-hour crash Tuesday, killing 3 pedestrians and injuring 15 others, witnesses and the authorities said.


I.B.M. PS/2 Clone Products Shown
LEAD: As expected, Chips and Technologies Inc. yesterday showed a set of semiconductor products that it said could enable computer makers to build the first clones of I.B.M.'s PS/2 personal computer by midyear.
But the company acknowledged that it was still unclear whether the International Business Machines


CINCINNATI BELL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINCINNATI BELL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
175,284,000
147,273,000
Net inc
17,837,000
14,308,000
Share earns
.56
.43
Yr rev
633,823,000
533,169,000
Net inc
64,353,000
58,228,000
Share earns
2.01
1.77


CITYTRUST BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITYTRUST BANCORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,862,000
2,697,000
Per share
1.42
.65
Yr net inc
21,502,000
13,894,000
Per share
5.20
3.49


New Poll Finds Wide Support for Abortion Rights
LEAD: Broad public support for preserving the right of women to obtain abortions remains undiminished seven years after Ronald Reagan came to office on a strong anti-abortion platform.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JANUARY 21, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-13


IRVING BANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IRVING BANK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
175,801,000
b31,025,000
Per share
-
1.65
Yr net loss
193,279,000
b128,107,000
Per share
-
6.83
b-Net income  The loss for the latest fourth quarter was after an additional $250 million provision to the allowance for credit losses, substantially all of which were related to less developed country outstandings.


Decline in Housing Spurs Fall in Lumber Contracts
LEAD: Lumber futures prices fell sharply on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange yesterday in reaction to a Government report that housing starts had plunged more than 16 percent in December.


Government Tightrope: What Price for Talent?
LEAD: The $150,000-a-year salary granted to New York City's new Schools Chancellor, Dr.
Richard R. Green, apparently makes him the nation's highest paid public school administrator.


Sports People; Olympic Director Quits
LEAD: In an unexpected move, Harvey Schiller resigned yesterday as executive director of the United States Olympic Committee, less than three weeks after he succeeded George Miller in the position.
Schiller returned to his former job as commissioner of the Southeastern Conference.


No Jewish Dictators
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sports People; Marino to Have Surgery
LEAD: Dan Marino, quarterback of the Miami Dolphins, said yesterday that he would undergo arthroscopic surgery on his left knee and miss the Pro Bowl game on Feb. 7 in Honolulu.
The Dolphins said they expected Marino to recover quickly.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.83
6.94
6.07
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.81
5.92
5.32
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.26
6.33
5.30
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.81
8.84
6.83
30-YR.


Grounded Ship Stalls Carter and Hundreds
LEAD: Former President Jimmy Carter and nearly 2,000 fellow passengers finally left on a Caribbean cruise today after being delayed nearly 24 hours by a grounded freighter that trapped their cruise liner in San Juan Harbor.


Icahn Goes to Court To Pitch Texaco Plan
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn, the largest shareholder of Texaco Inc., came to Federal Bankruptcy Court here today to try to persuade a judge to allow his bankruptcy reorganization proposal to go to the company's shareholders for consideration.


Pacemaker Use Questioned
LEAD: One in five of all the pacemakers implanted in patients by doctors in one city were clearly not needed and about a third of them were of uncertain value, according to a review of medical records from 1983.


Protest Figure Reported To Be a U.S. Informant
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton, a Brooklyn minister who has organized civil disobedience demonstrations and has frequently criticized the city's predominantly white political leadership, assisted law-enforcement officials in at least one recent criminal investigation of black community groups, Government sources said.


Role of Child's Sex In Divorce
LEAD: Sexism plays a role even in divorces, with the parents of sons less likely to separate than the parents of daughters, according to a new study.


Savings Unit Fines Imposed
LEAD: A jury has fined three former directors of the defunct First Maryland Savings and Loan $100 million each for mismanagement and fraud that contributed to the thrift institution's collapse in 1985.


U.S. Trial of AIDS Drug Is Failing the Victims
LEAD: To the Editor:


BANK SOUTH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK SOUTH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,913,000
9,352,000
Per share
.22
.37
Yr net inc
26,957,000
33,263,000
Per share
1.03
1.29
The latest periods included provisions for loan losses of $6,279,000 for the quarter and $21,495,000 for the year.


Evert Upsets Navratilova
LEAD: Chris Evert beat her longtime rival, Martina Navratilova, 6-2, 7-5, today to advance to the final of the Australian Open.


Rise Reported In Sterling Bid
LEAD: Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company is raising its bid for Sterling Drug Inc. to $81 a share, from $76, a person close to Hoffmann said last night.


Wartime Merchant Seamen to Get Veterans' Status
LEAD: The Defense Department, under orders from a Federal district judge to reconsider the issue, has agreed to extend veterans' status to the men who sailed merchant ships in World War II, the Pentagon said today.


SECURITY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SECURITY BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,399,000
4,646,000
Per share
.72
.61
Yr net inc
19,299,000
17,622,000
Per share
2.54
2.30


Checking Art Against Life
LEAD: Delegates from the make-believe world of the theater and a real-life former delegate from the world of nuclear arms negotiations faced each other in an unusual encounter a few mornings ago during a rehearsal of ''A Walk in the Woods.'' To their mutual delight, they discovered they were not far apart at all in their instincts and perceptions about what really happened in Geneva in 1982 and what will be presented on the Broadway stage in 1988.


HORIZON BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORIZON BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
923,180
951,264
Per share
.38
.40
9mo net inc
2,810,210
2,483,037
Per share
1.17
-
There were no per share earnings for the year-ago 9 months because the bank went public in September 1986.


COLONIAL BANCGROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLONIAL BANCGROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
3,006,000
b2,828,000
Per share
-
.52
Yr net inc
2,140,000
11,071,000
Per share
.35
2.20
b-Net income


BIRMINGHAM STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIRMINGHAM STEEL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
82,198,000
42,031,000
Net inc
5,064,000
2,619,000
Share earns
.72
.36
6mo rev
162,749,000
86,312,000
Net inc
10,309,000
5,234,000
Share earns
1.44
.72


SYSCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYSCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
1,071,291,000
902,378,000
Net inc
21,598,000
15,368,000
Share earns
.48
.35
6mo sales
2,115,320,000
1,780,423,000
Net inc
b43,711,000
31,594,000
Share earns
.97
.72


COMMONWEALTH EDISON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMONWEALTH EDISON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,229,987,000
1,270,688,000
Net inc
181,712,000
212,735,000
Share earns
.74
.91
Yr rev
5,673,782,000
5,478,511,000
Net inc
1,085,779,000
1,049,595,000
Share earns
4.73
4.69


Alan Patricof Sets Deal to Sell Details
LEAD: Advance Publications, the magazine company that owns The New Yorker, has agreed to acquire Details, the avant-garde fashion magazine, from Alan Patricof, head of Alan Patricof Associates, which is a venture capital group, and a group of investors.
S.
I.
Newhouse Jr., whose family owns Conde Nast Publications Inc., is chairman of Advance.


Abdul Ghaffar Khan, 98, a Follower of Gandhi
LEAD: Abdul Ghaffar Khan, a Moslem disciple of Mohandas K. Gandhi who opposed British rule in India and partition of the subcontinent, died yesterday in a hospital in Peshawar, Pakistan.
He was 98 years old and had suffered a stroke six months ago.


Child Molester Attacks 15th Victim, Girl, 9
LEAD: A child molester with a mustache and pock-marked face who preys on Queens schoolgirls attacked his 15th victim on Tuesday, the police said yesterday.


A Haitian Opposition Leader Is Seized After Tour Abroad
LEAD: With Haitians awaiting an announcement on the results of the flawed presidential election three days ago, the authorities detained a prominent opposition leader today as he returned home from an anti-Government campaign abroad.


AN UPDATE ON 'THE COSBY SHOW'
LEAD: IS he running out of steam?
Has he peaked?
How far can a megastar slip before he becomes an ordinary superstar again?
The subject is, of course, William H. Cosby Jr., comedian, actor, writer, producer and, according to some estimates, the top money-earning performer in these United States.
But suddenly the Bill Cosby media machine is showing signs of strain.


Dance: City Ballet Performs Robbins's 'Fanfare'
LEAD: JEROME ROBBINS is at his brightest and most goofily amusing in ''Fanfare.'' And the ballet received a correspondingly bright and funny performance on Tuesday, when the New York City Ballet presented it at the New York State Theater.


IT'S ORANGE, GREEN AND PURPLE
LEAD: CHITA RIVERA, the dancer and singer, is opening a new restaurant today at 444 West 42d Street that looks like a Broadway set of a New York restaurant: vivid, spirited, capable of delivering a slightly heightened experience along with grilled steak.


WOBURN FIVE CENTS SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WOBURN FIVE CENTS SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,086,000
1,658,000
Per share
.27
.41
6mo net inc
2,045,000
2,691,000
Per share
.51
.67


Pop: Houserockers, Blues
LEAD: THE ghosts of the blues guitarists Magic Sam and Freddie King swirled around the room Tuesday for the Abilene Houserockers, a blues trio.
At their first set at Mondo Cane, 205 Thompson Street, where they play regularly, the Houserockers worked their way through Texas-styled guitar instrumentals, and blues and soul standards, including Magic Sam's ''All of Your Love'' and Little Willie John's ''Fever.


Ex-CBS Chairman Tells of Takeover
LEAD: Thomas H. Wyman, the former chairman of CBS Inc., said yesterday that the 1986 assumption of management control by Laurence A. Tisch was a brilliantly plotted and executed takeover at bargain prices, and not the friendly management change it was depicted to be.


Old-Fashioned Dance
LEAD: Dennis O'Connor and Ann Papoulis will present ''Leonard and Cinciana,'' which they describe as a ''retro comedia de la danza,'' on Jan. 28 at 8:30 at At the World, 254 East Second Street.
The piece, conceived and performed by Mr.
O'Connor, a member of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company, and Ms.
Papoulis, the choreographer, has a score by John King that will be performed live and a set by Cis Bierinckx.


Youths Finding Success Elusive Without College
LEAD: American youths who do not go to college are as eager to succeed in the work force as their college-bound peers, but they are facing increasing difficulties in finding good jobs, according to a report released today.


WINN-DIXIE STORES reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 6
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WINN-DIXIE STORES (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 6
1988
1987
Sales
2,733,310,000
2,725,473,000
Net inc
27,660,000
27,400,000
Share earns
.67
.66
Shares outst
40,863,762
41,283,624
6mo sales
4,730,618,000
4,710,412,000
Net inc
43,132,000
40,816,000
Share earns
1.05
.99
Shares outst
40,968,413
41,290,723


Missile Pact Must Be Amended, Helms Says
LEAD: Senator Jesse Helms, a leading opponent of the recently signed treaty eliminating American and Soviet medium-range missiles, asserted today that it must be amended before it can be approved by the Senate.


CENTRAL FIDELITY BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL FIDELITY BANKS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
12,086,000
10,256,000
Per share
.77
.65
Yr net inc
47,300,000
41,653,000
Per share
3.01
2.76


BANKERS TRUST NEW YORK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKERS TRUST NEW YORK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
284,500,000
97,500,000
Per share
3.70
1.39
Yr net inc
1,200,000
427,900,000
Per share
.02
6.01
The company had $15.2 million in tax benefits in the fourth quarter related to the addition of $700 million to the allowance for credit losses taken in the second quarter.


Knicks Can't Elude Another Roadblock
LEAD: Xavier McDaniel produced career-highs of 41 points and 18 rebounds in leading the Seattle SuperSonics to their 16th straight home victory, a 108-96 triumph over the Knicks tonight.


Redmen Shoot Down Hoyas
LEAD: St.
John's needed big performances from its top three guns tonight, and this is how they responded: Michael Porter scored and soared for a game-high 21 points; Shelton Jones added 16 points with 14 rebounds; and Boo Harvey scored 9 points and guided the Redmen offense through Georgetown's vaunted press.


Flores Steps Down As Raider Coach
LEAD: Tom Flores stepped down today as head coach of the Los Angeles Raiders after nine seasons, and speculation over a successor flared up immediately.


HIGH COURT BARS EXPELLING DISTURBED PUPILS
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that public schools may not expel or remove disruptive, emotionally disturbed students from their classrooms for more than 10 days, even to protect others from physical assault, without the permission of the parents or a judge.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


In Sandinista Wall, Cracks Revealed
LEAD: Nicaragua's effort to comply with the Central American peace accord has accentuated differences within the Sandinista leadership, according to diplomats and Sandinista officials.


KIMBERLY-CLARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KIMBERLY-CLARK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,300,000,000
1,100,000,000
Net inc
82,200,000
64,300,000
Share earns
.99
.70
Yr sales
4,900,000,000
4,300,000,000
Net inc
325,000,000
269,000,000
Share earns
3.73
2.93


FRENCH NAVY AIDS A FOREIGN TANKER
LEAD: France appears to have altered its rules of military engagement in the Persian Gulf, announcing today that one of its warships intervened to stop an Iranian attack on a non-French tanker flying a Liberian flag last weekend.


Israelis Said to Kill 3 Guerrillas
LEAD: Israeli troops killed three Palestinian guerrillas early today, moments after the guerrillas cut a security fence on the northern border and slipped into Israel, apparently to mount an attack.


Change Seen In Limits on Soviet Trade
LEAD: The Western allies and Japan are expected to agree next week to fewer but more rigorously enforced curbs on exports to the Soviet Union, American and European officials said today.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Now that Bob Horner has signed with the St.
Louis Cardinals after playing one season with the Yakult Swallows of the Central League in Japan, the Swallows have responded by signing Doug DeCinces, a 37-year-old third baseman who batted .234 last year with California and St.
Louis, and Terry Harper, a 32-year-old outfielder who hit .246 with Detroit and Pittsburgh in 1987.


Kennedy Backs Extension in Sale of The Post if Deal Emerges
LEAD: Senator Edward M. Kennedy said yesterday that he ''would have no objection'' to extending Rupert Murdoch's March 6 deadline on selling The New York Post if such an extension is needed ''to complete the sale.''


Consumer Prices Rose 4.4% in 1987
LEAD: Consumer prices rose one-tenth of 1 percent in December, a modest finish to a year in which inflation at the retail level climbed 4.4 percent, the fastest pace in six years, the Labor Department reported today.


'Password' Winner's Logic
LEAD: Kerry Ketchem, the 36-year-old former Air Force airman who was arrested on mail fraud charges after trying to collect $58,600 in prize money he won on the television show ''Super Password,'' sent a Mailgram to the show's producer yesterday saying he deserved the money and had provided the show with ''priceless free publicity.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture on Jan. 2 with a review of the New York Philharmonic's Dec. 31 concert was published in error.
The picture, distributed by the orchestra last month, showed the New Year's Eve concert of 1984.
It was reissued to publicize Zubin Mehta and Kathleen Battle, who were once again appearing with the orchestra on the holiday, but it was imprecisely labeled.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the Advertising column in Business Day yesterday described the appointment of J. Charles Taney Jr. incorrectly.
He is president of FCB/Leber Katz


FRANK GEHRY REALLY LOVES FISH
LEAD: THE question seems to come up at dinners among architects just when the fish course is being served: can the Los Angeles architect Frank Gehry really be designing a high-rise office tower in the shape of a fish to be built on the present Madison Square Garden site?


Legal Limits on Young Workers
LEAD: FEDERAL and state laws restrict the kinds of jobs that teen-agers may hold and the number of hours they may work.
But enforcement is ''virtually nil,'' according to Dorianne Beyer, general counsel for the National Child Labor Committee, a nonprofit agency that examines youth-employment policy.


Personal Health
LEAD: The lineup of dental products in drugstores is becoming as dazzling as the cereal aisle in a supermarket.
Fifty dentrifices, a score of mouth rinses and dozens of mechanical devices greet the shopper eager to have sweet-smelling breath, no cavities and, above all, no tartar or plaque.


PRESIDENT PRAISES ENRICHED SCHOOL PROGRAM
LEAD: President Reagan traveled today to a suburban Washington school that has the kind of program he favors to achieve school integration.
He praised the plan and announced that he would ask Congress for more money for such programs.


Black vs. Black in South Africa
LEAD: High in the hillside cemetery of Sinathingi, his name on a roughhewn cross, lies the freshly dug grave of Arron Mabuza.
Nearby, in jumbled rows of still newer graves, lie at least three other blacks, perhaps as many as eight or nine, who were killed as they made their way to Mr.
Mabuza's burial shortly before the New Year.


Sports People; Coe's U.S. Indoor Debut
LEAD: Sebastian Coe of Britain, the 1980 and 1984 Olympic 1,500-meter champion, will make his American indoor debut on Feb. 13 in the Vitalis Olympic Invitational meet in East Rutherford, N.J.
Coe will run in the 3,000 meters against Doug Padilla, who is the best American in that event, and Frank O'Mara and Paul Donovan of Ireland, who finished first and second, respectively, last March in the first world indoor championships.


United Technologies' Profit
LEAD: The United Technologies Corporation, led by a strong performance in its power group and in its automotive and wire and cable operations, reported yesterday that it had fourth-quarter earnings of $172.5 million, or $1.32 a share, in contrast to a deficit of $228 million in the corresponding quarter last year.


Tour Presses Family Issues in Campaign
LEAD: A doctor, a television producer and a United States Representative are touring the country to promote what they think should be a central issue in the Presidential election: the status of the family.


SOCIETY FOR SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOCIETY FOR SAVINGS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b8,024,000
c7,937,000
Per share
.75
.74
Yr net inc
b31,269,000
c23,036,000
Per share
2.91
2.15
b-After tax credits of $387,000 for the quarter and $1,395,000 for the year.


Hartford Insurance
LEAD: The Hartford Insurance Group has laid off 400 people and indicated that more cuts might be necessary as the company tries to reduce its costs.
Hartford Insurance employs 9,000 people in Connecticut and 20,000 nationwide.
Donald R. Frahm, its president, said he hoped attrition might offset the need for future layoffs.


JOHNSON CONTROLS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSON CONTROLS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
732,800,000
644,100,000
Net inc
29,700,000
27,100,000
Share earns
.81
.67


FRANKFORD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRANKFORD CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,572,000
1,292,000
Per share
.54
.45
Yr net inc
5,815,000
5,361,000
Per share
2.00
1.90


EXCHANGE INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXCHANGE INTERNATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,900,000
2,800,000
Per share
.28
.16
Shares outst
11,043,000
10,428,000
Yr net inc
15,900,000
10,200,000
Per share
1.42
1.02
Shares outst
11,065,000
9,212,000


UNION NATIONAL CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION NATIONAL CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
7,215,000
7,205,000
Per share
.70
.69
Yr net inc
30,257,000
27,225,000
Per share
2.92
2.61


FAMILY OF AQUINO SET BACK IN VOTE
LEAD: Partial results of local elections held across the nation Monday led Philippine analysts to conclude today that President Corazon C. Aquino remains popular but that her relatives are not.


Bridge: Tournament in the Hague Is Limited to 16 Elite Pairs
LEAD: For most bridge purposes democracy is the norm.


BOWATER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOWATER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
349,198,000
255,770,000
Net inc
29,565,000
13,926,000
Share earns
.77
.44
Shares outst
36,543,000
29,539,000
Yr sales
1,231,002,000
919,690,000
Net inc
81,140,000
49,444,000
Share earns
2.13
1.51
Shares outst
35,954,000
29,439,000


MOTOROLA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOTOROLA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,850,000,000
1,619,000,000
Net inc
102,000,000
63,000,000
Share earns
.79
.49
Shares outst
129,300,000
128,200,000
Yr sales
6,707,000,000
5,888,000,000
Net inc
308,000,000
194,000,000
Share earns
2.39
1.53
Shares outst
128,900,000
126,500,000


HUNTINGTON BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUNTINGTON BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,634,000
18,084,000
Per share
.19
.61
Shares outst
30,074,000
29,499,000
Yr net inc
47,827,000
67,894,000
Per share
1.58
2.30
Shares outst
30,072,000
28,734,000


F.A.A. Seeks Seasoned Pilot in Cockpit
LEAD: Pressing for increased airline safety, the Federal Aviation Administration urged today that two ''relatively inexperienced'' pilots not be assigned to the same flight, and it also ordered a tightening of maintenance rules.


Orion Stake Raised
LEAD: Sumner M. Redstone, the chairman of Viacom International Inc., has increased his stake in the Orion Pictures Corporation to 26.1 percent from 25.1 percent.
Analysts said Mr.
Redstone was interested in acquiring Orion's motion picture and television production operations to augment Viacom's cable and movie theater businesses.


Put the Stock Markets On a Cash-Only Basis
LEAD: To the Editor:


Marvin F. Camillo, 51, Is Dead; Started Ex-Convicts' Stage Group
LEAD: Marvin Felix Camillo, the founder and director of the Family, a theater group composed primarily of former prison inmates, died last Saturday in La Rochelle, France, where he had been hospitalized since being injured in an automobile accident this month.
He was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.


STANDARD FEDERAL BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD FEDERAL BANK (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
12,788,000
c17,233,000
Per share
.42
-
Yr net inc
b67,420,000
c115,587,000
Per share
2.27
-
b-After a tax credit of about $10.6 million.
c-After tax credits of about $4.6 million for the quarter and about $53.2 million for the year.


16 Million Layoffs Foreseen By Soviet in Next 12 Years
LEAD: About 16 million workers will be laid off by the year 2000 under Mikhail S. Gorbachev's plan for restructuring the Soviet economy, the Communist Party newspaper Pravda reported today.


Administration Lowers Goals on Contra Aid
LEAD: The Reagan Administration, acknowledging that Congressional opposition is intense and growing stronger, is planning to ask for significantly less aid for the Nicaraguan rebels than President Reagan had wanted.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Baaron Pittenger has returned to the post of acting executive director of the United States Olympic Committee while a search is begun for a replacement for Harvey Schiller.
Schiller, 48 years old, became executive director less than three weeks ago, but then resigned to return to his job as commissioner of the Southeastern Conference.


Joseph H. Ream, 84, A Former CBS Director
LEAD: Joseph H. Ream, a former executive vice president and director of the Columbia Broadcasting System, died of neurological complications from an aneurysm at the Mobile (Ala.) Infirmary Wednesday.
He was 84 years old and lived in Fairhope, Ala.


MERITOR FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERITOR FINANCIAL GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
35,600,000
b9,100,000
Per share
-
.26
Yr net loss
395,800,000
b22,900,000
Per share
-
.65
b-Net income


Stop and Shop To Study Offer
LEAD: The Stop and Shop Companies, responding to an $834 million cash offer from the Dart Group Corporation, was noncommittal yesterday but said it would review the proposal.
The Haft family of Landover, Md., which controls Dart, has long been rumored to be interested in acquiring Stop and Shop, and the Boston-based retailer has taken defensive measures.


U.S. Bonds Advance on Japan Report
LEAD: Treasury bond prices rose nearly a point yesterday in response to a report that the Bank of Japan was considering a large increase in its buying of longer-term Treasury issues.


Convening of U.S. Judges Is Termed Extraordinary
LEAD: Lawyers and legal scholars said the convening of Federal district judges in Brooklyn in an ''en banc,'' or ''entire bench,'' panel yesterday was exceptionally unusual.


The Paper Bag Players: Still Zany
LEAD: FIRST, it was ''Cut-Ups.''


Restaurants
LEAD: THE palatial home of the former Quo Vadis restaurant on East 63d Street was beginning to get the reputation of being cursed.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Vietnam and Capitalism


UNIFI INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIFI INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
72,457,989
68,811,159
Net inc
b5,831,724
c1,909,751
Share earns
.55
.19
6mo sales
141,487,347
136,961,821
Net inc
b12,202,758
c3,085,369
Share earns
1.15
.31


Texas Court Fight Puts Focus on Elected Judges
LEAD: In some ways it looks like a quintessential Texas battle royal played against a background of big money, big egos and big stakes, with the largest court judgement in the nation's history serving as a juicy subplot.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  DICHTER AND ROMANCE


Kids 'R' Us Awarded To Scali, McCabe, Sloves
LEAD: Scali, McCabe, Sloves, already the agency for Toys ''R'' Us, has now been tapped to create advertising for Kids ''R'' Us , a chain of 74 children's clothing stores in the Northeast that is a unit of the toy company.


UNION PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,528,300,000
1,616,200,000
Net inc
139,800,000
129,300,000
Share earns
1.23
1.13
Yr rev
5,943,000,000
6,583,000,000
Net inc
b582,900,000
c460,200,000
Share earns
5.10
-


Met Lineup Looks Familiar
LEAD: There was quiet optimism at Shea Stadium yesterday, where the Mets held a midwinter luncheon to discuss such issues as the pitching staff, the team's new hope at shortstop, the status of Mookie Wilson, and the future of Dave Johnson as manager.


WILMINGTON TRUST CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILMINGTON TRUST CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
13,700,000
10,100,000
Per share
.78
.57
Yr net inc
43,400,000
34,000,000
Per share
2.46
1.95


Sandinistas Make Offer to Set Up Monitor Team With U.S. Members
LEAD: The Nicaraguan Government made a proposal today in what it said was an effort to promote peace talks with the rebels.


SUNAIR ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNAIR ELECTRONICS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,416,829
2,671,790
Net inc
225,911
651,346
Share earns
.06
.14
Shares outst
3,945,249
4,590,861


America, Shadowed by Death Squads
LEAD: In an unusual trial under way in Costa Rica, Honduras stands accused of maintaining an army death squad responsible for murdering four people in 1981.
That a special court set up by the Organization of American States is hearing the case sets a powerful precedent - so much so that two key witnesses have now been killed.


RAYTHEON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAYTHEON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,137,000,000
2,041,000,000
Net inc
117,900,000
99,600,000
Share earns
1.69
1.32
Shares outst
70,000,000
75,200,000
Yr sales
7,659,000,000
7,308,000,000
Net inc
445,100,000
393,200,000
Share earns
6.12
5.10
Shares outst
72,800,000
77,000,000


Rock Slide Kills Passenger On Thruway in Westchester
LEAD: A boulder, unleashed by a rock slide, struck a car traveling south on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway in Westchester County yesterday afternoon, crushing a passenger to death and injuring the driver.


San Jose Journal; Silicon Valley Laundries With Frills
LEAD: Until now, everyone knew what it was to talk about coin laundries: It meant peeling linoleum, month-old cigarette butts stubbed out in tin cans, orange molded plastic chairs bolted to the floor, old magazines and ''out of order'' signs on half the machines.


PINNACLE WEST CAPITAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PINNACLE WEST CAPITAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
303,501,000
288,192,000
Net inc
57,186,000
50,013,000
Share earns
.67
.63
Yr rev
1,313,438,000
1,249,912,000
Net inc
b284,184,000
234,184,000
Share earns
3.40
3.04


7 TV Stations Focus on Candidates' Character
LEAD: In an unusual alliance cutting across network boundaries, seven local television stations have joined forces to produce profiles of the 1988 Presidential candidates that focus on the character issue that has dominated the campaign.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Aluminum Co. of America
$132,800,000
-19.7
Amdahl Corp.
53,000,000
+79.1
Ameritech
322,200,000
+16.1
Boise Cascade Corp.
57,200,000
+78.8
Champion International Corp.


Cellular Makes Bid
LEAD: Cellular Communications Inc., based in New York, has begun an unsolicited tender offer for a majority holding in the American Cellular Network Corporation for $15.50 cash a share, or a total of $69.75 million.
The bid was disclosed in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
American Cellular builds and owns cellular telephone systems in the Middle Atlantic region from its headquarters in Pleasantville, N.J.


Opera: 'Luisa Miller,' Season's First at Met
LEAD: EXPECT nothing and you will never be disappointed.
That bit of folk wisdom has been the safest shield to carry to the Metropolitan Opera on most evenings this season and certainly it fortified one in advance for the return to the repertory of ''Luisa Miller'' on Wednesday night.


Film: Tony Bill's 'Five Corners,' With Foster
LEAD: ''FIVE CORNERS,'' opening today at the Baronet and other theaters, is about coming of age in the Bronx in the autumn of 1964, when student activists were listening to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., young women were still doing their darnedest to look like Jacqueline Kennedy and glue-sniffing was an acceptable way to attain a high.


GENENTECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENENTECH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
96,477,000
36,714,000
Net inc
27,173,000
b358,407,000
Share earns
.32
-
Yr rev
230,543,000
133,954,000
Net inc
42,230,000
b352,983,000
Share earns
.50
-


U.S. IS CONSIDERING A NEW INITIATIVE FOR MIDEAST PEACE
LEAD: As a result of the continuing violence in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, the Reagan Administration is conducting internal deliberations on whether the United States should take a more active and visible role in pursuing peace efforts in the Middle East, American officials said today.


ENVISIONING THE SHOW'S HEAVY ARTILLERY
LEAD: IT so happens that I live down the block from the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue at 66th Street.
For much of the year, I am aware of it as a thickset and bloodshot presence somewhere over my left shoulder.
In my dreams, ensigns straight out of Walt Whitman and sharpshooters straight out of Winslow Homer troop in and out of it.


Nobel Laureates Agree to Meet Again in 1990
LEAD: At the end of four days of deliberations, 75 Nobel laureates decided today to hold another meeting in two years and to create an emergency committee to intervene with moral authority in crises around the world.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If there is no vaccine, it will be like a war for us.''  - Pierre Mpele, secretary of Congo's Committee  to Combat AIDS.  [ A1:5. ]


Polish Workers Get Cash to Offset Price Rise
LEAD: Facing heavy pressure from officially sanctioned trade unions, the Government said today that it would triple cash payments promised to workers this year to offset planned consumer price increases.


MONSANTO CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONSANTO CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,850,000,000
1,570,000,000
Net inc
b44,000,000
c23,000,000
Share earns
.62
.28
Yr sales
7,639,000,000
6,879,000,000
Net inc
b436,000,000
d433,000,000
Share earns
5.63
5.55
Shares outst
77,500,000
78,000,000


Hammer to Build a Museum
LEAD: Dr.
Armand Hammer, chairman and chief executive of the Occidental Petroleum Corporation, announced in Los Angeles yesterday that he intends to build a $30 million museum and cultural center to house his well-known and widely circulated art collections.


Auctions
LEAD:  Offbeat Furniture


TRUSTCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRUSTCORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
14,369,000
8,582,000
Per share
.90
.51
Yr net inc
51,017,000
44,415,000
Per share
3.19
2.79


APPLE BANK FOR SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APPLE BANK FOR SAVINGS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b8,072,000
c6,916,000
Per share
1.76
1.51
Yr net inc
b27,567,000
c22,487,000
Per share
6.01
4.90
b-After tax credits of $3,351,000 for the quarter and $8,366,000 for the year, and included pre-tax losses of $1,014,000 and $14,152,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, from asset restructuring.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Living Section on Jan. 6 about sweet potatoes incorrectly described the conversion of beta carotene to vitamin A. It is converted within the body, not in cooking.


OWENS-CORNING FIBERGLAS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OWENS-CORNING FIBERGLAS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
714,000,000
898,000,000
Net inc
38,000,000
16,000,000
Share earns
.90
.44
Yr sales
2,891,000,000
3,644,000,000
Net inc
200,000,000
16,000,000
Share earns
4.81
.49


Advertising; New Drive By Condom Marketer
LEAD: IN the midst of a marketplace revolution in the category, Ansell-Americas, a big but relatively unknown condom marketer, has assigned its Lifestyles brand to Lois Pitts Gershon Pon/GGK.


Kenneth Harper, 48, Producer of 'The Wiz'
LEAD: Kenneth G. Harper, who produced ''The Wiz'' on Broadway in 1975, died Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 48 years old.
The cause of death was cancer, said his mother, Mildred Harper.


ANTIQUE CREATURES GREAT AND SMALL AT ARMORY
LEAD: MERCURY, monsters and scores of their mythological brethren are installed throughout the Winter Antiques Show, opening today in previews and tomorrow to the public for a nine-day run at the Seventh Regiment Armory.


War Powers Resolution Can Still Be Salvaged
LEAD: To the Editor:


ANCHOR SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANCHOR SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,900,000
c30,000,000
Per share
.12
-
6mo net inc
b15,000,000
c68,200,000
Per share
.45
-
b-After tax credits of $2.2 million for the quarter and $4.3 million for the 6 months.


Mecham's New Worry: Lasers
LEAD: As he faces criminal charges and possible recall or impeachment, Gov.
Evan Mecham of Arizona says he has yet another worry: someone may be eavesdropping on him with laser beams.


GREAT LAKES BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT LAKES BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,300,000
4,500,000
Per share
1.09
1.16
Yr net inc
20,200,000
b22,200,000
Per share
5.16
5.67
b-After an extraordinary charge of $600,000.


Data General Profits Up
LEAD: The Data General Corporation said today that its profits had soared in its fiscal first quarter as shipments rose and cost-cutting efforts took hold.
The computer maker said its net income totaled $12.4 million in the quarter that ended last Dec. 26, compared with $3.3 million for the corresponding quarter in 1986.


CULLEN-FROST BANKERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CULLEN-FROST BANKERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
400,000
380,000
Per share
.05
.05
Yr net inc
1,983,000
6,565,000
Per share
.24
.91


On Stage
LEAD:  Fierstein Says No Roller Skaters


Skin Cream Seems to Reverse Some Harmful Effects of Sun
LEAD: A small study has found that a prescription cream containing a chemical cousin of vitamin A appears capable of reversing some of the damaging effects that sunlight has on skin.


Manila Defense Chief Quits And Ramos Is Named to Job
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino accepted the protest resignation of Defense Secretary Rafael M. Ileto today and said she would nominate the armed forces Chief of Staff, Gen.
Fidel V. Ramos, to replace him.


College Basketball; Duke Upsets North Carolina
LEAD: Danny Ferry hit a free throw with 52 seconds left tonight and second-ranked North Carolina missed two chances to win in the final 16 seconds as No. 9 Duke beat the Tar Heels, 70-69.


Piano-Bass Duo
LEAD: The duo of Steve Kuhn on piano and Eddie Gomez on bass will perform tonight and tomorrow at Bradley's, 70 University Place (228-6440).
Music begins at 9:45 P.M.; there is no cover charge or minimum.


AMERITECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERITECH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,447,900,000
2,375,400,000
Net inc
322,200,000
277,400,000
Share earns
2.33
1.93
Yr rev
9,536,000,000
9,362,100,000
Net inc
1,188,100,000
1,138,400,000
Share earns
8.47
7.87


NEWSPAPER'S FATE TIED TO JOINT PACT
LEAD: The board of directors of Knight-Ridder Inc. voted today to close The Detroit Free Press if a joint operating agreement with The Detroit News is not approved by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d.


ARCO CHEMICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARCO CHEMICAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
507,000,000
398,000,000
Net inc
62,000,000
29,000,000
Yr rev
1,950,000,000
1,540,000,000
Net inc
257,000,000
143,000,000
Share earnings were not available because ARCO Chemical went public in October 1987.


U.S. to Submit Anti-Missile Treaty Draft
LEAD: The United States has prepared a formal treaty to present in Geneva on anti-missile defense systems, Administration officials said today.


KENNEDY CHEERED ON STUMP IN IOWA
LEAD: His face was familiar to everyone, and so were the deep voice and the broad Massachusetts accent.
And the name, after all these years, was still magic.


LAKE SHORE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAKE SHORE BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,282,000
2,010,000
Per share
.38
.33
Yr net inc
9,231,000
7,935,000
Per share
1.53
1.31


Gould to Sell Unit To Westinghouse
LEAD: Gould Inc., a maker of electronic products and systems that is getting out of the military business, announced today that it had agreed to sell its antisubmarine warfare operation for a sharply lower price than it had originally intended.


New Orleans Sound
LEAD: Dr.
John, the New Orleans pianist and singer, will perform tonight and tomorrow at the Lone Star Cafe, 61 Fifth Avenue, at 13th Street (242-1664), with G. C. Dangerous opening the show.
Shows are scheduled for 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.; tickets are $12.


PFIZER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PFIZER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,275,200,000
1,162,900,000
Net inc
136,600,000
158,400,000
Share earns
.82
.94
Yr sales
4,919,800,000
4,476,000,000
Net inc
690,200,000
660,000,000
Share earns
4.08
3.90


Surcharge Set For Car Owners In New Jersey
LEAD: To prevent the collapse of the agency that insures more than half of New Jersey's 4 million motorists, all drivers will have to pay a surcharge averaging $66 for each car they own when they renew their insurance policies, the state's Insurance Commissioner said today.


STUDY TRACES AIDS IN AFRICA CHILDREN
LEAD: Nearly one in 15 Central African children receiving blood transfusions to combat malaria-related anemia may become infected with the AIDS virus as a result, a new study has found.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Consumer's World page last Saturday about radar detectors incorrectly described some applications issued by Geico.
Those distributed with mail solicitations specify that Geico does not insure vehicles equipped with radar detectors; all other applications do not.


Zimbabwe Emergency Stays
LEAD: The Government extended its 13-year-old state of emergency for six months today, saying it needed to deal with threats from rebels.
Parliament was told that South African-backed Mozambique National Resistance rebels were responsible for 101 incidents from July 12 to Jan. 4, including murders, abductions and the burning and ransacking of villages.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.63
6.86
6.08
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.82
5.81
5.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.23
6.26
5.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.32
8.61
6.83
30-YR.


RALSTON PURINA CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RALSTON PURINA CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,556,600,000
1,512,100,000
Net inc
b132,400,000
c298,900,000
Share earns
1.91
3.97
Shares outst
69,400,000
75,300,000
b-Includes $7 million of pretax gains from the sale of tuna boats.


Panel to Study Racial Fairness of New York Courts
LEAD: The Chief Judge of New York named a 16-member commission yesterday to examine whether minority groups are fairly served by the state's courts.


Austria Opens a Flood of Wartime Memories
LEAD: The first major event of Austria's Year of Reflection had barely begun on Jan. 6 when anti-Semitic leaflets and words of hate rained down on the audience.


Chain of Dry Cleaners Chooses Kirshenbaum
LEAD: Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond has become the first agency of Clean Street, a chain of dry cleaning establishments.
The budget is about $1 million.
Colgate-Palmolive recently acquired a majority interest in the chain, which is based in Great Neck, L.I.
It now has 30 outlets and has hopes of expanding to 1,000 by 1993.


UNION CAMP CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION CAMP CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
609,751,000
534,877,000
Net inc
58,937,000
42,866,000
Share earns
.81
.58
Yr sales
2,307,599,000
2,045,215,000
Net inc
207,483,000
129,934,000
Share earns
2.83
1.77


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly


Bridge: Manhattan Club's Successes Rivaling Those of Beverly
LEAD: Players from the Beverly Club, at 130 East 57th Street in Manhattan, are accustomed to capturing titles at every level.
But their successes are now being rivaled by those of the Manhattan Club, at 27 West 72d Street.


John H. Mitchell, 66, Former TV Executive
LEAD: John H. Mitchell, a former television executive, died of a heart attack in Los Angeles Tuesday.
He was 66 years old.


SCHWAB, CHARLES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCHWAB, CHARLES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
124,100,000
75,800,000
Net loss
b14,000,000
c600,000
Share earns
-
.03
Yr rev
464,800,000
308,300,000
Net inc
24,400,000
14,700,000
Share earns
.87
.53


Fed Urged Caution on Reserves
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Bank of New York told the leading New York banks last month that it did not necessarily want them to increase reserves against their loans to third-world countries, despite sharp increases in such reserves by some large regional banks.


UNI-MARTS INC reports earnings for Sales
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNI-MARTS INC (OTC)
Sales
34,022,593
28,013,237
Net inc
736,924
444,840
Share earns
.13
.10
Shares outst
5,766,788
4,553,105


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Akers &amp; Co. in 'Brel'


WASHINGTON MUTUAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON MUTUAL SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
7,203,000
45,821,000
Per share
.48
3.87
Yr net inc
b40,014,000
b70,654,000
Per share
2.67
4.74
b-After extraordinary charges of $2,327,000 for the latest year and $1,168,000 for 1986.


E-II Holdings Gets Offer From American Brands
LEAD: Worried about a possible takeover by E-II Holdings Inc., American Brands Inc. turned the tables last night and announced plans to spend nearly $2.4 billion to buy E-II, the Chicago-based offshoot of the Beatrice Companies.


Art People
LEAD:  Modern Modern


PLAZA COMMERCE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLAZA COMMERCE BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,218,000
923,000
Per share
.22
.18
Yr net inc
4,020,000
3,075,000
Per share
.73
.64
The per share earnings for 1987 and 1986 are adjusted for the 10 percent common stock dividend paid by the company in December 1987.


Film: 'Promised Land'
LEAD: ''PROMISED LAND'' tries hard to win you over but finally wears you down with its sincerity.
Michael Hoffman, the writer and director, seems determined to inject freshness into the old story about graduating seniors who discover life is hard after high school, but he transforms his best ideas and images into bludgeons.


METROBANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*METROBANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,173,000
189,000
Per share
.30
.05
Yr net inc
3,400,000
2,800,000
Per share
1.00
.89


CRIME STUDY FINDS RECENT DRUG USE IN MOST ARRESTED
LEAD: Half to three-fourths of the men arrested for serious crimes in 12 major cities tested positive for the recent use of illicit drugs, according to a study by the Justice Department.


DIC Deal Opposed
LEAD: Two shareholders of Computer Memories Inc. said they opposed a proposed merger between the computer equipment maker and the cartoon maker DIC Animation City Inc. of Burbank, Calif., and intended to seek control of the company.
Paul and Natalie Koether of Far Hills, N.J., said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing that they had increased their interest to 9.7 percent of Computer Memories, based in Chatsworth, Calif.


Genscher Urges Arms Cuts
LEAD: Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany urged President Reagan today to press for the elimination of chemical weapons and for reductions of battlefield nuclear weapons in Europe.
Administration officials said that cuts in battlefield nuclear weapons with ranges under 300 miles was a low arms-control priority and that there would be little progress on the chemical arms issue until the United States can verify the destruction of the weapons.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article from Washington on Wednesday cited a study showing that Pat Robertson's Presidential campaign paid more than $4 million to three consulting companies in the first nine months of 1987.
The article noted that under Federal law, consultants in turn can hire subcontractors in a way that lets a candidate avoid disclosing precisely how the money is spent.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Clang and Grind


Results Plus
LEAD:  N.B.A.


G.M. and China In Auto Deal
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation announced today that it had reached an agreement to sell a used engine assembly line to the China National Automotive Industry Corporation and to cooperate with various Chinese agencies in developing an auto industry in that country.


ADAMS-RUSSELL ELECTRONICS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADAMS-RUSSELL ELECTRONICS (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Sales
35,431,000
30,185,000
Net inc
988,000
1,776,000
Share earns
.16
.28
Shares outst
6,013,000
6,393,000


GOOD SIGNS FOR TV INDEPENDENTS
LEAD: In the last 18 months the nation's independent television stations have learned firsthand how tough life can become when the number of players in an industry grows too quickly.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: UPDATE on Dominick's, the pint-size, wildly popular Italian institution on Arthur Avenue in the Bronx: At 3 P.M. on a Sunday, customers were lined up in the foyer while inside gleeful diners, packed tighter than a jar of Italian peppers, were digging into oval platters of homemade lasagna, stuffed shells, ziti in red sauce, bresaola, pork chops and more.


BEARINGS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEARINGS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
132,280,000
118,318,000
Net inc
b1,585,000
1,319,000
Share earns
.45
.34
6mo sales
257,209,000
235,504,000
Net inc
b6,538,000
3,349,000
Share earns
1.81
.84


Vietnam's Party Chief Says Capitalism Can Be a Guide
LEAD: The head of the Vietnamese Communist Party suggested today that Vietnam, ''a backward agricultural country,'' could learn lessons from the capitalist world.


Advisory Panel For Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange plans to form a pension manager advisory committee after its next board meeting, which is scheduled for Feb. 4.


MCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
59,500,000
b9,000,000
Per share
-
.14
Yr net loss
258,300,000
82,100,000
b-Net income  The latest quarter loss included a provision for possible loan losses of $52.6 million, which brought the provision for loan losses for the year to $282.6 million.


Australian Open; Wilander Accurate To Upset Edberg
LEAD: Mats Wilander outlasted Stefan Edberg, the defending champion, 6-0, 6-7, 6-3, 3-6, 6-1, today to move into the men's final of the Australian Open Tennis Championships.


Haitian Rock Band
LEAD: Tabou Combo, a Haitian rock band, will perform tonight at Sounds of Brazil, 204 Varick Street (243-4940).
Sets begin at 11 P.M., 1 and 2:30 A.M.; there is a $15 cover and a two-drink minimum.


Sports People; Million-Vote Players
LEAD: When the fans' ballots had been counted, Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls and Earvin (Magic) Johnson of the Los Angeles Lakers were the only players to draw more than a million votes each for the National Basketball Association's All-Star Game Feb. 7 in Chicago.
Larry Bird of the Boston Celtics was named a starter for the ninth time in nine seasons.


Piano, Bass and Drums
LEAD: Jill McManus, a pianist, will lead a trio - with Ray Drummond on bass and Eliot Zigmund on drums - Sunday at 7 P.M. at St.
Peter's Church, 619 Lexington Avenue, at 54th Street in the Citicorp Center (935-2200).
Admission is $7.


AMERICAN PRESIDENT COS reports earnings for 14wks to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN PRESIDENT COS (NYSE)
14wks to Dec 25
1987
1986
Revenue
518,300,000
438,900,000
Net inc
14,200,000
10,100,000
Share earns
.59
.40
52wk rev
1,860,000,000
1,470,000,000
Net inc
79,100,000
18,000,000
Share earns
3.42
.70


SIMON AND JACKSON GAIN IN NEW YORK
LEAD: About 3,500 New York Democrats have indicated they intend to run in the April 19 Presidential primary for 222 positions as members of delegations to the Democratic National Convention from Congressional Districts.
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson and Senator Paul Simon of Illinois filed the most names of candidates, according to a


CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
7,205,000
8,128,000
Per share
.50
.56
Yr net inc
26,047,000
30,471,000
Per share
1.80
2.10


Reinhardt's Hot Club Back in Style
LEAD: FEW jazz legends have a more exotic mystique than Django Reinhardt, the Belgian-born gypsy guitarist and banjo player who led the legendary Parisian ensemble known as the Quintet of the Hot Club of France in the 1930's and 40's.
By the time of his death in 1953, at age 43, he was recognized as one of the three or four most important jazz guitarists in history, and his influence has reverberated from Les Paul, one of his great champions in the 1940's, to Willie Nelson in his nostalgic mode.


Hartford Director Plans O'Neill Play in Moscow
LEAD: Mark Lamos, artistic director of the Hartford Stage Company, will direct Eugene O'Neill's ''Desire Under the Elms'' in Russian at the Pushkin Theater in Moscow.
Rehearsals begin there on Feb. 18.


G.E.'s Profits Increase 18.9%
LEAD: The General Electric Company reported yesterday that its earnings climbed 18.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 1987, buoyed by stronger performances from nearly all of its core businesses.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
AMR Corp., Dallas/Fort Worth Airport, a holding company, named Donald J. Carty senior vice president and chief financial officer, filling a vacancy left by John C. Pope, who left earlier this year to become executive vice president and chief financial officer of Allegis Corp., parent of United Airlines.


IRWIN UNION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IRWIN UNION CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,302,119
296,651
Per share
2.10
.48
Yr net inc
2,247,047
3,158,265
Per share
3.62
5.10


Market Place; Profit Jump Seen In Paper Industry
LEAD: BUSINESS is booming in the paper industry, particularly for commodity-oriented companies that produce such basic materials as linerboard, bleached board and market pulp.
Price increases are going into effect; production is humming at capacity levels, and the weak dollar has made American producers exceedingly competitive in world markets.


Dow Registers Tiny Gain, to 1,879.31
LEAD: Stock prices edged slightly higher yesterday in moderate trading.


Sports of The Times; Holmes, Ali and Tyson
LEAD: EVER since Larry Holmes agreed to take $3.1 million for taking Mike Tyson's punches, he has been a different Larry Holmes, a hermit in a stylish sweatsuit.
He trained in his own quiet gym in Easton, Pa.
He hardly talked to sportswriters.
He didn't arrive in Atlantic City until 48 hours before he will try to dethrone Tyson as the world heavyweight champion.


Justice Falls Under a Totalitarian Shadow Put the Stock Markets On a Cash-Only Basis
LEAD: To the Editor:


AMCORE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMCORE FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,532,000
1,446,000
Per share
.49
.28
Yr net inc
6,827,000
5,446,000
Per share
1.32
1.14


J. Walter McClancy, Judge, 94
LEAD: J. Walter McClancy, a retired judge of the Family Court of New York City, died Jan. 15 at his home in Woodside, Queens.
He was 94 years old.


City Ballet: 'Jewels'
LEAD: LOOKED at one way, George Balanchine's ''Jewels'' could be called a three-act abstract ballet in which each act evokes qualities associated with a particular jewel.
Looked at another way, it could be argued that ''Jewels'' is not a three-act ballet at all, but three one-act ballets, for each of its parts is self-contained and has music by a different composer.


BANKAMERICA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKAMERICA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
60,000,000
82,000,000
Per share
.27
.44
Shares outst
162,530,000
154,797,000
Yr net loss
955,000,000
518,000,000
Shares outst
157,925,000
154,277,000


Corrections
LEAD: The restaurant review in Weekend last Friday gave an incorrect cross street for David K's.
The restaurant, at 1115 Third Avenue, is near 65th Street.


PACIFIC LIGHTING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFIC LIGHTING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,394,027,000
1,300,267,000
Net inc
b56,780,000
c36,127,000
Share earns
.93
.59
Yr rev
5,339,310,000
5,323,757,000
Net inc
b251,168,000
c83,605,000
Share earns
4.14
1.34


Manhattan Youth Shot in Subway Station
LEAD: A 17-year-old Manhattan youth was shot in the leg yesterday afternoon during a dispute at the 34th Street station of the Seventh Avenue IRT subway line, a Transit Authority police spokesman said.


NCR Chairman Gives Up His Position as President
LEAD: The NCR Corporation said yesterday that it had named Gilbert P. Williamson president.


Chauncey Eskridge, Lawyer for Dr. King
LEAD: Chauncey Eskridge, once legal counsel for the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. and who was with Dr.
King when he was assassinated, died Monday.
Mr.
Eskridge was 70 years old.


OUTBOARD MARINE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OUTBOARD MARINE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
259,680,000
168,742,000
Net inc
b7,932,000
c5,839,000
Share earns
.41
-
b-After a gain of $4,113,000 from the effect of an accounting change.
c-Net loss and after a tax credit of $1,007,000.


WLIB: Radio 'Heartbeat' of Black Life
LEAD: When the Rev.
Al Sharpton was being besieged Wednesday by reporters for his response to a newspaper report that he was a Federal informant, he chose to speak first to a reporter from WLIB, a New York City radio station that he calls ''the heartbeat of the black community.''


Record British Spending
LEAD: British consumers spent a record amount in 1987, estimated at $:170.7 billion, or about $305.5 billion, but the boom slowed almost to a halt after the stock market collapse, the Government said today.
The Central Statistical Office said that in the last quarter of 1987, consumers spent only a little more than they did in the third quarter, despite the Christmas shopping.


EMHART CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMHART CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
665,000,000
584,000,000
Net inc
26,000,000
20,000,000
Share earns
.42
.32
Yr rev
2,454,000,000
2,094,000,000
Net inc
b106,000,000
c10,000,000
Share earns
1.70
-


500 March in Brooklyn Over Racism
LEAD: In a carefully choreographed and controlled rally that highlighted the growing frustration among blacks over drugs, almost 500 demonstrators marched yesterday along a circuitous route through some of Brooklyn's most drug- and crime-ridden communties.


TV Weekend; 'Murder of Mary Phagan,' on NBC
LEAD: PERHAPS it's just coincidence, but the subject of anti-Semitism is unusally prominent in television movies these days.
A couple of weeks ago, ABC's ''Evil in Clear River'' dealt with the fact-based story of a neo-Nazi in rural Canada.
On Home Box Office, ''Into the Homeland'' takes a look at white-supremacist hate groups in this country.


Bad Finishes Sink Islanders and Devils; Red Wings 3, Devils 2
LEAD: Sam St.
Laurent, a goaltender the Devils traded to Detroit two summers ago, helped drop New Jersey below the .500 mark for the first time this season as he made 27 saves tonight for the Red Wings, who beat the Devils, 3-2.
Brent Ashton's second goal of the game, scored 3 minutes 37 seconds into overtime, was the difference.


Music: Joshua Ensemble
LEAD: WHATEVER idea was behind the Joshua Chamber Orchestra's evening at Alice Tully Hall on Wednesday, it was not a good one.
Two young performers from South Korea - Jeong Soo Kim and Hae Kyung Lee - were its stars, and the music was Prokofiev's ''Classical'' Symphony, Mozart's ''Jupiter'' and the Beethoven Piano Concerto in G.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JANUARY 22, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-13


The Jazz Passengers
LEAD: Roy Nathanson on saxophones and Curtis Fowlkes on trombone will lead the Jazz Passengers, tonight at 9 and 11 at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street (219-3055).
Admission is $6.


AMDAHL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMDAHL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
482,935,000
336,777,000
Net inc
bc53,002,000
b29,594,000
Share earns
1.00
.60
Shares outst
53,143,000
49,143,000
Yr rev
1,505,160,000
966,349,000
Net inc
b145,985,000
b41,829,000
Share earns
2.82
.86


Murdoch Moves to Avoid Shutting Post
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch moved on several fronts yesterday to avoid shutting down The New York Post in six weeks.


BECTON DICKINSON &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BECTON DICKINSON &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
397,379,000
349,556,000
Net inc
b24,460,000
b31,840,000
Share earns
.60
.75
b-Includes tax credits of $619,000 for the latest quarter and $1,388,000 for the year-earlier period.


Washington Talk: Pentagon; Cost-Cutter's Target: Secret Bomber
LEAD: There are a few people left at the Pentagon who still think it's possible to turn the place around on a dime, or preferably a nickel.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JANUARY 22, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Folk Music Benefit
LEAD: Bill Milford, a folk singer and guitarist, is to give a concert on Sunday at 7 P.M. at St.
Clement's Church, 423 West 46th Street.
Proceeds will benefit Clinton Community Services, a group that provides assistance to the homeless.
Admission is $5.
Information: 864-0510.


BUSINESSLAND INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUSINESSLAND INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
232,763,000
165,038,000
Net inc
5,054,000
2,659,000
Share earns
.20
.11
Shares outst
27,353,000
24,683,000
6mo sales
412,799,000
294,695,000
Net inc
8,717,000
3,680,000
Share earns
.35
.15
Shares outst
27,485,000
24,602,000


Garbage Barge Sinks, Spilling Tons of Trash Into the East River
LEAD: A cleanup crew laying a containment barrier to trap floating debris from a city-owned barge that sank as workers tried to secure it to a pier in the Bronx.
The barge, carrying 703 tons of garbage, was one of four being pushed by a tugboat when it was struck by an empty tanker near Rikers Island.
Authorities said they expected to recover most of the trash.


FIRST ALABAMA BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST ALABAMA BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
14,462,000
13,967,000
Per share
.44
.42
Yr net inc
56,206,000
54,911,000
Per share
1.71
1.67


Stage: 'Sally,' by Kern
LEAD: JEROME KERN'S ''Sally'' was a major musical success in 1920, running for almost two seasons and establishing Marilyn Miller as one of Broadway's most popular stars.
In contrast to other Kern hits, the show is seldom revived.
For that reason, one might suppose that the New Amsterdam Theater Company is performing a service by presenting the quasi-concert version that began a five-performance engagement Wednesday at the New Academy Theater.


Surge in AIDS Cases in Congo Could Be an Omen for africa
LEAD: Jean-Marie Matsiona, a 38-year-old oil tanker navigator, is one of the one million Africans expected to die of AIDS in the next decade.


Jazz Premiere Highlight Of Festival At Juilliard
LEAD: The New York premiere of a work by the jazz saxophonist Ornette Coleman is to highlight the first concert in the Juilliard School's ''Focus!
Festival'' that begins tonight at 8 at Alice Tully Hall.
Five concerts in all are to be presented during the festival, which is free and runs through next Friday.


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK OF PUERTO RICO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK OF PUERTO RICO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,273,147
b4,602,675
Per share
.59
-
Yr net inc
11,123,572
b11,806,242
Per share
2.02
-
b-Included an extraordinary gain on pension plan liquidation of $2.1 million.


A JAZZ-DANCE AMALGAM
LEAD: AMERICAN dance has been formed and shaped by choreographers who broke from tradition to follow their own lights.
In the case of Danny Buraczeski, whose jazz dance pieces are being performed by his company this weekend at the Joyce Theater, the break was twofold.
Mr.
Buraczeski, who began dancing as a Japanese major at Bucknell University and went on to Broadway show-dancing, chose to devote himself to choreographing jazz dance, a form that has seldom been taken so seriously.


Fordham Tops Iona With 28 by Parrotta
LEAD: In recent years, whenever Fordham and Iona clashed on the basketball court, two things were virtually guaranteed: an intense atmosphere and an Iona victory.


Jimmy Witherspoon
LEAD: Jimmy Witherspoon, the blues and jazz singer, will perform tonight through Sunday at Carlos 1, 432 Avenue of the Americas, at Ninth Street (982-3260).
Sets begin at 9 and 11 P.M., plus a 12:30 A.M. set tonight and tomorrow; there is a $10 cover with a $7 minimum at tables and a one-drink minimum at the bar.


A Year From Now, What Will Reagan's Legacy Be?; 'Greed Isn't Enough'
LEAD: Almost a year hence, President Reagan will leave the White House.


BANK OF BOSTON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF BOSTON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
41,400,000
b64,800,000
Per share
-
1.03
Yr net inc
19,700,000
232,800,000
Per share
.10
3.69
b-Net income  The latest quarter loss included a pre-tax charge of $200 million related to Third World debt.


Science Talent Search Names 13 Winners From New York
LEAD: Thirteen students from 6 New York City high schools were among the 40 national winners of this year's Westinghouse Science Talent Search announced yesterday.


Righetti Ready to Sign
LEAD: The Yankees and Dave Righetti have resolved their dispute over the timing of a physical examination, and Righetti is expected to sign his three-year, $4.3 million agreement in New York today, Bill Goodstein, the pitcher's agent, said yesterday.


Pan Am, in a Union Deal, Ousts 2 Top Executives
LEAD: Bending to the pressure of a union coalition, the board of the Pan Am Corporation forced the resignation yesterday of its top two officers and three subordinates.


Horse Racing Notebook; Lottery Could Help Tracks
LEAD: Officials from Florida's horse racing tracks held a news conference in Miami today under the funereal banner of ''Florida Horse Racing Is Facing Extinction.'' There is no such imminent threat, but the officials effectively painted a gloomy picture.


Good Trade Neighbors
LEAD: To the Editor:


Film: 'The Grand Highway,' Childhood in France
LEAD: IN ''The Grand Highway,'' the French director Jean-Loup Hubert gives us his romance with childhood innocence.
The autobiographical story, set in a pretty peasant village in 1958, has the makings of a nostalgic glance backward, full of easy charm and sentimentality.
Louis, an adorable 9-year-old, is sent from Paris to the country for three weeks while his mother has a baby.


AFFILIATED BANKSHARES OF COLOADO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AFFILIATED BANKSHARES OF COLOADO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,747,879
91,025
Per share
.15
-
Yr net inc
8,559,563
7,089,451
Per share
.75
.65


Drug Therapy for Professor
LEAD: A municipal judge ordered Glenn C. Loury, a professor at John F. Kennedy School of Government of Harvard University who was charged with posssessing drugs, to continue a program for drug treatment that he has entered since his arrest and to pay $115 in court costs and other fines.


For Refugees, a Semblance of Normalcy
LEAD: Palestinian children returning from their school at the Shatila refugee district yesterday in south Beirut.
On Wednesday, detachments of the Shiite Amal militia and the Sixth Brigade of the Lebanese Army ended a three-year siege.
Syrian troops moved in immediately afterward. (Agence France-Presse)


KRAFT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KRAFT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,581,500,000
2,023,700,000
Net inc
b97,600,000
c119,000,000
Share earns
.74
.87
Yr sales
9,875,700,000
7,779,600,000
Net inc
b489,400,000
c413,200,000
Share earns
3.60
2.93


27 Pit Bulls Are Put to Death
LEAD: Twenty-seven pit bull dogs seized in a raid last month were put to death today after a judge ruled they had been trained for violence.
The dogs belonged to a couple who face cocaine-trafficking charges.
Judge William Green said he issued the order because ''these animals have been bred and trained for no purpose other than to viciously attack other animals.


Film: 'Family,' From Scola
LEAD: ''THE FAMILY,'' directed by the usually perceptive Ettore Scola, recalls 80 years in the life of a large, loving upper-middle-class Roman family.
It begins in 1906 at the baptism of the baby Carlo, lying in the arms of his patrician grandfather (Vittorio Gassman) as the members of the family gather for a group photograph.


CARDINAL FEDERAL SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARDINAL FEDERAL SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
289,000
b256,000
Per share
.24
-
b-Included $110,000 of after-tax investment gains.
The year-ago per share earnings are not available; the bank converted to a stock savings institution in March.


Trial Set for John Zaccaro Jr.
LEAD: April 4 has been set as the trial date in the drug case of John Zaccaro Jr., who will be be tried in Vermont District Court in Middlebury.
Mr.
Zaccaro, the son of former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro of New York, was a Middlebury College senior when he was arrested in February 1986 on charges of cocaine possession and sale.


Dance: Ice Capades, Torvill and Dean
LEAD: THE way to remember Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean, ice dancers par excellence, is in lonely splendor on a huge and empty rink.
Seemingly isolated from the thousands watching them, they skate together wrapped, so to speak, in a rapt encounter.


Washington Talk: Urban Affairs; Mayors See Captial's Gold Dust Turn to Sawdust
LEAD: America's mayors used to view the nation's capital as El Dorado, a city of gold, the source of limitless financing, where no urban problem was too remote or complex to escape the attention of dedicated professionals.


MARTIN MARIETTA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARTIN MARIETTA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,340,143,000
1,268,478,000
Net inc
59,384,000
43,389,000
Share earns
1.12
.79
Yr sales
5,165,124,000
4,752,537,000
Net inc
230,650,000
202,344,000
Share earns
4.25
3.67


Nofziger Letter Hinted at Reagan Help for Wedtech
LEAD: Lyn Nofziger suggested that President Reagan could help persuade the Army to give the Wedtech Corporation a military contract, according to a letter produced Thursday at the former Presidential aide's trial.


A Good Quick Fix for Downtown Traffic
LEAD: Governors Cuomo and Kean have agreed to set aside $50 million in Port Authority funds to relieve traffic congestion.
New Jersey has decided to spend its $25 million on a new busway feeding into the Lincoln Tunnel.
That suggests a sound use for New York's share: a downtown terminal for express buses from New


WHIRLPOOL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WHIRLPOOL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
972,100,000
942,900,000
Net inc
40,400,000
c42,200,000
Share earns
.59
.57
Shares outst
69,300,000
74,100,000
Yr sales
4,179,000,000
4,008,700,000
Net inc
b191,900,000
199,700,000
Share earns
2.68
2.70
Shares outst
71,700,000
73,800,000


L. Maxell Peace, Bank Executive, 35
LEAD: L. Maxell Peace, a former vice president at Marine Midland Bank, died of complications of AIDS Monday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 35 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Super Bowl XXII; Broncos Recall Turning Point
LEAD: For winners, there's always a turning point: the moment when a team sees itself, hitches up its pants, stops losing and gets to the Super Bowl.


In Rare Session, 9 U.S. Judges Convene to Review Mob Trial
LEAD: Nine Federal judges from the Eastern District of New York were convened yesterday in a highly unusual formal court proceeding to decide issues arising from a mob trial now under way.


PYRAMID TECHNOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PYRAMID TECHNOLOGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Revenue
17,528,000
12,043,000
Net inc
b1,820,000
c353,000
Share earns
.22
-
b-Includes a pretax gain of $305,000 from a favorable foreign currency transaction due to the decline of the U.S.





Washington Talk: Briefing; Congress vs. Pentagon
LEAD: The epic struggle between Congress and the Pentagon over the appointment of an Assistant Secretary for Special Operations and Low Intensity Conflict continues.


PNEUMATIC SCALE CORP reports earnings for Year to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PNEUMATIC SCALE CORP (AMEX)
Year to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
33,141,312
30,937,216
Net inc
b226,994
b335,074
Share earns
.42
.60
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $68,507 and $139,400 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Argentines Report Infection by Altered Farm Virus
LEAD: Officials in Argentina have concluded that several farm workers there inadvertently became infected with a genetically altered virus that had been injectd into cattle as an experimental vaccine against rabies, according to press accounts and an American critic of the biotechnology industry.


The Editorial Notebook; The Two Roerichs Are One
LEAD: The gulf between politics and art can be seen in the gulf between two Nicholas Roerichs.
Devotees of dance know one as the creator of the costumes and sets for the 1913 premiere of Stravinsky's ''Rite of Spring.'' A revival of that production was the sensation of the Joffrey Ballet's recent season, prompting a fine show at the Lincoln Center Library of Performing


A Winter Event in Buffalo Is Canceled for a Lack of Winter
LEAD: Dominic Adams walking past a mound of snow that had been trucked to a downtown park.
The imported snow was to have been used in a snow-sculpture contest scheduled to be part of the city's winter festival this weekend.
However, officials decided to cancel event because of unusually warm weather. (NYT/Joe


HOFFMANN RAISES STERLING BID TO $81
LEAD: Sweetening its hostile takeover bid for the second time in three days, Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company, the big Swiss drug producer, offered yesterday to pay $81 a share, or nearly $4.7 billion in cash, for Sterling Drug Inc., manufacturers of Bayer aspirin.


Economic Scene; The Big U.S. Shift Toward Exports
LEAD: THE steep drop in housing starts in December reawakened worries that the economy might be sliding into a recession and sent the stock market plunging.


TEXACO CANADA LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXACO CANADA LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
716,000,000
624,000,000
Net inc
89,000,000
75,000,000
Share earns
.74
.62
Yr rev
2,770,000,000
2,810,000,000
Net inc
320,000,000
283,000,000
Share earns
2.65
2.34


Film: 'Missing In Action III'
LEAD: LAST week, the Living Dead returned.
Again.
This week, it's Chuck Norris.
As Col.
Jim Braddock, in ''Braddock: Missing in Action III,'' he returns to Vietnam to find his Vietnamese wife, who was unfortunately left behind at the fall of Saigon.
On his prior trips, he rescued American prisoners of war; this time, he brings out a batch of


Dollar Steadies as Buying By U.S. and Japan Is Hinted
LEAD: The dollar firmed in foreign-exchange trading yesterday, bolstered by hints that the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan had bought dollars.


WELDOTRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WELDOTRON CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,022,000
8,429,000
Net loss
135,000
604,000
9mo sales
27,161,000
26,938,000
Net loss
104,000
b177,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income and includes a gain of $142,000 from pension termination.


Poetry of Britten's 'War Requiem' Inspires Dutoit
LEAD: Belying its title, Benjamin Britten's ''War Requiem'' is a cry for peace, and in this season of glasnost, Central American peace efforts and promises of troop withdrawals from Afghanistan, its choice for tomorrow's Carnegie Hall concert by the Orchestre Symphonique de Montreal seems very logical.
But Charles


Konstantin A. Andrianov, Olympics Delegate, 78
LEAD: Konstantin A. Andrianov, a member of the International Olympic Committee and the first Soviet representative to that organization, has died, the Soviet press agency Tass reported today.
He was 78 years old.


Duchess Sees British Import on Broadway
LEAD: Sarah Campbell presenting flowers to the Duchess of York last night before benefit performance of ''Phantom of the Opera.'' Looking on was Bernard Jacobs of Shubert Organization.
Page B2. (NYT/Angel Franco)


Airbus Would Like U.S. Assembly Line
LEAD: Airbus Industrie, the European airplane consortium that captured nearly 25 percent of the world market for new jetliners in 1986, wants to set up an assembly line in the United States with an American aerospace company as a partner, a senior executive said.
Adam Brown, vice president for group strategy, said in an interview that Airbus needed to increase production because of a backlog of orders for its A320 jet, which has been bought by several United


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Toronto, said it was negotiating to form a partnership with the Canadian investment dealer Wood Gundy Inc.


Uncovered Short Sales Down 23.1% on Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short and not yet covered in the month ended Jan. 15 decreased from the previous month by 114.2 million shares, or 23.1 percent, to 380.4 million.


MCKESSON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCKESSON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,930,500,000
1,765,200,000
Net inc
28,100,000
b28,400,000
Share earns
.66
.65
9mo rev
5,399,900,000
4,959,200,000
Net inc
72,500,000
b73,500,000
Share earns
1.70
1.70


Our Towns; Thin Mint Alert: Super Girl Scout Is On the Loose
LEAD: It's that time of year in the suburbs.
The doorbell rings.
You answer.
At first you don't see anything.
You look down and it's a lovely little girl with a million-dollar smile and maybe a ponytail to break your heart.
You smile back - relieved it's not a religious pamphleteer, or even worse, a guy selling meat out of his trunk - and already you have made the fatal mistake.


ARCO Settlement
LEAD: ARCO said it had agreed to pay $481,000 to buy back from its retired chairman the deep-drilling rights on 15 West Texas properties.
The move settles two shareholders' suits, filed in 1986, that contended Robert O. Anderson had received a special deal.
In the out-of-court settlement approved Jan. 11, ARCO agreed to buy the rights from Mr.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Bells, Bells, Bells
LEAD: Come Feb. 15, if you happen to be in in the upper northwest corner of the capital, you might sense a ringing in your head around noontime, but it won't be from anything you ate or drank.


Sports People; Incentive for Olympics
LEAD: To get the best track and field performances for the Seoul Olympics, The Athletics Congress, the national governing body of the sport in the United States, announced that it would provide $400,000 to 26 Olympic hopefuls.


Sports People; Snyder Defended
LEAD: In a coincidenal twist to the Jimmy (the Greek) Snyder flap, Gene Upshaw, executive director of the National Football League Players Association, said yesterday in Washington that he was supposed to have dinner with Snyder last Friday night.
Earlier in the day, Snyder made his remarks on blacks in sports that led to his dismissal last Saturday by C


NBC News Explores Problem of the Homeless
LEAD: Who are the homeless, and why are they on the streets? ''Home Street Home,'' an NBC News special, on Channel 4 at 10 o'clock tonight, offers a number of answers.
That turns out to be its weakness.
Drugs, alcohol, mental illness, post-Vietnam stress, a failing farm economy and an uncaring society are rolled up as one.


Rep. Latta Is Retiring
LEAD: United States Representative Delbert L. Latta said today that he would not run for re-election this November.
Mr.
Latta, a 67-year-old Republican who has been in the House since 1959 and who is a key White House ally on budget matters, said he was retiring to spend more time with his family.


Super Bowl XXII; Monk Works Out With the Redskins
LEAD: Art Monk practiced with the Washington Redskins today for the first time in more than six weeks as the team began preparations for the Super Bowl.


A Family Quarrel on Wall St.: Kidder vs. G.E.
LEAD: Nothing irritates investment bankers more than losing a shot at the huge fees they can earn for arranging major corporate deals.
And when the investment banking firm's own parent is the one that snatches the deal away, tempers can flare.


Ameritech Profit Up 16.1%
LEAD: The Ameritech Corporation said yesterday that net income in the fourth quarter of 1987 rose 16.1 percent, to $322.2 million, compared with $277.4 million in the 1986 fourth quarter.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  THE FAMILY ROMANCE OF THE IMPOSTOR-POET THOMAS CHATTERTON.
By Louise J. Kaplan. 301 pages.


GENERAL ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,030,000,000
12,270,000,000
Net inc
868,000,000
730,000,000
Share earns
.96
.80
Yr sales
39,310,000,000
35,210,000,000
Net inc
2,915,000,000
2,494,000,000
Share earns
3.20
2.73


U.S. Warns Japan Not to Kill Whales in Antarctic
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has warned Japan that it would be breaking an international agreement if a Japanese whaling fleet now approaching the Antarctic fisheries killed even a single whale, Government officials said today.


Witness Says Levin Was 'Physically Assertive'
LEAD: A witness described Jennifer Levin yesterday as a ''physically assertive'' young woman who ''went after what she wanted,'' and who went to an Upper East Side bar on Aug. 25, 1986, determined to spend the night with Robert E. Chambers Jr.
The witness, Larissa Thomson, a 20-year-old college student testifying in Mr.


BOISE CASCADE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOISE CASCADE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
971,700,000
940,580,000
Net inc
57,220,000
31,970,000
Share earns
1.20
.62
Yr rev
3,829,120,000
3,735,820,000
Net inc
182,990,000
101,540,000
Share earns
3.70
1.99


ALUMINUM CO OF AMERICA (ALCOA)(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALUMINUM CO OF AMERICA (ALCOA)(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,466,100,000
1,166,400,000
Net inc
132,800,000
c165,300,000
Share earns
1.50
1.93
Yr sales
5,549,300,000
4,696,200,000
Net inc
b200,100,000
c254,100,000
Share earns
2.25
2.96
Shares outst
87,671,196
84,899,601


VISTA CHEMICAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VISTA CHEMICAL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
178,824,000
130,227,000
Net inc
b31,295,000
8,610,000
Share earns
1.73
.48
Shares outst
18,080,000
16,893,000
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $5,817,000.


Case of Unwritten Decorum
LEAD: It was mid-December, at two simultaneous Christmas parties in a downtown hotel here, when a chance meeting between a lawyer and a justice of the Virginia Supreme Court became a historic encounter that has just been resolved in a special hearing.


PRIME COMPUTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIME COMPUTER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
266,971,000
230,934,000
Net inc
21,299,000
14,156,000
Share earns
.44
.29
Yr rev
960,913,000
860,173,000
Net inc
64,768,000
46,925,000
Share earns
1.32
.97


Yevgeny Mravinsky, Conductor, 81
LEAD: Yevgeny Mravinsky, who became the chief conductor of the Leningrad Philharmonic Orchestra in 1938, has died of a heart attack, the Soviet press agency Tass reported.
He was 81 years old.
Tass did not say when or where he died.


MIDLANTIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDLANTIC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
37,600,000
24,700,000
Per share
.97
.67
Yr net inc
161,500,000
147,500,000
Per share
4.23
3.92
The latest quarter net included a special provision for loan losses of $25 million.


AIR PRODUCTS &amp; CHEMICALS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIR PRODUCTS &amp; CHEMICALS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
585,920,000
533,745,000
Net inc
55,352,000
b35,375,000
Share earns
1.01
.62
b-Includes special charges of $3.5 million related to a salaried staff reduction program.


Art: Works by 7 Women, 'Aspects of Abstraction'
LEAD: IN ''Aspects of Abstraction,'' the Holly Solomon Gallery has put together the kind of exhibition with which it has not been identified.
All seven artists are women.
All are abstract painters for whom touch and process are important.
All the paintings have an unapologetic, take-it-or-leave-it quality.


Haiti Jails Opposition Leader on Disorder Charge
LEAD: A prominent opposition leader was charged today with inciting public disorder and taken back to jail after a hearing in the Palace of Justice, his lawyer said.


United Nations Journal; A Time to Slumber and a Time to Dream of Glory
LEAD: From September to December every year, the United Nations stages its annual extravaganza at Turtle Bay.


Profit at Recovering BankAmerica
LEAD: In a further sign that it is recovering from several years of losses caused mainly by bad loans, the BankAmerica Corporation today reported a fourth-quarter net income of $60 million, or 27 cents a share.


Soviet Looks at Lenin's Executed Comrades
LEAD: Soviet publications and films used the anniversary of Lenin's death today to call attention to his contemporaries who were executed under Stalin.


Grumman Appoints New Chief Executive
LEAD: The Grumman Corporation yesterday named John O'Brien, the aerospace company's president since mid-1986, to be its new chief executive.


Big Drop in Jobs in New York City Is Predicted by Its Budget Director
LEAD: New York City will lose more jobs this year - 39,000 - than at any time since its fiscal crisis in the mid-1970's, the city's Budget Director said in a report yesterday.


From Dispute, Aid to Neediest
LEAD: A threatening encounter at the Port Authority Bus Terminal inspired Lorraine Shanley to contribute to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


States on the Frozen Plains Offer Some Candidates a Toehold
LEAD: Two weeks after the caucuses in Iowa, a week after the New Hampshire primary, the spotlight in the Presidential campaign will switch to Minnesota and South Dakota.
Or will it?


Curious Come For a Glimpse Of Dutchess
LEAD: With a winning smile and a friendly wave to her admirers, the Duchess of York, known to most of the world as ''Fergie,'' made her first official visit to New York City last night for a fund-raising performance of Andrew Lloyd Weber's ''The Phantom of the Opera'' benefitting three charities.


Dining Out Guide: Chinese
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
AUNTIE YUAN, 1191A First Avenue, near 65th Street (744-4040) -


CENTRAL JERSEY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL JERSEY BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,524,000
4,018,000
Per share
1.07
.95
Yr net inc
15,904,000
14,357,000
Per share
3.76
3.39


U.S. Wants To Resume Japan Talks
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has decided to resume promptly negotiations with Japan on opening Japanese public works contracts to foreign construction companies.


Notre Dame Wins, 67-48
LEAD: Gary Voce of Notre Dame trying to drive around Penn's Hassan Duncombe in the first half last night at South Bend, Ind. (AP)


When Students Take On Real-World Problems
LEAD: To the Editor:


In an $880,000 School Program, $300,000 for Custodians
LEAD: A special after-school program run by the Board of Education and designed to relieveracial friction among students spent one-third of its budget on fees for school custodians who kept the school buildings open at night.


THE LAW: At the Bar
LEAD: Most people, accepting the maxim that everyone is entitled to his day in court, are willing to forgive a lawyer for his clients.
Attorneys spend legal lifetimes representing drug dealers or Mafia kingpins or murderers, and remain invulnerable.
Not so Jack T. Litman, the man representing Robert Chambers in the death of Jennifer Levin in Central


2 Concerts at St. Ann's Offer Bach Cantatas
LEAD: The first of two concerts featuring Bach cantatas is to be presented by an ensemble with choir and soloists on Sunday at 4 P.M. at the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity, 157 Montague Street, Brooklyn Heights.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 414 money market mutual funds increased $2.05 billion, to $273.55 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 113 institutional funds increased $616.8 million, to $79.76 billion.
Assets of the 206 general purpose funds were up $79.2 million, to $81.09 billion.


G.S.A. Said to Try to Deflect Inquiry
LEAD: The General Services Administration is attempting to shift the focus of an investigation into possible corruption in the awarding of telephone contracts to the BellSouth Corporation and away from top agency officials, three people familiar with the inquiry said last night.


Dairy Board Awards 2 Jobs
LEAD: After less than a year's absence the National Dairy Board is returning its Children's Milk Promotion program to McCann-Erickson in San Francisco, one of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Billings are about $6.5 million.


AHMANSON, H F &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AHMANSON, H F &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b45,180,000
80,294,000
Share earns
.46
.82
Yr net inc
bc200,153,000
303,604,000
Share earns
2.03
3.22
Shares outst
98,478,745
94,407,572
b-Includes after-tax gains on loan sales of $16 million and $83.8 million for the quarter and year, respectively.


Q and A, and Q's, on Judge Kennedy
LEAD: Judge Anthony Kennedy sailed through his Supreme Court confirmation hearings last month in almost total triumph, and he deserved it.
He described his views of the Constitution with insight as well as diplomacy, and he demonstrated an outlook and temperament that reassured people with much different politics.


Leland C. Wyman, Authority on Navajos, 90
LEAD: Leland C. Wyman, a scholar in physiology and anthropology who was a leading authority on the culture and history of the Navajo Indians, died here Jan. 13.
He was 90 years old and lived in Brookline, Mass.


U.S. Assails Ethiopia Rebel Raid
LEAD: The cargo of a commercial convoy attacked by rebel forces in northern Ethiopia last week included 176 tons of relief food being sent to drought victims, the State Department said today.


Robert Todd, 90, Dies; World War I Ace Pilot
LEAD: Robert Todd, one of the few remaining World War I flying aces, died Wednesday of pneumonia at the Veterans Administration Center in La Jolla, hospital officials said.
He was 90 years old.


At the Movies
LEAD:  Drop in the Bucket


Simon Sees Gephardt at Heels and Toughens Pitch
LEAD: Senator Paul Simon's campaign is trying to adjust to a new political landscape in Iowa, refining and toughening his message as it tries to turn back a stiff challenge from Richard A. Gephardt.


Art: Cy Twombly At Pace
LEAD: SINCE the beginning of the 1980's, several aspects of Cy Twombly's long career have been reviewed in small gallery exhibitions in New York.
It is almost as if, in lieu of the large retrospective his work deserves in this country, a sequential version is being patched together over time.
The most recent addition, now on view at the Pace


MIDWEST FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDWEST FINANCIAL GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,301,181
3,166,040
Per share
.95
.70
Yr net inc
15,526,183
11,611,613
Per share
3.43
2.56


Film: Godard in His Mafia 'King Lear'
LEAD: ''Keep thou the napkin and go boast of this.'' - ''Henry VI, Part III.''


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


US BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*US BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
19,071,000
12,832,000
Per share
.46
.31
Yr net inc
b108,472,000
75,998,000
Per share
2.65
1.87
b-After a $7,695,000 loss from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting for loan fees and a $16,529,000 gain from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting for income taxes.


B.A.T. Seeks Talks
LEAD: A day after its $4.2 billion takeover bid for the insurer Farmers Group Inc. was rejected, a subsidiary of Britain-based B.A.T.
Industries indicated it might be willing to raise its offer.
Henry Frigon, president of Batus Inc., based in Louisville, Ky., urged Farmers' directors to meet with B.A.T.


Super Bowl XXII; Backing for Patriots Renewed
LEAD: Emergency financing for the New England Patriots from the rest of the National Football League will continue, and so will negotiations to sell the franchise.


Cary Elliott Odell, Movie Art Director, 77
LEAD: Cary Elliott Odell, a movie art director and three-time Academy Award nominee, died of cancer Tuesday.
He was 77 years old.


Volunteers Exchange
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sports People; Van Breda Kolff Ailing
LEAD: Butch van Breda Kolff, Lafayette's basketball coach, suffered chest pains during a game last night against Drexel and was admitted to Easton (Pa.) Hospital.
He was listed in stable condition after undergoing tests, according to a nursing supervisor who declined to provide further information.


Mother Sentenced in Suicide
LEAD: A woman convicted in connection with her daughter's suicide was sentenced today to a year in jail, two years of community control and three years of probation.


Israel's New Violent Tactic Takes Toll on Both Sides
LEAD: The Israeli Army was reported today to be sending teams of psychologists to units in the Gaza Strip because it was worried about the effect of a new crackdown on the mental health of the troops.


Village Invites Change But Finds It Scary, Too
LEAD: When Dee Staffa moved here three years ago, she formed a close bond with St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church, both as a parishioner and as a volunteer religion teacher.


The Mayor and Joyce Brown
LEAD: Joyce Brown no longer lives on a patch of sidewalk on Second Avenue.
She no longer shivers in the cold, huddled silently sometimes, shouting at passers-by other times, befouled and alone in her misery.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


CHAMPION INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAMPION INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,200,000,000
1,100,000,000
Net inc
82,000,000
65,000,000
Share earns
.85
.67
Yr sales
4,600,000,000
4,400,000,000
Net inc
b382,000,000
201,000,000
Share earns
3.92
2.05


FIRST WISCONSIN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST WISCONSIN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
33,060,000
14,202,000
Per share
1.53
.62
Yr net inc
8,124,000
55,047,000
Per share
.05
2.49
The latest quarter net included a loan loss provision of $19 million for less developed countries and a gain of $35 million from the sale of a building.


Two First Boston Officials Get Wider Management Roles
LEAD: The First Boston Corporation yesterday placed its two biggest stars, Bruce Wasserstein and Joseph R. Perella, at the helm of its corporate finance and real estate finance businesses.


Duke Upsets North Carolina
LEAD: Greg Koubek of Duke blocking a shot by J. R. Reid of North Carolina in the first half last night at Chapel Hill.
Duke won, 70-69.
Page A26.(AP)


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary of Baron Philippe de Rothschild yesterday listed his survivors incompletely.
They are his daughter, Baroness Philippine de Rothschild; three grandchildren and one great-grandchild.


TRINITY INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRINITY INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
185,876,000
118,884,000
Net inc
4,583,000
1,114,000
Share earns
.26
.07
9mo sales
460,838,000
368,113,000
Net inc
6,750,000
5,143,000
Share earns
.39
.32


Forsman Gets 62 With Eagle
LEAD: Just 14 months after he underwent surgery on the rotator cuff in his left shoulder, Dan Forsman shot the best round of his career today as he scrambled for an eagle at the 18th hole to finish with 10-under-par 62 on the 6,478-yard Indian Wells course.


WESTERN DIGITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN DIGITAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
160,676,000
114,408,000
Net inc
b8,333,000
c11,009,000
Share earns
.30
.44
Shares outst
28,048,000
24,969,000
6mo rev
300,773,000
209,072,000
Net inc
b20,496,000
c18,666,000
Share earns
.73
.76


Washington Talk: Briefing; HIC's and NIC's
LEAD: The HIC's, NIC's and SSA's that you might hear being discussed around the World Bank these days sound as though they could be hot new hockey or basketball teams.
Actually, they are clusters of countries.


Weigh-In Is Quick and Quiet
LEAD: Larry Holmes stepped back into the boxing spotlight today, uttering his first word in a while at the weigh-in for his fight Friday night with Mike Tyson.


Reporter's Notebook; Soviet Seems Eager to Quit Afghan War
LEAD: The Soviet and Afghan authorities did their best this week to create the impression that the end game of Moscow's military intervention in Afghanistan has begun.


ZERO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZERO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
34,081,000
30,850,000
Net inc
2,906,000
b3,527,000
Share earns
.23
.28
9mo sales
102,165,000
94,526,000
Net inc
9,278,000
b8,617,000
Share earns
.74
.69


Institutional Nature of Schools Is the Problem
LEAD: To the Editor:


BRANDYWINE SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRANDYWINE SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
380,000
372,000
Per share
.30
-
6mo net inc
747,000
b1,033,000
Per share
.59
-
b-After a tax credit of $93,000.
The company converted to stock ownership in June 1987.


EASTERN BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTERN BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,006,000
1,306,000
Per share
.37
.47


Sugar Traders Are Betting On Long-Term Price Rise
LEAD: Traders in world sugar futures, which are at their highest price level in five years, again rolled forward positions yesterday in expectation of still higher prices later this year and next.


CAMPAIGN TRAIL
LEAD:  Dole Makes Nice


Bad Finishes Sink Islanders and Devils; Whalers 4, Islanders 3
LEAD: They were hardly trounced by Hartford tonight, but the Islanders, who traveled here hoping to smother a two-game losing streak, went away very unhappy.


MULTIBANK FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MULTIBANK FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
7,186,000
5,177,000
Per share
.76
.59
Shares outst
9,503,885
8,728,747
Yr net inc
22,151,000
16,655,000
Per share
2.37
1.95
Shares outst
9,334,516
8,547,627


Hart's Advisers Deny New Charges, but Are Fearful of Impact
LEAD: Gary Hart's political advisers gathered at his campaign headquarters in Denver today to decide how to deal with allegations of financial irregularities that they acknowledge have damaged his renewed Presidential bid.


Immigrant Girl's Dream of Attending West Point Hangs in the Balance
LEAD: On an unpaved street in the poorest section of the city, in a tiny house whose front stoop has long since sunk into the dirt, lives a high school senior who wants to escape to the Military Academy at West Point.


Irston R. Barnes, 83, An Economics Expert
LEAD: Irston Roberts Barnes, an economist and naturalist, died after a short illness Tuesday at his home in Groton, Conn.
He was 83 years old.
Mr.
Barnes was an assistant professor of economics at Yale University from 1932 to 1941 and a professor of political economy at the graduate school of business administration at Columbia


PPG INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PPG INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,327,600,000
1,200,800,000
Net inc
96,500,000
72,900,000
Share earns
.85
.61
Yr sales
5,182,600,000
4,687,100,000
Net inc
377,100,000
316,400,000
Share earns
3.19
2.66


IRWIN MAGNETICS SYS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IRWIN MAGNETICS SYS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
13,849,000
13,712,000
Net inc
856,000
b942,000
Share earns
.16
.21
Shares outst
5,250,080
4,489,710
6mo sales
25,014,000
25,514,000
Net inc
1,330,000
b1,822,000
Share earns
.25
.45
Shares outst
5,330,670
4,068,834


Reagan Delaying Decision On Amount of Contra Aid
LEAD: President Reagan decided today to postpone until the last minute a decision on how much aid he will request for the Nicaraguan rebels, White House officials said.


Loews to Acquire U.S.A. Circuit
LEAD: The Loews Theater Management Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire U.S.A.
Circuit for approximately $165 million in cash.
U.S.A. owns about 325 screens in five states: Massachusetts, New York, Connecticut, Ohio and Kentucky.
The acquisition reflects the move among movie theater concerns to expand their theatrical holdings.


CALFED INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALFED INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
30,400,000
38,100,000
Per share
1.22
1.52
Shares outst
24,889,331
25,020,055
Yr net inc
166,900,000
164,700,000
Per share
6.67
7.04
Shares outst
25,016,951
22,615,053


DATA TRANSLATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA TRANSLATION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
7,739,000
6,472,000
Net inc
702,000
634,000
Share earns
.22
.21
Yr sales
30,858,000
23,069,000
Net inc
2,904,000
2,125,000
Share earns
.91
.70


Little Nell Rescued From Oscar Wilde
LEAD: To the Editor:


BRIGGS &amp; STRATTON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRIGGS &amp; STRATTON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
244,298,000
169,716,000
Net inc
12,618,000
6,141,000
Share earns
.88
.43
6mo sales
389,636,000
307,590,000
Net inc
6,598,000
2,998,000
Share earns
.46
.21


MANUFACTURERS NATIONAL CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANUFACTURERS NATIONAL CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
23,912,000
b17,050,000
Per share
-
1.15
Yr net inc
6,631,000
70,252,000
Per share
.45
4.79
b-Net income  The latest fourth quarter included a $60 million addition to Latin American loan reserve, while the year included a $90 million addition to the same reserve.


Rules Set On Market Makers
LEAD: The board of the National Association of Securities Dealers yesterday approved a series of measures aimed at restoring public confidence in a stock trading system that was nearly paralyzed by customer orders on Oct. 19 and 20.


Nets Now 0-15 On the Road
LEAD: Vern Fleming's 26 points led four Indiana players with more than 20 as the Pacers kept the Nets without a road victory this season with a 113-104 trouncing tonight.


PACIFIC FIRST FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFIC FIRST FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,162,000
c7,882,000
Per share
.55
1.05
Yr net inc
b24,415,000
c23,469,000
Per share
3.25
3.14
b-Includes an extraordinary loss of $3,758,000.


APPLIED SOLAR ENERGY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APPLIED SOLAR ENERGY CO (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,200,000
5,900,000
Net inc
b393,000
c222,000
Share earns
.11
-
Yr sales
30,800,000
17,100,000
Net inc
b1,262,000
c2,727,000
Share earns
.37
-


26 Cruise Ships Fail on Health
LEAD: Only 32 of the 58 cruise ships that regularly sail to the United States met Government health standards, the Centers for Disease Control has reported.


Excerpts From Court Opinion Invalidating the Law on Independent Counsel
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the decision today by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia invalidating the law that creates an independent counsel, or special prosecutor.
Judge Laurence H. Silberman wrote the majority opinion, in which Judge Stephen F. Williams joined; Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg dissented.


Stage: 'K,' a One-Man Play About Kafka
LEAD: Not long after the start of ''K,'' Jan Hartman's play about Franz Kafka, we begin to hear portions of several of Kafka's most famous stories, including ''The Judgment,'' ''Metamorphosis,'' ''The Trial'' and ''In the Penal Colony.'' Graeme Malcolm, who plays the writer, delivers them with considerable power.


JACOBS ENGINEERING GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACOBS ENGINEERING GROUP INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
206,420,000
71,340,000
Net inc
1,653,000
505,000
Share earns
.38
.12
The latest quarter includes the operations of Robert E. McKee Inc., acquired in October 1987.


B.P. Raises Britoil Offer; ARCO to Sell
LEAD: The British Petroleum Company announced tonight that it had increased its multibillion-dollar takeover bid for Britoil P.L.C. and that it would buy ARCO's 24 percent stake in Britoil.


Officer on Horseback Arrests Man in Slaying in Brooklyn
LEAD: A 31-year-old Brooklyn man was arrested last night in the stabbing death of another man during a fight in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.


KAYDON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAYDON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
31,100,000
32,200,000
Net inc
4,500,000
2,800,000
Share earns
.53
.33
Yr sales
133,500,000
112,600,000
Net inc
17,100,000
10,000,000
Share earns
2.00
1.19


NORTHEASTERN MORTGAGE CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHEASTERN MORTGAGE CO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Net loss
3,282,755
b650,959
Share earns
-
.11
Yr net loss
96,352
b3,500,604
Share earns
-
.72
b-Net income


Gain for Texas Instruments
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc., the nation's largest maker of computer chips, said today that it had posted the most profitable quarter in its history.


BANK OF SOUTH CAROLINA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF SOUTH CAROLINA
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
25,951
-
Per share
.05
-
Yr net loss
309,942
-
The latest year period consisted of only 10 months because the bank began operations last February.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Cooper Cos., Palo Alto, Calif., said it had completed the sale of its contact lens care solutions business outside of the U.S. to Swiss-based Ciba-Geigy Ltd., for about $50 million in cash.


Ben-Fleming Sessel, Banker, 86
LEAD: Ben-Fleming Sessel, a retired executive vice president of the Irving Trust Company, a New York commercial bank, died of Alzheimer's disease Jan. 13 in the Hotel Seteais in Sintra, Portugal.
He was 86 years old and lived in New Canaan, Conn.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Horse Racing  First for Matthews Keep: Jose Santos rode Matthews Keep to a four-length victory in the $47,000 Bold Bidder Purse yesterday at Aqueduct.
He went one and one-sixteenth miles in 1:42 3/5.
He earned $28,200 for his owner, Marc Barge, and paid $5.60 for $2 to win. (AP)  Road Rally


ACME-CLEVELAND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACME-CLEVELAND CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
43,527,729
44,749,496
Net loss
1,289,173
b17,743,373
Share earns
-
2.75
b-Net income and includes a tax credit of $8,473,000.


CASA BLANCA INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CASA BLANCA INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,386,000
10,492,000
Net inc
97,000
b2,195,000
Share earns
.02
.47
6mo rev
28,481,000
25,862,000
Net inc
892,000
b2,676,000
Share earns
.19
.57


New Design for Cup Boat
LEAD: A catamaran is being built to defend the America's Cup against New Zealand's challenge, marking the first use of the multihull boat in the cup's 137-year history, the design coordinator for the San Diego Yacht Club effort said today.


MCGILL MANUFACTURING CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCGILL MANUFACTURING CO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
21,336,000
18,219,000
Net inc
387,000
b222,000
Share earns
.27
-
6mo sales
43,633,000
38,720,000
Net inc
743,000
b2,900,000
Share earns
.52
-


Memorial for Rapoport
LEAD: A memorial service for the sculptor Nathan Rapoport will be held Sunday at 11 A.M. at the Park Avenue Synagogue, 50 West 87th Street.
Mr.
Rapoport, who was known for his monuments to the Holocaust, died June 4 at the age of 76.


AMITY BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMITY BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
339,199
260,673
Per share
.35
.26
Shares outst
919,568
917,429
Yr net inc
1,372,777
905,699
Per share
1.41
1.18
Shares outst
918,256
698,339


FIRST FEDL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDL SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
578,000
524,000
Per share
.50
.45
The bank is located in Alabama.


EQUITABLE BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EQUITABLE BANCORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
11,543,000
7,915,000
Per share
.66
.49
Yr net inc
40,675,000
32,682,000
Per share
2.30
1.97
The year-ago periods' results are restated for an accounting change and for subsequent stock dividends.


MEDIA GENERAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDIA GENERAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
183,800,000
168,700,000
Net inc
11,400,000
b8,400,000
Share earns
.40
-
Yr rev
715,300,000
634,600,000
Net inc
42,900,000
17,100,000
Share earns
1.50
.60


SUNRISE MEDICAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNRISE MEDICAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Sales
42,042,000
34,320,000
Net inc
941,000
656,000
Share earns
.21
.16
6mo sales
82,547,000
64,690,000
Net inc
1,728,000
1,300,000
Share earns
.39
.31


DORCHESTER HUGOTON LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DORCHESTER HUGOTON LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
900,000
734,000
Net inc
b156,000
221,000
Share earns
.03
.04
Yr rev
3,790,000
2,576,000
Net inc
1,442,000
845,000
Share earns
.27
.16
b-Includes a non-recurring charge of $220,000 for settlement of a gas-processing contract dispute.


Arabs Recount Severe Beatings By Israel Troops
LEAD: Both hands encased in plaster casts, Imad Omar Abu Rub explained from his bed in the Rafidiya Hospital what happened when the Israeli Army came to the Palestinian village of Qabatiya.


F &amp; M NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*F &amp; M NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,649,019
1,648,012
Per share
.30
.31
Shares outst
5,455,685
5,385,575
Yr net inc
6,900,000
6,000,000
Per share
1.27
1.12


P.L.O. Is Said to Delay on Government in Exile
LEAD: Faced with internal dissent, the Palestine Liberation Organization has put off an immediate decision on whether to set up a government in exile, according to Western and Arab diplomats here.


Reagan Delaying Decision On Amount of Contra Aid; Rebels Back Escrow Idea
LEAD: Nicaraguan rebel leaders said today that they would ask Congress to approve renewed military aid to the contras but to put the money in an escrow account for 30 days while they hold peace talks with the Sandinistas.


GREAT AMERICAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT AMERICAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
19,854,000
14,134,000
Yr net loss
22,276,000
13,845,000


CARPENTER TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARPENTER TECHNOLOGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
125,943,000
110,495,000
Net inc
4,022,000
1,972,000
Share earns
.44
.21
6mo sales
241,183,000
227,864,000
Net inc
6,108,000
3,118,000
Share earns
.67
.34


COLORADO NATIONAL BANKSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLORADO NATIONAL BANKSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
164,000
3,166,000
Yr net inc
502,000
2,156,000
Per share
.05
.20


HORIZON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORIZON INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
61,795,000
63,031,000
Net inc
422,000
1,125,000
Share earns
.10
.27


GATEWAY FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GATEWAY FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,074,000
c1,229,000
Share earns
.55
-
Yr net inc
b5,676,0000
c6,372,000
Share earns
2.90
-
b-Includes tax credits of $265,000 for the quarter and $2,595,000 for the year.


Werner Nachmann, German Jewish Leader, 62
LEAD: Werner Nachmann, president of the Jewish Council of West Germany, died Thursday of a heart attack.
He was 62 years old.
Mr.
Nachmann, who was born here, fled the Nazi regime for France in 1938 and returned to West Germany in 1945 to rebuild his family's business.


CIPHER DATA PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CIPHER DATA PRODUCTS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
45,443,000
45,227,000
Net inc
2,191,000
954,000
Share earns
.15
.07
6mo rev
84,744,000
89,994,000
Net inc
2,877,000
1,981,000
Share earns
.20
.14


Knicks Lose Again On Road by 113-112
LEAD: Kareem Abdul-Jabbar scored 12 of his 24 points in the last five minutes tonight as the Los Angeles Lakers dealt the Knicks their 12th straight road defeat with a 113-112 victory that was marred by a bench-clearing brawl that resulted in the ejection of three players.


Award in Channel Disaster
LEAD: Britain's High Court awarded more than $295,000 in compensation to a family whose father died when a English Channel ferry, the Herald of Free Enterprise, sank off Belgium in March, killing nearly 200 people.


CEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CEM CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,119,000
2,222,000
Net inc
420,000
224,000
Share earns
.19
.10
6mo sales
6,071,000
4,398,000
Net inc
852,000
502,000
Share earns
.38
.23


MARION LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARION LABORATORIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
180,553,000
128,159,000
Net inc
36,027,000
21,909,000
Share earns
.23
.14
6mo sales
351,545,000
253,700,000
Net inc
70,913,000
42,648,000
Share earns
.45
.27


FORT WAYNE NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORT WAYNE NATIONAL CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,678,000
3,183,000
Per share
.58
.50
Yr net inc
13,863,000
12,443,000
Per share
2.20
1.98


For Republicans in New Hampshire, All Eyes Are on Iowa
LEAD: For Republicans here, the New Hampshire Presidential primary begins in Iowa.


Alice Citron Begun, Teacher, 79
LEAD: Alice Citron Begun, a former teacher in New York City and a member of the faction-ridden New York Teachers Union in the 1930's, died of a heart attack Sunday at her home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
She was 79 years old.


M/A/R/C INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*M/A/R/C INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,018,000
15,800,000
Net inc
854,000
597,000
Share earns
.27
.20
9mo rev
43,217,000
41,431,000
Net inc
2,164,000
1,350,000
Share earns
.69
.45


Nets Lose on the Road Again
LEAD: Pacers' Steve Stipanovich taking rebound from Nets' Roy Hinson.
The Nets have dropped 23 straight road games, 15 this season.
Page 48. (AP)


In Taiwan, Rumblings About Another Chiang
LEAD: Some elderly conservative leaders of the Nationalist Party on Taiwan have sought to install Madame Chiang Kai-shek, 90 years old, as chairman of the party after the death of President Chiang Ching-kuo last week.


CLUB MED INC reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLUB MED INC (NYSE)
Year to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
370,443,000
336,950,000
Net inc
17,351,000
18,055,000
Share earns
1.23
1.32
Shares outst
14,141,030
13,729,048


FIRST FEDERAL OF THE CAROLINAS FA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL OF THE CAROLINAS FA
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b665,000
b1,015,000
Per share
.40
.61
Shares outst
1,683,000
815,000
b-Includes pre-tax gains on the sale of loans of $62,000 for the latest first quarter and $369,000 for the year-ago period.


EASTERN GAS &amp; FUEL ASSOCITION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTERN GAS &amp; FUEL ASSOCITION (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
175,490,000
162,041,000
Net inc
b14,295,000
c18,437,000
Share earns
.61
-
Yr rev
677,159,000
673,093,000
Net inc
47,568,000
d19,088,000
Share earns
2.05
.82


COMPUTER ASSOCIATES INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER ASSOCIATES INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
195,075,000
134,401,000
Net inc
42,783,000
b24,850,000
Share earns
.54
.32
Shares outst
84,729,000
78,442,000
9mo rev
502,668,000
313,263,000
Net inc
67,980,000
b35,546,000
Share earns
.87
.45
Shares outst
84,560,000
78,225,000


Brown-Forman
LEAD: The Brown-Forman Corporation, the Louisville, Ky., liquor producer with annual sales of more than $1.4 billion, said that it had agreed to sell its Artcarved jewelry division to the SGI Acquisition Corporation for about $120 million.
Artcarved, which makes diamond engagement rings, wedding rings and scholastic class rings, has operations in New York, Austin, Tex., and P.R.


CIRCLE INCOME SHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CIRCLE INCOME SHARES INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
765,955
816,760
Share earns
.29
.32
6mo net inc
1,568,730
1,648,201
Share earns
.60
.64


UNION PLANTERS CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION PLANTERS CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b6,640,000
cd4,767,000
Per share
-
.66
Yr net inc
b10,686,000
d22,813,000
Per share
1.48
3.52
b-After an extraordinary charge of $1,397,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary gain of $612,000 for the year.


15 Hindus Killed in Punjab
LEAD: Gunmen believed to be Sikh terrorists killed at least 15 Hindus today in the northern state of Punjab, including Khushi Ram Sharma, vice president of the opposition National Peoples Party, the police said.
The killings came two days after the state's top police official, Julio F. Ribeiro, declared that his troops had captured or killed about 300 Sikh terrorists.


Concert: Speculum Musicae Plays Work by Ge Gan-ru
LEAD: Ge Gan-ru, a young Chinese composer now studying in New York, is a name that crops up with increasing regularity, partly because of the Kronos Quartet's championing of his work.
Tuesday night at Merkin Concert Hall, Speculum Musicae devoted the post-intermission portion of its program to the New York premiere of Mr.


LA JOLLA BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LA JOLLA BANCORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
566,000
466,000
Per share
.12
.10
Yr net inc
2,248,000
1,732,000
Per share
.47
.38


MERRY LAND &amp; INVESTMENT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERRY LAND &amp; INVESTMENT CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,125,000
3,084,000
Net inc
1,538,000
586,000
Share earns
.17
.09
Shares outst
9,234,000
6,367,000
Yr rev
25,637,000
16,517,000
Net inc
7,861,000
6,155,000
Share earns
.90
.99
Shares outst
8,737,000
6,264,000


Giants to Move Preseason Camp
LEAD: The Giants signed an agreement today to use the Fairleigh Dickinson campus for preseason training.
The Giants previously trained at Pace University in Pleasantville, N.Y.


HAMMOND CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAMMOND CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,986,967
9,597,120
Net inc
144,227
964,952
Share earns
.07
.45
9mo rev
19,390,610
23,697,773
Net inc
609,925
1,192,514
Share earns
.28
.55


LILLY INDUSTRIAL COATINGS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LILLY INDUSTRIAL COATINGS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
51,159,000
36,108,000
Net inc
2,989,000
2,507,000
Share earns
.34
.28
Yr sales
183,596,000
142,568,000
Net inc
10,272,000
8,515,000
Share earns
1.16
.96


ALZA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALZA CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,268,000
13,721,000
Net inc
4,037,000
b4,668,000
Share earns
.12
.14
Yr rev
70,812,000
57,799,000
Net inc
13,984,000
b16,753,000
Share earns
.42
.52


7 in Baseball Collusion Case Win Free Agency
LEAD: The arbitrator who found that baseball club owners acted in collusion against free agents after the 1985 season yesterday ordered that seven of those players be given a chance to be free agents again.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.48
6.67
6.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.80
5.82
5.41
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.18
6.23
5.37
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.26
8.32
6.90
30-YR.


SEACOAST BANKING CORP OF FLORIDA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEACOAST BANKING CORP OF FLORIDA (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,038,000
944,000
Per share
.44
.40
Yr net inc
4,072,000
3,416,000
Per share
1.74
1.46


Oslo's Insider Inquiry
LEAD: The Oslo stock exchange said today that it would investigate trading in the shares of Norway's biggest bank to be sure no insider dealing occurred before the bank announced a huge loss.
Insider dealing is a criminal offense in Norway.
The exchange said it would check with dealers, including those at Den Norske Creditbank, because its shares fell sharply on Wednesday just before the bank disclosed that it had a 1987 loss of 1.5 billion kroner, or about $236 million.


GLENMORE DISTILLERIES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GLENMORE DISTILLERIES CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,424,718
16,280,607
Net inc
368,135
b2,118,895
Share earns
.15
-
6mo sales
31,595,292
28,331,089
Net loss
244,694
c22,114,366
Share earns
-
9.56


BAIRNCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAIRNCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
164,139,000
154,274,000
Net inc
8,333,000
7,663,000
Share earns
.79
.75
Yr sales
630,228,000
585,530,000
Net inc
28,249,000
22,530,000
Share earns
2.68
2.20


CENTRAL PENNSYLVANIA FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL PENNSYLVANIA FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
829,868
752,405
Per share
.55
.55
Shares outst
1,500,000
1,400,000
9mo net inc
2,529,000
2,366,000
Per share
1.69
1.99
Shares outst
1,500,000
1,200,000


SCHOOLCHILDREN SACRIFICE TO GIVE TO THE NEEDIEST
LEAD: Throughout December, Shirley Bernard's sixth graders at the Tenafly (N.J.) Middle School gave up desserts, candy, gum, baseball cards and other luxuries.
The pocket money saved from these sacrifices amounted to $37, which was sent to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


INLAND STEEL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INLAND STEEL INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
920,598,000
817,581,000
Net inc
b59,469,000
c30,216,000
Share earns
1.67
.95
Yr sales
3,453,184,000
3,173,242,000
Net inc
b144,976,000
c19,264,000
Share earns
4.14
.40


ENDOTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENDOTRONICS INC
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
917,285
4,358,582
Net loss
536,964
b674,887
Share earns
-
.06
Yr rev
5,915,790
13,088,822
Net loss
29,909,148
bc1,333,886
Share earns
-
.13
b-Net loss


GERBER PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GERBER PRODUCTS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
250,500,000
218,800,000
Net inc
9,702,000
c5,804,000
Share earns
.49
.30
9mo sales
767,018,000
655,914,000
Net inc
b24,499,000
c25,403,000
Share earns
1.24
1.25


INTELLICORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTELLICORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,950,000
4,932,000
Net loss
972,000
501,000
6mo rev
10,009,000
9,106,000
Net loss
1,621,000
1,351,000


PICCADILLY CAFETERIAS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PICCADILLY CAFETERIAS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
59,574,000
55,665,000
Net inc
3,387,000
3,680,000
Share earns
.36
.39
6mo sales
116,835,000
110,220,000
Net inc
8,384,000
6,668,000
Share earns
.89
.71


Bridge: Overbidders Are Legendary, Unlike Their Quiet Partners
LEAD: By the nature of things, spendthrifts attract more attention than misers.


Muslims Start Patrol to Fight Crack in Brooklyn
LEAD: Muslims with walkie-talkies and solemn stares, some of them armed off-duty correction and police officers, have started to patrol part of the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn in another initiative to rid the community of crime and drugs, particularly crack.


Back on the Slope
LEAD: Sidelined since Nov. 9 when she suffered a broken leg in a training accident, Tamara McKinney will resume racing at the United States Alpine championships Feb. 4-8, according to a spokesman for the United States Ski Team in Denver.
McKinney, a World Cup skier and the best hope of the United States for an alpine medal at the Winter Olympics in Calgary, will skip the remaining World Cup races in January.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 23, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INCORPORATED reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INCORPORATED (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,534,700,000
1,335,800,000
Net inc
b93,700,000
26,600,000
Share earns
1.05
.30
Shares outst
85,906,000
76,641,000
Yr sales
5,594,500,000
4,974,000,000
Net inc
b308,500,000
c29,100,000
Share earns
3.59
.24
Shares outst
82,023,000
75,942,000


DOMINION RESOURCES INC (VA) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOMINION RESOURCES INC (VA) (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
760,500,000
799,400,000
Net inc
84,300,000
93,800,000
Share earns
.88
1.00
Shares outst
95,800,000
93,700,000
Yr rev
3,251,200,000
3,078,700,000
Net inc
430,500,000
385,200,000
Share earns
4.54
4.16
Shares outst
94,900,000
92,600,000


ALPHA INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALPHA INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,452,000
19,031,000
Net loss
579,000
b178,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
46,535,000
52,866,000
Net loss
561,000
141,000
b-Net income


CANNON EXPRESS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANNON EXPRESS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,134,075
1,262,415
Net inc
233,414
b9,190
Share earns
.14
-
6mo rev
5,799,799
2,765,160
Net inc
477,778
29,165
Share earns
.28
.03
b-Net loss


COMMUNITY BANKSYSTEM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMUNITY BANKSYSTEM INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
867,674
1,231,338
Per share
.34
.48
Yr net inc
4,420,455
4,152,704
Per share
1.72
1.88
Shares outst
2,572,407
2,187,234
The year-ago figures are restated to reflect the acquisition of Nichols National Bank.


GENERAL HOUSEWARES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL HOUSEWARES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
22,743,000
19,744,000
Net inc
403,000
327,000
Share earns
.17
.14
Yr sales
80,062,000
75,208,000
Net inc
1,205,000
966,000
Share earns
.51
.41


HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (TENNESSEE) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (TENNESSEE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,437,000
2,091,000
Share earns
.55
.47
Yr net inc
b8,629,000
6,041,000
Share earns
1.94
1.36
b-Includes a pre-tax write-off of $643,000 of the company's FSLIC secondary reserve.


Origins of the 'Pac-Man' Defense
LEAD: When the Martin Marietta Corporation introduced the ''Pac-Man'' defense in 1982 - boldly bidding for the very company that was trying to take it over - many on Wall Street wondered if the aerospace giant could survive its spectacular and innovative strategy.


ADVEST GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVEST GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
52,502,000
52,079,000
Net loss
724,000
b2,810,000
Share earns
-
.27
b-Net income  The company said earnings were negatively impacted by previously announced losses of Advest Inc., the company's principal broker-dealer subsidiary; as previously reported, the company set asode a $2 million reserve for customer margin accounts and incurred $2.7 million in trading losses in October.


LTU-Boeing Deal
LEAD: A West German charter airline, Lufttransport-Unternehmen, or LTU, ordered three Boeing 767-300 jetliners, for a total of $205 million.
Deliveries to the Dusseldorf-based carrier are to begin in January 1989.
LTU's order was for 767-300ER aircraft, which are a high-gross-weight version of the extended-range airliners that first entered commercial service in October 1986.


ATLANTIC FINANCIAL FEDERAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTIC FINANCIAL FEDERAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b6,788,000
c5,621,000
Per share
1.40
1.13
b-After an extraordinary credit of $4,986,000.
c-After a tax credit of $4,852,000.
The extraordinary credit included a tax credit of $4,467,000 and a gain of $519,000 from debt redemption.


GALLAGHER, ARTHUR J &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GALLAGHER, ARTHUR J &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
32,548,000
30,182,000
Net inc
2,492,000
3,010,000
Share earns
.22
.27
Yr rev
134,656,000
121,347,000
Net inc
16,208,000
15,512,000
Share earns
1.45
1.38


Dollar Is Generally Stable; Gold Prices Decline Slightly
LEAD: The dollar was little changed yesterday as currency traders moved cautiously in the absence of fresh economic data.


BANCTEXAS GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANCTEXAS GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b12,570,000
99,146,000
Yr net loss
b54,351,000
134,353,000
b-After extraordinary gains of $16,000 for the quarter and $22,009,000 for the year.


Shearson Curbs Program Trading
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Brothers said yesterday that it had voluntarily given up practicing a controversial form of trading that some people have tied to the stock market's large swings.


Thomas E. Barker, 33; Wrote Chamber Works
LEAD: Thomas E. Barker, an award-winning composer of chamber works, died Jan. 12 at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 33 years old.
Mr.
Barker was being treated for bone cancer, according to his sister-in-law, Laura Smith.


FIRST MUTUAL SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST MUTUAL SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
323,929
263,181
Per share
.33
.27
Yr net inc
1,376,819
1,014,405
Per share
1.41
1.05


DATAMARINE INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATAMARINE INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
4,544,969
3,598,818
Net inc
183,308
163,663
Share earns
.17
.15


THETFORD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THETFORD CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
9,265,000
7,507,000
Net inc
456,000
229,000
Share earns
.30
.15


NATIONAL COMMERCE BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL COMMERCE BANCORPORATION
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,528,000
3,631,000
Per share
.50
.41
Yr net inc
17,533,000
14,060,000
Per share
1.96
1.59
The per share figures reflect a 10 percent stock dividend paid Jan.


How Public Art Is Changing New York City
LEAD: It's a show of art, a show of architecture and a show of urban design.
Most of all, it's a show that vividly portrays and explains the role New York City is playing in what many people say is the largest nationwide public art movement since the Works Progress Administration of the 1930's: ''Percent for Art'' programs in cities, counties and states throughout the United States.


Graf Holds Off Evert to Capture Final
LEAD: Steffi Graf captured the Australian Open women's singles title today, defeating Chris Evert, 6-1, 7-6.


REGIONAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REGIONAL BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,065,000
1,916,000
Per share
.30
.51
Yr net inc
6,491,000
5,890,000
Per share
1.77
-
The year-ago periods' earnings included $762,000 from a non-recurring dividend from the Mutual Savings Central Fund.


ARCHIVE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARCHIVE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Sales
26,522,000
19,033,000
Net inc
2,328,000
607,000
Share earns
.18
.06


Avian Flurry Greets a Walker
LEAD: A group of birds scattered yesterday at the approach of a pedestrian at Carl Schurz Park on the Upper East Side. (The New York Times/Ray Stubblebine)


For Holmes, the Bell Tolls
LEAD: HAROLD CONRAD, the former boxing press agent, ran into an old friend, Mickey Duff, the British boxing promoter, in Trump Plaza here the day before last night's heavyweight title fight.


KAUFMAN &amp; BROAD HOME CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAUFMAN &amp; BROAD HOME CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
262,027,000
207,831,000
Net inc
15,713,000
15,207,000
Share earns
.59
.56
Yr rev
671,855,000
491,208,000
Net inc
35,531,000
27,649,000
Share earns
1.32
1.08
Shares outst
27,001,000
25,667,000


NEW ENGLAND BUSINESS SERVCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW ENGLAND BUSINESS SERVCES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Sales
53,091,000
45,290,000
Net inc
5,657,000
4,314,000
Share earns
.33
.25
6mo sales
105,400,000
90,177,000
Net inc
11,429,000
8,539,000
Share earns
.66
.50


HOUSING FOR HOMELESS FUELS DEBATE IN WESTCHESTER TOWN
LEAD: Last week Town Supervisor Tony Veteran called a news conference to announce his support for the construction here of 108 apartments for homeless families - part of a program to build Westchester County's first housing for the homeless.


FIRST INTERSTATE OF IOWA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST INTERSTATE OF IOWA (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,268,000
b8,786,000
Per share
.28
-
Yr net inc
5,091,000
b11,721,000
Per share
.43
-
b-Net loss


Recital: Ilton Wjuniski, Harpsichordist
LEAD: Ilton Wjuniski, Brazilian-born but Paris-trained and -based, made his New York debut Wednesday night at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and offered as appealing a harpsichord recital as this harpsichord enthusiast has ever heard.


Nonproliferation in Asia Is a Global Issue
LEAD: To the Editor:


SANTA FE SOUTHERN PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANTA FE SOUTHERN PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,490,200,000
1,420,500,000
Net inc
b113,700,000
c261,800,000
Share earns
.72
-
Yr rev
5,448,400,000
5,314,400,000
Net inc
b373,500,000
c137,900,000
Share earns
2.37
-


INTERGRAPH CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERGRAPH CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
195,322,000
157,383,000
Net inc
24,730,000
19,520,000
Share earns
.44
.35
Yr rev
641,083,000
605,737,000
Net inc
69,876,000
70,362,000
Share earns
1.23
1.26


Nofziger Stock Payment Revealed
LEAD: A former official of the Wedtech Corporation testified today that the company turned over 1 percent of its stock to the lobbying concern of Lyn Nofziger, the former White House aide, after Mr.
Nofziger's partner told them they were ''more or less like a welfare case.''


NATIONAL CITY BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL CITY BANCORPORATION
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,179,000
988,000
Per share
.33
.28
Yr net inc
3,409,000
2,704,000
Per share
.95
.76
The latest periods refected loan loss provision of $1,335,000 for the quarter and $4,682,000 for the year, compared with year-ago periods of $864,000 for the quarter and $6,772,000 for the year.


Hearing Is Held On Medical Test In Murder Case
LEAD: A research scientist testified at a court hearing yesterday that Jennifer Levin's denim jacket had a stain on the inside front left pocket that contained a ''high level'' of an enzyme found in saliva.


Jack Lemmon Returns To Television Drama
LEAD: By ELEANOR BLAU


No Further Contra Aid
LEAD: Following a meeting of the five Central American presidents in Costa Rica last week, the Central American battlefield has shifted north momentarily, to Washington, where the fight is under way over aid to the contras.


BOLT BERANEK &amp; NEWMAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOLT BERANEK &amp; NEWMAN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
78,089,000
53,653,000
Net inc
4,332,000
3,364,000
Share earns
.23
.19
Shares outst
18,761,475
17,776,090
6mo sales
148,289,000
102,284,000
Net inc
8,459,000
6,541,000
Share earns
.45
.37
Shares outst
18,798,010
17,738,492


Philharmonic: Haydn's 'Seasons'
LEAD: In terms of sheer creative struggle, ''The Seasons'' is perhaps even more a triumph than Haydn's other great oratorio, ''The Creation.'' The latter was built on a text in which he believed; ''The Seasons'' - with its romantic depictions of peasant labors, loves, hardships and celebrations -was more or less forced on the composer, who remarked to a friend that though he was an industrious man, it seemed strange to be setting industry to music.


Detectives Arrest a Fugitive Diamond Thief
LEAD: A multilingual con man who disappeared from a midtown Manhattan office with $3 million in diamonds two years ago emerged yesterday when investigators caught him trying to repeat the scheme and arrested him, the police said.


INTERCHANGE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERCHANGE FINANCIAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
663,840
566,192
Per share
.33
.32
Yr net inc
2,412,454
1,824,732
Per share
1.34
1.06
The latest year per share earnings adjusted for a 3-for-2 stock split distributed Jan.


AUDIOVOX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUDIOVOX CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
78,311,000
58,217,000
Net inc
1,697,000
900,000
Share earns
.19
.14
Shares outst
9,007,242
6,807,242
Yr sales
276,986,000
203,832,000
Net inc
6,469,000
3,453,000
Share earns
.82
.51
Shares outst
7,934,300
6,807,242


John E. Bassett Sr., Furniture Manufacturer, 86
LEAD: John E. Bassett Sr., retired chairman of Bassett Furniture Industries Inc., died Thursday.
He was 86 years old.


PIPER JAFFRAY &amp; HOPWOOD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIPER JAFFRAY &amp; HOPWOOD (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
40,991,823
44,067,394
Net inc
194,414
6,642,897
Share earns
.05
.69


Coping: With the New Tax Laws
LEAD: With the sweeping revisions in the Federal tax law, record numbers of Americans are expected to seek help this year in filling out their income-tax returns.


Michele Cantarella, Anti-Facist Leader, 88
LEAD: Michele Cantarella, a professor emeritus at Smith College and a leader of anti-Fascist Italian exiles during the rise of Mussolini, died of kidney failure Monday at Bay State Medical Center in Springfield, Mass.
He was 88 years old and lived in Leeds, Mass.


HERITAGE FINANCIAL SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HERITAGE FINANCIAL SERVICES INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,486,000
1,183,000
Per share
.45
.37
Yr net inc
6,137,000
3,923,000
Per share
1.83
1.64
Shares outst
3,313,132
3,097,795


MENTOR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MENTOR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,062,000
7,918,000
Net inc
2,021,000
1,141,000
Share earns
.18
.10
9mo sales
29,235,000
23,877,000
Net inc
4,872,000
3,197,000
Share earns
.43
.28


Super Bowl XXII; Redskins Studying Each Move Closely
LEAD: A sign of the times: ''MTV needs 15 guys to talk about their favorite music and to intro videos Friday after practice.''


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, JANUARY 23, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 3-6, 28  Israelis are beating Palestinians under a new army policy.
The policy is designed to end the wave of protests in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip that began in early December.
Page 1  A curfew on an Arab neighborhood in East Jerusalem was imposed by the Israeli police, who invoked emergency powers in the city for the first time since East Jerusalem was annexed in 1967.


LEGG MASON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEGG MASON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
55,402,000
34,708,000
Net inc
236,000
2,309,000
Share earns
.03
.34
9mo rev
163,985,000
101,010,000
Net inc
5,686,000
7,275,000
Share earns
.66
1.06


The Game Of the Name
LEAD: When they first started running, I could remember only four or five of the official Presidential candidates.
Nowadays I can often remember as many as 11.
Considering that there are 13, 11 is probably good enough to put me in the 99th percentile, memory-wise.


FIRST INTERSTATE CORP OF WISONSIN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST INTERSTATE CORP OF WISONSIN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,445,000
c1,547,000
Per share
.28
.14
Yr net inc
b11,892,000
c11,811,000
Per share
1.38
1.50
Shares outst
8,128,681
7,373,788
b-After a tax credit of $458,000.


FIRST COMMERCIAL CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST COMMERCIAL CORP (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b11,495,000
8,397,000
Per share
2.76
2.02
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $1,750,000 from the settlement of a suit by a First Commercial banking unit against its bonding company.


DATA ARCHITECTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA ARCHITECTS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,517,000
7,812,000
Net inc
b751,000
537,000
Share earns
.24
.21
Shares outst
3,14,784
2,537,652
Yr rev
34,743,000
27,085,000
Net inc
b2,330,000
1,635,000
Share earns
.81
.64
Shares outst
2,865,973
2,564,040


AMERICAN BRANDS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN BRANDS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,477,600,000
1,871,859,000
Net inc
b156,129,000
c117,356,000
Share earns
1.38
1.03
Yr sales
9,152,906,000
7,252,906,000
Net inc
b552,679,000
c365,304,000
Share earns
4.60
3.18


HOWARD BEACH DEFENDANT GIVEN MAXIMUM TERM OF 10 TO 30 YEARS
LEAD: One of three white teen-agers convicted of manslaughter and assault for attacking three black men in Howard Beach, Queens, was sentenced yesterday to the maximum of 10 to 30 years in prison by a judge who denounced him for the ''hatred'' and ''savageness'' shown by his actions.


FLEET-NORSTAR FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLEET-NORSTAR FINANCIAL GROUP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,420,000
64,848,000
Per share
.01
.67
Yr net inc
185,054,000
241,574,000
Per share
1.85
2.50
The results are pro-forma because of the merger between Fleet Financial and Norstar Bancorp, which took effect Jan.


SEAMEN'S CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEAMEN'S CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,477,000
4,094,000
Per share
.21
.25
Yr net inc
18,330,000
26,757,000
Per share
1.10
1.89


FIRST AMER SAVINGS BANK-OHIO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMER SAVINGS BANK-OHIO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
870,000
1,500,000
Per share
.40
-
6mo net inc
1,600,000
2,500,000
Per share
.75
-
The bank went public in July 1987.


COMSHARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMSHARE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,680,900
17,389,200
Net inc
1,431,400
656,000
Share earns
.53
.24
6mo rev
39,010,900
34,197,100
Net inc
485,100
1,158,500
Share earns
.17
.42


Stephen King, Author, Dons a Publisher's Hat
LEAD: Stephen King has a novel coming out next week, but this one will appear under the name Don Robertson.
That is not another pseudonym like ''Richard Bachman,'' under which Mr.
King wrote several books.
Don Robertson is the actual author of the novel, and Mr.
King is its publisher.


XIDEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XIDEX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
152,605,000
146,326,000
Net inc
3,237,000
3,261,000
Share earns
.08
.07
Shares outst
40,938,000
44,469,000
6mo sales
308,266,000
281,426,000
Net inc
8,689,000
13,050,000
Share earns
.21
.29
Shares outst
41,459,000
44,991,000


LSI LOGIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LSI LOGIC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
78,258,000
54,504,000
Net inc
b5,780,000
1,714,000
Share earns
.14
.04
Yr rev
262,131,000
194,335,000
Net inc
b11,340,000
3,855,000
Share earns
.28
.10


Rushing to N.F.L.?
LEAD: Craig Heyward, Pitt's all-America tailback, has not attended classes this semester and has told friends he wants to play in the National Football League next season, according to published reports.
Heyward, second in the nation in rushing last season with 1,655 yards, flew to Washington last night to meet with an agent, Bruce Allen, The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported in today's editions.


National Symphony To Record Soviet Works
LEAD: The National Symphony Orchestra announced today that it had signed an agreement with Erato Records to make seven recordings over the next three years, beginning with works by two Soviet composers who were associates of the orchestra's music director, Mstislav Rostropovich.


WASHINGTON BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON BANCORPORATION
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b20,083,000
bc2,577,000
Per share
-
.52
Yr net loss
b25,606,000
bc8,179,000
Per share
-
1.64
b-Reflects a special provision of $30.6 million for the latest quarter which brought the total loan loss provision for the current year to $46 million, compared with $2,206,000 and $5,830,000 for the year-ago quarter and year, respectively.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


NBC May Sell Radio Group
LEAD: The National Broadcasting Company said yesterday that it was negotiating to sell its radio group, which will consist of seven stations after the previously announced sale of its Chicago station.


CLOROX COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLOROX COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
243,444,000
214,573,000
Net inc
21,631,000
16,028,000
Share earns
.40
.30
6mo sales
545,921,000
488,416,000
Net inc
60,994,000
44,983,000
Share earns
1.13
.84


DAISY SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAISY SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
28,048,000
25,380,000
Net inc
1,013,000
b1,293,000
Share earns
.06
-
b-Net loss


U.S. Research Satellite Needs Lift Back Home
LEAD: The grounding of the space shuttle fleet has left a bus-size research satellite with almost four years of data in some jeopardy.


UNION CARBIDE CANADA LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION CARBIDE CANADA LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
117,203,000
90,655,000
Net loss
b89,000
cd18,040,000
Share earns
-
.85
Yr sales
421,212,000
359,035,000
Net inc
b31,490,000
d47,497,000
Share earns
1.49
2.17


WESTPORT BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTPORT BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
649,000
610,000
Per share
.31
.29
Yr net inc
2,323,000
3,064,000
Per share
1.11
1.48


Copeland Blues Band
LEAD: Johnny Copeland will lead his blues band tonight at Tramps, 125 East 15th Street (777-5077), with sets at 9:30 and midnight.
There is a $10 cover and a two-drink minimum.


Amid Debate, Boston's Convention Center Opens
LEAD: There are 17,000 more dentists here this weekend than the city's mouths require.
The Yankee Dental Congress is staging its 13th annual convention and the gathering is among the most important ever for Boston.


Stampfel at Speakeasy
LEAD: Peter Stampfel, a singer and songwriter, is to perform tonight at Speakeasy, 107 Macdougal Street (598-9670).
Sets are at 8:30 and 11 P.M.; admission is $7 with a two-drink minimum.


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK-TENESSEE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK-TENESSEE
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
251,000
516,000
6mo net inc
498,000
781,000
The bank converted to stock ownership last month.
The year-ago second quarter included gains of $291,000 from the sale of mortgage-backed certificates and bank-owned properties.


More Women in State Posts
LEAD: A survey made public here Thursday by the National Women's Political Caucus shows that the number of women appointed across the nation to state cabinet-level posts has increased to 130 in 1986 from 70 in 1981.


WAXMAN INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WAXMAN INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
38,100,000
27,042,000
Net inc
1,524,000
788,000
Share earns
.24
.13
6mo sales
72,882,000
53,722,000
Net inc
2,824,000
1,550,000
Share earns
.45
.25


L.I. Woman Convicted In Killing of Husband
LEAD: A Long Island woman was convicted of manslaughter today but acquitted of murder charges after she was accused of hiring three men to kill her husband, who she asserted had sexually abused her.


BALLARD MEDICAL PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALLARD MEDICAL PRODUCTS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,225,103
1,882,430
Net inc
689,059
252,895
Share earns
.19
.07


Fine Print and the Cost of Car Rental
LEAD: Renting a car in the New York City area for a week costs $49 to $145 above the advertised or quoted price, according to a review of the car-rental industry by the Better Business Bureau.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption in The Living Section on Jan. 6 about Les Chefs de France, a restaurant at Epcot Center in Orlando, Fla., misidentified the Disney character greeting visitors.
It was Pluto.


SPORTS PEOPLE;
LEAD: The Philadelphia Phillies signed Lance Parrish to a one-year contract yesterday for $1 million plus incentives.
Last spring, Parrish signed an $800,000 contract that provided an additional $200,000 if he played the first half of the season without going on the disabled list.
The Phillies guarded against a recurrence of a back problem that caused Parrish to miss the last half of the 1986 season with the Detroit Tigers.


McDonnell to Pay U.S. In Overcharging Case
LEAD: A division of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation yesterday agreed to pay the Goverment $1.6 million to settle allegations that it overcharged on Air Force contracts.


INSILCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSILCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
152,601,000
146,861,000
Net loss
b40,694,000
c8,060,000
Share earns
-
.38
Yr sales
639,747,000
662,474,000
Net loss
b10,679,000
c33,345,000
Share earns
-
1.58


A Walk in the Woods
LEAD:  SUMMIT. By D. M. Thomas. 160 pages.


Pianist's Trio
LEAD: Barry Harris, a pianist, will lead a trio tonight at the Angry Squire, 216 Seventh Avenue, at 23d Street (242-9066).
Sets begin at 10 and 11:30 P.M. and 12:30 A.M.; there is an $8 cover and a two-drink minimum.


PCS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PCS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
20,004,000
14,586,000
Net inc
2,793,000
1,979,000
Share earns
.19
.14
9mo rev
54,939,000
38,107,000
Net inc
7,832,000
5,151,000
Share earns
.54
.36


Newspaper Merger Planned
LEAD: The Columbia Record, the afternoon newspaper in South Carolina's capital city, will cease publication after the April 1 issue and its staff will be merged into its sister morning newspaper, The State, the newspapers' publisher announced Wednesday.
The publisher, Ben R. Morris, told the newspapers' 650 employees that no layoffs were planned.


MODINE MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MODINE MANUFACTURING CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
98,600,000
89,700,000
Net inc
6,000,000
4,900,000
Share earns
.40
.33
9mo sales
292,100,000
257,400,000
Net inc
19,900,000
16,200,000
Share earns
1.33
1.07


LSI LIGHTING SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LSI LIGHTING SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,432,000
9,384,000
Net inc
914,000
858,000
Share earns
.31
.28
6mo sales
19,484,000
16,213,000
Net inc
1,673,000
1,241,000
Share earns
.56
.41


Mayors Vow to Renew Drive for Aid
LEAD: Robert M. Isaac, the Republican Mayor of Colorado Springs, puts it with as much asperity as anyone.


DIAMOND CRYSTAL SALT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAMOND CRYSTAL SALT CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
35,829,000
31,748,000
Net inc
209,000
619,000
Share earns
.08
.25
9mo sales
98,026,000
86,937,000
Net inc
1,557,000
938,000
Share earns
.61
.37


Your Money; Mortgage Offers Way to Cut Rate
LEAD: GEORGIA COX, an office manager of a trucking company in Woodstock, Ga., took out a new type of mortgage last month that will allow her to take advantage of falling interest rates quickly and inexpensively.


MISSION WEST PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MISSION WEST PROPERTIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,446,610
10,282,515
Net inc
911,380
b4,343,850
Share earns
.59
2.80
Yr rev
7,884,615
15,386,960
Net inc
723,641
4,859,996
Share earns
.47
3.80


LOMAS &amp; NETTLETON FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOMAS &amp; NETTLETON FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b15,277,000
16,767,000
Per share
.37
.58
Shares outst
39,021,000
28,969,000
6mo net inc
b18,769,000
31,316,000
Per share
.43
1.08
Shares outst
39,677,000
29,130,000


HALIFAX ENGINEERING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HALIFAX ENGINEERING INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,790,000
6,377,000
Net inc
b279,000
95,000
Share earns
.23
.08
9mo rev
23,130,000
19,363,000
Net inc
b703,000
c216,000
Share earns
.59
-


BANDAG INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANDAG INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
119,709,000
100,400,000
Net inc
16,937,000
15,215,000
Share earns
1.10
.90
Yr sales
423,029,000
370,396,000
Net inc
62,553,000
48,464,000
Share earns
3.90
2.85
Shares outst
16,040,400
17,015,000


U.S. COURT UPSETS LAW ON APPOINTING KEY PROSECUTORS
LEAD: A divided Federal appeals court today struck down the law authorizing judges to appoint the special prosecutors who investigate suspected crimes by high-level officials of the executive branch.


ALPINE INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALPINE INTERNATIONAL CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
883,000
907,000
Net loss
14,000
d435,000
6mo rev
1,750,000
1,741,000
Net inc
b352,000
cd663,000
Share earns
.11
-
b-Includes a gain of $649,000 on the disposal of discontinued operations and a loss of $204,000 from discontinued operations.


ROCHESTER COMMUNITY SAVNGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCHESTER COMMUNITY SAVNGS BANK
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,192,000
c5,688,000
Per share
.52
.41
Yr net inc
b26,976,000
c19,408,000
Per share
1.95
-
b-After tax credits of $3,687,000 for the quarter and $11,651,000 for the year.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''What should be obvious to everyone here is that racism breeds hatred and hatred breeds racism and it is a vicious circle.'' - Justice Thomas A. Demakos of State Supreme Court in Queens.  [ 1:4. ]


Prices Set for Eagle Cars
LEAD: The Chrysler Motors Corporation has announced firm prices for its Premier four-door sedans, the first models to be sold under the No. 3 auto maker's new Eagle nameplate.
The manufacturer's suggested retail price for the 1988 Eagle Premier LX is $12,274, and for the Eagle Premier ES, $14,079, Chrysler said.


MAGNA GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAGNA GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,104,000
4,208,000
Share earns
.46
.47
Yr net inc
15,199,000
14,412,000
Share earns
1.70
1.62


FIRST OHIO BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST OHIO BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,863,751
1,494,600
Per share
.64
.33
Yr net inc
8,029,488
10,161,662
Per share
1.78
2.25
The latest year net reflects a provision of $7,885,000 for credit losses.


Firefighters Strike in Dublin
LEAD: Firefighters went on strike here today for the first time in 20 years, and 300 soldiers trained for firefighting and emergency services handled emergency calls.
Talks between the 800 firefighters and the city broke down early today.
The dispute is over staffing, training and what the firefighters' unions say are breaches of wage agreements.


Devils Frustrated And Penalized, 7-3
LEAD: The Devils fell behind by two goals in the first period tonight and never recovered, losing their fourth consecutive game, a 7-3 decision to the Buffalo Sabres.


DELTAK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELTAK CORP
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,153,741
5,011,994
Net inc
66,403
159,227
Share earns
.06
.14
Yr rev
26,387,842
19,434,568
Net inc
992,431
301,445
Share earns
.87
.27


Center Is Suspended
LEAD: The Minnesota North Stars' Dennis Maruk, a center, was suspended by the National Hockey League for cross-checking Wendel Clark of Toronto in the forehead on Jan. 13.
A cut on Clark's forehead required seven stitches.
Maruk, who has 6 goals and 3 assists in 15 games, will begin his suspension tonight with Minnesota's game at Hartford.


Parker W. Fennelly Dies at 96; Was Actor in Radio, Film and TV
LEAD: Parker W. Fennelly, who played Titus Moody, the cryptic New Englander, on the Fred Allen radio program in the 1940's and early 1950's, and who was later the television spokesman for Pepperidge Farm products, died yesterday at his home in Peekskill, N.Y.
He was 96 years old.
Mr.
Fennelly, who retired at 85, was known especially for his portrayals of old Yankee characters, whose accent he knew well; he was born and raised in Northeast Harbor on Mount Desert Island,


Contain AIDS by Treating Addicts
LEAD: New York City has long had to cope with crimes committed by its 200,000 heroin addicts to finance drug purchases.
Now the addicts pose a new danger.
By sharing the needles they use to shoot up, they spread AIDS.
Mayor Koch deserves praise for recognizing the need to increase the city's drug treatment capacity.


Unwanted Lottery Ticket Brings Holder $10 Million
LEAD: A bartender won $10 million in the Illinois lottery after hitting the wrong button on a computer and dispensing $50 worth of unwanted tickets that she had to buy herself.


CYBERTEK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CYBERTEK CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,604,000
6,517,000
Net inc
283,000
456,000
Share earns
.08
.13
9mo rev
16,623,000
19,468,000
Net inc
180,000
1,481,000
Share earns
.05
.41


Rangers Beat Canucks, 6-3
LEAD: Tomas Sandstrom scored two first-period goals and the Rangers took advantage of a poor Vancover middle period to score a 6-3 victory tonight.


Sermon at the Coal Pits: A Britain for Workers
LEAD: By 9 P.M. on Thursday, the Arthur Scargill gospel hour had begun at the Maltby Miners Welfare Club in this south Yorkshire coal-mining town.


15 Killed at Afghan Rites for Pathan Leader
LEAD: Two bombs exploded today during the funeral of Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the Pathan leader who preached nonviolent resistance to British rule in India and opposed the partition of the subcontinent.
The United News of India reported 15 people were killed and witnesses said 25 were wounded.


THOUSANDS MARCH AGAINST ABORTION
LEAD: An estimated 50,000 people demonstrated here today against abortion on the 15th anniversary of the Supreme Court decision legalizing it.


Santa Fe Nets $113.7 Million
LEAD: The Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation today reported a fourth-quarter profit of nearly $113.7 million, or 72 cents a share, up from a steep loss posted in the period a year earlier.


GOLDEN WEST FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOLDEN WEST FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b29,030,000
c45,647,000
Share earns
.92
1.46
Yr net inc
b146,876,000
c183,808,000
Share earns
4.69
5.89
b-Includes a loss of $1,475,000 for the quarter and a gain of $18,351,000 for the year both the on the sale of securities, and the year also includes a charge of $4,759,000 from Federal Home Loan Bank advance prepayment penalities.


2d Haitian Leader Detained After Criticizing Vote
LEAD: A second Haitian opposition leader was detained at the airport here this afternoon in what many Haitians and some Western diplomats said appeared to be a Government effort to divert attention from the presidential elections last Sunday.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Jim Abernethy, a former Atlanta sports agent, filed a plea of not guilty in Opelika, Ala., yesterday to misdemeanor counts stemming from payments to an Auburn football player. . . .
Jimmy (the Greek) Snyder, who was dismissed last weekend by CBS Sports after making controversial remarks about blacks, was admitted yesterday to Duke Medical Center in Durham, N.C., after reporting chest pains, a hospital spokeswoman said.


Library Puts Crumbling Books on Film
LEAD: To preserve the millions of crumbling books, newspapers and maps that are slowly disintegrating because of the high-acid content of their paper, the New York Public Library has established a new state-of-the art laboratory in the cellar of the central research library on Fifth Avenue and 42d Street.


SINGER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SINGER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
563,400,000
495,700,000
Net inc
b13,600,000
31,700,000
Share earns
.59
1.44
Yr rev
1,900,000,000
1,700,000,000
Net inc
c26,400,000
d82,600,000
Share earns
1.01
3.82


VICTORY FOR BUSH IN MICHIGAN FIGHT
LEAD: Vice President Bush's campaign won a major victory yesterday in the protracted struggle for Michigan's national convention delegates, and appeared to be in a strong position to win a majority of the state's votes in his quest for the Republican Presidential nomination.


DATA GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA GENERAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
342,900,000
313,300,000
Net inc
b12,400,000
3,300,000
Share earns
.43
.12
b-Includes a tax credit of $2.1 million.


Israelis Impose Curfew On East Jerusalem Area
LEAD: The police imposed a curfew tonight on A-Tur, an Arab neighborhood in East Jerusalem, invoking special emergency powers in this city for the first time since East Jerusalem was captured from Jordan in 1967.


U.N. Chief Calls for Urgent Action By Council on Arab-Israel Accord
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar called on the Security Council today to begin an urgent effort to end the Arab-Israeli conflict, saying a political solution was the only way to insure the safety of Palestinians in the occupied West Bank.


Pact in Spain to Form Nation's Biggest Bank
LEAD: Two leading Spanish banks, Banco de Bilbao and Banco de Vizcaya, have stunned the financial community here by announcing plans to merge their operations and create Spain's largest bank.


Heat on Campaign Reform
LEAD: Last month, New York's new Commission on Government Integrity dutifully added its own volume to the shelf of reports proposing reform of the state's lax campaign funding rules.
The report inspired no more than pious nodding.
But now the commission could yet unearth the compelling cases of abuse that finally might shame the State


DIEBOLD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIEBOLD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
119,259,000
112,454,000
Net inc
11,934,000
9,973,000
Share earns
.91
.76
Yr sales
439,063,000
417,369,000
Net inc
35,768,000
34,905,000
Share earns
2.72
2.66


Let's Look at Rights of Our Mental Patients, Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mexico Oil Price to Rise
LEAD: The Government-owned oil company Pemex has announced that it will increase the price of light Isthmus crude by 30 cents a barrel to its customers in the United States.
Pemex, whose official name is Petroleos Mexicanos, said in a statement released late Thursday that the change would go into effect Feb.


CAPITOL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN OF DENVER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPITOL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN OF DENVER (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
3,393,000
c620,000
Share earns
-
.20
6mo net loss
b5,023,000
c1,625,000
Share earns
-
.52
b-Includes an after-tax loss of $1,468,000 from the repayment of debt.


Ted Majeski, 69, Chief Of U.P.I. News Photos
LEAD: Edward (Ted) Majeski, head of the newspicture service at United Press International, died Thursday at his home here.
He was 69 years old.


Sugar Prices Reach a High As Brazil Assesses Drought
LEAD: Drought in Brazil's sugar-growing regions sent prices of sugar futures to life-of-contract highs yesterday on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange.


KIMBALL INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KIMBALL INTERNATIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
132,159,000
123,052,000
Net inc
9,428,000
7,126,000
Share earns
.44
.33
6mo sales
269,151,000
238,324,000
Net inc
19,799,000
15,011,000
Share earns
.93
.70


IP TIMBERLANDS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IP TIMBERLANDS LTD
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
71,000,000
38,000,000
Net inc
40,000,000
20,000,000
Share earns
.76
.49
Yr rev
204,000,000
179,000,000
Net inc
115,000,000
98,000,000
Share earns
2.52
2.29


OREGON METALLURGICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OREGON METALLURGICAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,711,000
9,766,000
Net inc
1,064,000
b58,000
Share earns
.08
-
Yr sales
51,716,000
41,527,000
Net inc
918,000
b157,000
Share earns
.06
-


ELCO INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELCO INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
33,623,000
29,868,000
Net inc
1,752,000
116,000
Share earns
.74
.05
6mo sales
65,782,000
59,920,000
Net inc
3,406,000
667,000
Share earns
1.44
.28


Priest-Lobbyist Offers Mass and Gentle Persuasion
LEAD: Most mornings, the Rev.
Kenneth J. Doyle celebrates the early Mass at a local Roman Catholic church, distributing communion from an altar framed by statues of angels.
Then he heads for the State Capitol, where his clerical collar makes him the most easily recognized lobbyist in town.


COURIER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COURIER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
20,385,000
20,202,000
Net inc
363,000
b2,688,000
Share earns
.20
1.38
b-Includes an after-tax gain of about $2.1 million, or $1.10 share, from the sale of a 50 percent interest in North American Directory Corp.


At City College, Vexing Action Off Stage
LEAD: Little is pleasant about a years-long construction project on the front doorstep.


MAGNACARD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAGNACARD INC
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
838,071
1,230,281
Net inc
416,441
503,003
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
45,195,223
42,945,223


MELAMINE CHEMICALS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MELAMINE CHEMICALS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,481,000
6,409,000
Net inc
1,543,000
696,000
Share earns
.28
.15
Shares outst
5,450,000
4,644,599
6mo sales
15,373,000
13,981,000
Net inc
3,015,000
1,925,000
Share earns
.58
.41
Shares outst
5,158,152
4,644,599


LEE DATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEE DATA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,790,000
29,706,000
Net loss
1,491,000
b1,512,000
Share earns
-
.11
9mo rev
74,277,000
83,518,000
Net loss
5,216,000
b3,801,000
Share earns
-
.27


AMERICAN SHIP BUILDING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN SHIP BUILDING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,388,000
4,877,000
Net loss
b1,380,000
2,911,000
b-Includes a gain of $244,000 from securities sales and a gain of $198,000 from the settlement of a lawsuit.


STERLING BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STERLING BANCORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,489,022
1,154,705
Per share
.23
.19
Yr net inc
4,606,403
b7,876,607
Per share
.73
1.35
b-After a gain of $1,485,961 from pension adjustment.


CENTRAL BANKING SYSTEM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL BANKING SYSTEM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,133,000
2,451,000
Per share
1.18
.55
Yr net inc
10,068,000
6,803,000
Per share
2.29
1.51


ADVANCED MAGNETICS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANCED MAGNETICS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,011,485
920,894
Net inc
b29,393
c245,075
Share earns
.01
.08
b-Includes writedowns on realized and unrealized losses on value of marketable securities of $294,689 and $110,864 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


CYPRESS SEMICONDUCTOR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CYPRESS SEMICONDUCTOR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 28
1987
1986
Revenue
24,331,000
14,806,000
Net inc
3,977,000
c3,963,000
Share earns
.11
.12
Shares outst
37,463,000
33,364,000
Yr rev
77,251,000
50,878,000
Net inc
b13,407,000
c13,399,000
Share earns
.37
.45
Shares outst
36,508,000
29,626,000


BOULEVARD BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOULEVARD BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,587,000
3,020,000
Per share
.39
.44
Yr net inc
10,140,000
11,502,000
Per share
1.53
1.82


COM-TEK RESOURCES INC reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COM-TEK RESOURCES INC
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,281,626
1,103,484
Net loss
691,058
374,493


CHEMICAL FABRICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEMICAL FABRICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
8,895,000
6,943,000
Net inc
760,000
c71,000
Share earns
.17
.02
6mo sales
16,337,000
12,864,000
Net inc
1,044,000
bc351,000
Share earns
.23
-


SUNWEST FINANCIAL SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNWEST FINANCIAL SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
6,833,000
6,637,000
Per share
.72
.68
Yr net inc
32,263,000
28,300,000
Per share
3.30
2.90


FIRST FEDERAL-WESTERN PENN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL-WESTERN PENN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
345,000
336,000
Per share
.26
-
Yr net inc
1,121,000
1,322,000
Per share
.91
-
The bank went public in June 1987.


Textile Manufacturer Is Killed in Bay Ridge
LEAD: A textile manufacturer from Brooklyn was shot and killed early yesterday in an apparent robbery as he parked his car, the police said.


Top Pentagon Officials Back Plan Keeping Arms Balance in Europe
LEAD: Top Pentagon officials have endorsed an armaments plan intended to maintain the military balance in Europe after the withdrawal of nuclear missiles under a new treaty.


Hawaii G.O.P. Move Vexes Robertson Camp
LEAD: Faced with a huge influx of new registrants, Republican Party officials in Hawaii abruptly canceled a Presidential caucus and straw vote scheduled for next Wednesday, and partisans of Pat Robertson are crying foul.


FIRST HAWAIIAN BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST HAWAIIAN BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
9,426,000
8,071,000
Per share
.71
.60
Yr net inc
35,495,000
30,750,000
Per share
2.65
2.30


BI INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BI INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,689,000
287,000
Net inc
372,000
b280,000
Share earns
.15
-
6mo rev
2,561,000
489,000
Net inc
374,000
b586,000
Share earns
.15
-
b-Net loss


BUCKEYE PARTNERS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUCKEYE PARTNERS LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
39,000,000
40,700,000
Net inc
11,900,000
8,700,000
Share earns
.98
.72
Yr sales
152,400,000
148,600,000
Net inc
33,600,000
26,800,000
Share earns
2.77
2.21


Harassment Is Alleged in Arson Case
LEAD: Two prosecution witnesses in the case of the burning of a house intended for foster-care infants have received anonymous threatening letters and have been subjected to ''verbal harassment'' by two of the five defendants, a Queens prosecutor said yesterday.


FIRST UNITED BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST UNITED BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
6,800,000
7,300,000
Per share
3.19
3.41


Zacharias Dische, 92; A Researcher of DNA
LEAD: Dr.
Zacharias Dische, professor emeritus of biochemistry at the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, died Sunday at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 92 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Tyson Keeps Title With 3 Knockdowns in Fourth
LEAD: Mike Tyson and Father Time caught up with Larry Holmes tonight.


ARMATRON INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMATRON INTERNATIONAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,640,000
3,491,000
Net loss
399,000
b4,860,000
Yr sales
21,343,000
23,310,000
Net loss
871,000
b11,489,000
Shares outst
2,540,871
2,543,446


City Ballet: Balanchine's 'Variations'
LEAD: Men in George Balanchine's ballets often yearn after mysterious women.
So it was no surprise that Bart Cook yearned after Maria Calegari in Balanchine's ''Variations Pour une Porte et un Soupir,'' which the New York City Ballet presented Thursday night at the New York State Theater.


Security-Blanket Surrogates
LEAD: If urban life seems more crowded these days, one reason may be the Big Pack - that 4-by-4-foot, 20-pound pouch swinging from just about every other shoulder in downtown America.
Big Packs, riding high on crowded buses or trains, broadside fellow travelers, jam automatic doors, crush ribs.


Icahn Plan For Texaco Ruled Out
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge ruled yesterday that Carl C. Icahn, Texaco's largest shareholder, cannot send his version of a bankruptcy reorganization plan for Texaco to other shareholders for their consideration.


Pueblo in Sale Of Supermarkets
LEAD: Pueblo International Inc., an operator of supermarkets in Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands and Florida, said that it had entered into a definitive agreement for a leveraged buyout by a company consisting of a subsidiary of First Boston and members of Pueblo's management.


MASSACHUSETTS COMPUTER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MASSACHUSETTS COMPUTER (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
15,860,000
15,075,000
Net inc
931,000
c1,066,000
Share earns
.06
.07
6mo sales
33,225,000
29,011,000
Net inc
b2,293,000
c1,956,000
Share earns
.15
.13


U.S. Cites Aid to Manila
LEAD: The United States is committed to helping the Philippine economic recovery by stepping up investments, keeping its doors open to imports and maintaining aid flows, United States Ambassador Nicholas Platt said today.
He told a meeting of American business executives that the Philippines had a trade surplus of $640 million with the United States in 1987 compared with a surplus of $461 million in 1986.


Chrysler in Europe
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation's return to Europe after nine years' absence will begin in March with a program to sell cars in five nations, a spokesman said in Paris.
Alexander Demuth said that Chrysler was initially planning to sell in West Germany, which is Europe's largest car market; Belgium; Switzerland; the Netherlands, and Austria.


A Bad Judgment on a Good Law
LEAD: A divided Federal appeals court panel has ruled that there can be no special Federal prosecutor independent of the executive branch.
This country is in trouble if the judgment stands.


Homeless Are Afraid of Being Murdered in New York's Shelters
LEAD: To the Editor:


Azinger Surges To Share of Lead
LEAD: Paul Azinger, who won three PGA Tour events last year and was the runner-up in the British Open, birdied six holes on the back nine at Indian Wells today and shot a seven-under-par 65.
That gave him a 200, 16 shots under par, for a share of the lead after three rounds of the 90-hole Bob Hope Chrysler


Belgian Dispute to Court
LEAD: Societe Generale de Belgique S.A., the subject of a takeover bid by the Italian financier Carlo de Benedetti, said today that it had initiated court proceedings to counter Mr. de Benedetti.
Rene Lamy, governor of Societe Generale, Belgium's largest holding company, refused to elaborate on the nature of the proceedings before the Brussels commercial court.


Let's Look at Rights of Our Mental Patients, Too; Change Soviet Laws
LEAD: To the Editor:


FORTUNE FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORTUNE FINANCIAL GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,156,000
b3,128,000
Per share
.68
.64
b-After an extraordinary charge of $3,618,000.


VANGUARD SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VANGUARD SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,537,000
957,000
Per share
.40
.25
Yr net inc
5,223,000
3,385,000
Per share
1.35
.87


GRUBB &amp; ELLIS REALTY INVESTORS TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRUBB &amp; ELLIS REALTY INVESTORS TRUST (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
632,000
1,119,000
Net inc
535,000
b1,017,000
Share earns
.19
.37
Yr rev
2,506,000
2,930,000
Net inc
2,131,000
b2,521,000
Share earns
.77
.92


Jefferson and Hemings
LEAD: To the Editor:


ROWE FURNITURE CORP reports earnings for Year to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROWE FURNITURE CORP (OTC)
Year to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
90,503,000
81,701,000
Net inc
2,215,000
2,171,000
Share earns
1.15
.95
Shares outst
1,924,000
2,296,000


CORRECTION
LEAD: An Article on Jan. 2 about the expiration of British copyrights to ''Peter Pan'' incompletely described the status of the United States copyrights to J. M. Barrie's work.
The novel ''Peter Pan'' entered the public domain in the United States in 1986.
The play ''Peter Pan'' is still protected under copyright in the United States.


Music: Concordia Opens Its Fourth Season
LEAD: Concordia: A Chamber Symphony, a group of freelance orchestral musicians founded by the conductor Marin Alsop, opened its fourth season Thursday night at Alice Tully Hall.
Concordia has shown a penchant for interesting programming and has been generally well received.
But Thursday's concert was not very successful.


Flying for Less: The Search for a Seat at the Best Possible Fare
LEAD: The lowest air fare between Los Angeles and San Antonio was about $125 last fall.
So when Diana Homer's supermarket in Northridge, Calif., offered shoppers $89 coupons for use on any domestic Continental Airlines flight, she bought four coupons for the family's Christmas trip to San Antonio.


FLAGLER BANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLAGLER BANK CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
205,000
b333,000
Per share
-
.16
Yr net inc
1,004,000
1,743,000
Per share
.49
.86
b-Net income  The year-ago per share earnings were adjusted for a 5 percent stock dividend paid in December 1987.


HOME SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
6,013,000
b7,077,000
Per share
.50
-
Yr net inc
26,067,000
b30,075,000
Per share
2.17
-
b-After tax credits of $2,678,000 for the quarter and $5,864,000 for the year.


MT BAKER BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MT BAKER BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
63,671
648,566
Per share
.04
.43
Yr net inc
2,006,838
2,415,560
Per share
1.29
1.85


REPUBLIC BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REPUBLIC BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b65,927
c45,545
Per share
.03
-
Yr net inc
b212,169
c102,812
Per share
.15
-
b-After tax credits of $64,900 for the quarter and $147,600 for the year.


JONES INTERCABLE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JONES INTERCABLE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,797,000
7,040,000
Net inc
465,000
b1,770,000
Share earns
.04
.14
6mo rev
14,811,000
13,523,000
Net inc
1,762,000
b1,806,000
Share earns
.14
.14


Parliament in Vienna Bars a Waldheim Talk
LEAD: Parliament decided today that President Kurt Waldheim will not deliver an address on the 50th anniversary of Hitler's takeover of Austria, but a Government commission decided to ask him to address another assembly.


Bond Yields Continue to Decline
LEAD: Prices of fixed-income securities continued to rise and their yields declined further yesterday, despite some brief flurries of pre-weekend profit taking.
While prices of Treasury coupon issues finished below the best levels of the day, the gains for the session and week were impressive.


MISTRIAL DECLARED IN LONG MOB CASE
LEAD: A Federal judge declared a mistrial yesterday in the nine-month-old racketeering and drug trial of Gene Gotti and nine co-defendants.
The judge said the Government's allegations of jury tampering had persuaded him such a move was needed.


Appointees Under Ethics Law
LEAD: Following are the special prosecutors appointed under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, struck down as unconstitutional by a Federal appeals court yesterday.


Hart Tries to Deflate Charges on Funds
LEAD: Gary Hart sought today to refute growing allegations of financial irregularities in his Presidential campaign.
He offered documents and comments that he said showed that neither he nor his campaign organizations had knowingly violated Federal election laws in receiving contributions or assistance from a


INSIDE
LEAD:  Sandinistas Attack Meeting


ACTION AUTO STORES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACTION AUTO STORES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
21,460,000
14,367,000
Net inc
476,000
137,000
Share earns
.16
.07
Shares outst
2,963,000
2,100,000
6mo sales
41,275,000
26,887,000
Net inc
b1,088,000
372,000
Share earns
.37
.18


NETWORK EQUIPMENT TECHOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NETWORK EQUIPMENT TECHOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
24,794,000
14,252,000
Net inc
b3,983,000
c1,735,000
Share earns
.29
.15
Shares outst
13,774,000
11,567,000
9mo rev
62,657,000
31,704,000
Net inc
b11,185,000
c2,870,000
Share earns
.81
.24
Shares outst
13,764,000
11,838,000


NUCLEAR METALS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUCLEAR METALS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
9,756,000
10,472,000
Net inc
73,000
608,000
Share earns
.03
.23


GUILFORD MILLS INC reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GUILFORD MILLS INC (NYSE)
13wks to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
136,114,000
120,707,000
Net inc
4,698,000
4,012,000
Share earns
.45
.38
Shares outst
10,297,000
10,560,000
26wk sales
264,899,000
243,607,000
Net inc
9,623,000
b7,827,000
Share earns
.92
.74
Shares outst
10,469,000
10,547,000


GEORGIA GULF reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEORGIA GULF (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
201,856,000
144,728,000
Net inc
b25,182,000
11,486,000
Share earns
1.75
.73
Yr sales
707,435,000
583,255,000
Net inc
b81,851,000
39,123,000
Share earns
5.61
2.41


WATTS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WATTS INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
44,286,000
35,223,000
Net inc
5,121,000
3,782,000
Share earns
.41
.30
6mo sales
86,111,000
67,996,000
Net inc
9,659,000
6,942,000
Share earns
.77
.57


Guidepost; Lighting Homes
LEAD: There are new ways to light homes during the long, dark days of winter, including low-wattage bulbs that use less electricity, and incandescent and halogen bulbs that last longer.
Halogen bulbs are more efficient because their quartz cases allow the tungsten filaments to burn at a higher temperature.


CONTINUUM CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINUUM CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,422,000
14,465,000
Net inc
1,187,000
938,000
Share earns
.27
.22
9mo rev
48,263,000
42,605,000
Net inc
3,450,000
2,204,000
Share earns
.79
.51


Stake in Orion Up
LEAD: For the second time in less than a week, John W. Kluge, the chairman of the Metromedia Corporaiton, has increased his stake in the Orion Pictures Corporation.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Kluge said he had raised his stake in Orion to 23 percent from 21.9 percent, purchasing 176,200 additional Orion shares in the open market for prices ranging from $12.125 to $12.875 a share.


FDP CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FDP CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,213,858
3,148,900
Net inc
57,584
133,093
Share earns
.02
.03
Shares outst
3,679,006
3,887,819
Yr rev
14,212,759
13,469,367
Net inc
285,055
308,649
Share earns
.08
.08
Shares outst
3,787,923
4,065,583


CK FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CK FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
473,000
375,727
Share earns
.46
-
Year-ago share earnings is not available; the company became a stock concern in July 1987.


About New York; Four Movements For Orchestra And Tennis Balls
LEAD: A summons from the Little Orchestra Society skittered across the transom a while back, directing us to 132 West 65th Street at 9:30 yesterday morning.


Murdoch Seeks Other Offers After Four Bid for The Post
LEAD: At least four bids to buy The New York Post - two by publishers and two by real-estate developers - were submitted yesterday as a deadline for offers closed.
But Rupert Murdoch, the owner, said all amounted to offers for The Post's real estate, not the newspaper.


SIGNET BANKING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIGNET BANKING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
17,424,000
23,557,000
Per share
.65
.95
Yr net inc
b23,452,000
86,277,000
Per share
.85
3.53
b-Includes an additional $75 million to the allowance for loan losses for loans to less developed countries that was taken in the second quarter.


Amnesty for Aliens Might Be Extended
LEAD: The Immigration and Naturalization Service is considering an extension for illegal aliens unable to meet the May 4 deadline to apply for amnesty, an agency official said today.


IOMEGA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IOMEGA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
29,158,000
30,677,000
Net inc
2,412,000
427,000
Share earns
.15
.03
Shares outst
16,304,083
15,293,089
Yr sales
89,417,000
125,906,000
Net loss
36,688,000
b6,373,000
Share earns
-
.42


RYAN'S FAMILY STEAK HOUSES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RYAN'S FAMILY STEAK HOUSES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1987
1986
Sales
40,645,000
29,685,000
Net inc
4,431,000
3,012,000
Share earns
.08
.06
Yr sales
155,252,000
104,989,000
Net inc
16,830,000
10,811,000
Share earns
.32
.21


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 50.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,389,951,000
1,310,614,000
Net inc
182,911,000
158,523,000
Share earns
.78
.67
Yr rev
5,492,669,000
5,311,733,000
Net inc
b788,626,000
768,617,000
Share earns
3.39
3.28


Kodak Agrees to Buy Sterling for $5.1 Billion
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company announced yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Sterling Drug Inc. for about $5.1 billion, forcing an end to a competing hostile offer from Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company.


Europe's Inflation Rate
LEAD: Consumer prices in the 12 member countries of the European Community edged up a tenth of a percent in December to an average of 3.2 percent for 1987, Eurostat, the community's statistical service, reported today.


U.S. CHOOSES MARTIN MARIETTA FOR SIMULATION OF 'STAR WARS'
LEAD: The Martin Marietta Corporation won a contract yesterday to take the lead in developing a billion-dollar ''Star Wars'' computer complex.
The complex would be able to simulate strategic defense systems and evaluate whether it is technically possible to repel a nuclear attack.


Mary Brosnan Kratschmer, Mannequin Designer,81
LEAD: Mary Brosnan Kratschmer, a former designer and manufacturer of mannequins, died of cancer of the spine Wednesday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.


CAPITAL WIRE &amp; CABLE CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPITAL WIRE &amp; CABLE CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
32,991,000
23,603,000
Net inc
1,665,000
1,105,000
Share earns
.45
.28
Yr sales
116,630,000
96,034,000
Net inc
5,016,000
4,146,000
Share earns
1.28
1.16


FOUNDERS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOUNDERS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
131,334
53,310
Per share
.19
.11
Yr net inc
436,677
180,106
Per share
.66
.36


Caracas Journal; A President, a Liaison and a Lot of Political Clout
LEAD: When President Jaime Lusinchi took office in early 1984, his longtime liaison with his private secretary, Blanca Ibanez, seemed nothing out of the ordinary for a country where the extramarital relationships of prominent politicians have traditionally been heralded as signs of virility.


Paris and Bonn Set Up Military Link
LEAD: France and West Germany marked the 25th anniversary of their friendship treaty today by creating a joint military council and the legal basis for a French-German brigade.
The leaders of the two nations also announced the formation of an advisory council to coordinate their economic policies.


NORTH FORK BANCORPORATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH FORK BANCORPORATION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,817,000
2,466,000
Per share
.55
.47
Yr net inc
10,309,000
8,531,000
Per share
1.97
1.71
Shares outst
5,245,879
4,991,983


KNAPE &amp; VOGT MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KNAPE &amp; VOGT MANUFACTURING CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
23,497,223
18,148,211
Net inc
941,225
583,795
Share earns
.23
.15
6mo sales
48,286,761
36,632,260
Net inc
2,575,560
1,887,992
Share earns
.64
.48
Shares outst
4,006,500
3,922,500


Tricentrol Fight
LEAD: The British oil group Tricentrol P.L.C. said it might seek the aid of a friendly company to fight a hostile bid by the French oil giant Elf Aquitaine.
But Tricentrol's chairman, James Longcroft, who has urged shareholders to reject Elf's offer of $:134.7 million, or about $240 million, said a friendly suitor was not now under consideration.


VIE DE FRANCE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 12
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIE DE FRANCE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 12
1987
1986
Sales
18,286,783
14,966,067
Net inc
710,487
410,510
Share earns
.07
.04
6mo sales
20,176,867
21,173,512
Net inc
1,399,078
1,221,021
Share earns
.13
.11


SLUGGISH DE LEON KEEPS TITLE
LEAD: Carlos De Leon successfully defended his World Boxing Council cruiserweight title tonight when he took a 12-round unanimous decision over Jose Flores.


Dance Teacher Wins Stay of Eviction Order
LEAD: Mary Anthony, the modern dance teacher who was to be evicted from her loft in lower Manhattan this week, was granted a stay of the eviction order yesterday after the Loft Board said it would consider reopening her case.


INSPEECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSPEECH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,980,000
5,378,000
Net inc
863,000
d834,000
Share earns
.06
.08
Shares outst
13,827,000
11,010,000
6mo rev
27,502,000
9,786,000
Net loss
b555,000
cd1,223,000
Share earns
-
.13


APPLIED BIOSYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APPLIED BIOSYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Sales
33,551,000
21,114,000
Net inc
4,988,000
2,716,000
Share earns
.37
.20
6mo sales
60,029,000
40,536,000
Net inc
7,951,000
5,412,000
Share earns
.59
.40


Matriarch, 95, Can Be Citizen Under '29 Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


Super Bowl XXII; Broncos' Johnson Can Start to Practice
LEAD: The Broncos' irrepressible wide receiver, Vance Johnson, who risked reinjuring a damaged artery when he rode a horse for a music video on Wednesday, has been cleared to begin practicing next Tuesday for the Super Bowl game against Washington in nine days.


Merrill Talks To Rothschild
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company has ended discussions on buying an equity stake in L. F. Rothschild Holdings Inc. and taking over Rothschild's small retail brokerage network, a Wall Street source said this week.


DALLAS SEMICONDUCTOR reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DALLAS SEMICONDUCTOR (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
9,770,000
4,407,000
Net inc
b1,534,000
c455,000
Share earns
.06
-
Yr sales
30,664,000
13,196,000
Net inc
b2,645,000
c3,433,000
Share earns
.13
-


FIRST MIDWEST BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST MIDWEST BANCORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,106,000
2,332,000
Per share
.40
.30
Yr net inc
b11,511,000
9,370,000
Per share
1.48
1.21
b-After extraordinary credits of $464,000 for the quarter and $815,000 for the year.


American Brands' 'Pac-Man' Ploy
LEAD: In following through today on its announced plans to make a hostile tender offer for E-II Holdings Inc., American Brands Inc. appears to be hoping that it can dissuade E-II from making its threatened bid for American Brands.


Viola Honored
LEAD: As a sophomore at East Meadow High School he played first base and hit .288.
As a junior he hit .333, and after switching to pitching at midseason, went 5-0.
As a senior he boosted his batting average to .413 and turned in a 10-1 record.
Those were pretty good statistics, but when he was graduated in 1978, nobody thought about retiring his jersey number.


Listen to Haiti's Democrats
LEAD: The elections in Haiti have only complicated the political tragedy there.
Gen.
Henri Namphy will now claim to have kept his pledge of providing for an elected successor by Feb. 7, the second anniversary of Jean-Claude Duvalier's departure.
Never mind that in doing so, the general has trampled on Haiti's new


M.T.A. Bans All Smoking On Its Trains
LEAD: The Metropolitan Transportation Authority banned smoking yesterday on all Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North Commuter Railroad trains.


ZITEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZITEL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,588,000
2,714,000
Net inc
b282,000
c1,411,000
Share earns
.06
-
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $110,000.
c-Net loss


Volvo Expansion
LEAD: The Swedish car maker A.B.
Volvo, which has just reported record profits, says it will be on the lookout in 1988 for companies to buy in North America and Europe. ''Volvo is seeking companies in the United States and Europe, and is particularly keen to crack the West German market in terms of sales,'' Volvo's finance director, Lennart Jeansson, said in an interview.


SANDINISTAS HALT AMNESTY MEETING
LEAD: Sandinista demonstrators attacked and broke up a meeting today at which speakers were demanding amnesty for prisoners.


UNITED CAROLINA BANCSHARES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED CAROLINA BANCSHARES CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,760,000
4,578,000
Per share
.34
.33
Yr net inc
20,260,000
19,279,000
Per share
1.46
1.39
The year-ago per share earnings are restated to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split paid Sept.


DEROSE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEROSE INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,967,000
7,132,000
Net loss
375,000
444,000
9mo sales
23,427,000
23,763,000
Net loss
1,515,000
1,380,000


FIRST CHARTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST CHARTER CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
663,467
494,623
Per share
.23
.21
Shares outst
2,955,327
2,355,347
Yr net inc
2,406,927
2,239,419
Per share
.89
.95
Shares outst
2,710,922
2,358,951


BELL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELL SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,498,000
1,243,000
Per share
.60
-
6mo net inc
2,989,000
2,241,000
Per share
1.20
-
The year-ago per share earnings are not available because the company went public in February 1987.


MAXTOR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAXTOR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
74,147,000
50,787,000
Net inc
5,151,000
b6,882,000
Share earns
.26
.35
9mo rev
185,478,000
126,550,000
Net inc
8,065,000
b16,985,000
Share earns
.41
.87


CADNETIX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CADNETIX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,022,000
11,565,000
Net inc
b3,054,000
1,596,000
Share earns
.22
.12
6mo sales
28,144,000
20,721,000
Net inc
b4,592,000
2,664,000
Share earns
.33
.19


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 12.


MID-HUDSON SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MID-HUDSON SAVINGS BANK
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,703,000
2,300,000
Per share
2.55
-
The thrift converted to stock form in June.


HYTEK MICROSYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HYTEK MICROSYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,144,000
3,930,000
Net inc
b563,000
c505,000
Share earns
.20
-
Yr rev
22,681,000
14,663,000
Net inc
b452,000
c1,903,000
Share earns
.16
-
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $154,000 for both the quarter and year.


Arizona Governor Arraigned
LEAD: Gov.
Evan Mecham taking a document from Superior Court Commissioner Patrick O'Neil after Mr.
Mecham and his brother, Willard, pleaded not guilty in Phoenix to charges of fraud, perjury and filing false documents.
The charges stem from Governor Mecham's failure to report a $350,000 loan from a developer.


CITYFED FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITYFED FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
435,000
c9,997,000
Yr net inc
b13,170,000
37,524,000
Per share
.24
1.57
b-After a gain of $2,470,000 from an accounting adjustment.
c-Net loss


New York Health Chief Faults New Courtroom Guidelines on AIDS
LEAD: One week after New York State's Chief Administrative Judge issued guidelines on how courts should handle defendants who may have AIDS, New York City's Health Commissioner has said key portions of the guidelines convey ''a very inappropriate message'' about transmission of the disease.


ASSOCIATED MORTGAGE INVESORS reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASSOCIATED MORTGAGE INVESORS (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,004,991
b3,324,991
Share earns
.31
.20
b-Includes tax credits of $1,518,000 for the latest year and $1,529,496 for the year-earlier period.


CENTURY BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTURY BANCORPORATION
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,079,000
865,000
Per share
.19
.21
Yr net inc
3,412,000
3,027,000
Per share
.67
.73
Shares outst
5,100,000
4,200,000


ROCHESTER GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCHESTER GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
177,764,000
180,635,000
Net loss
b9,771,000
d18,909,000
Share earns
-
.57
Shares outst
30,053,165
29,188,275
Yr rev
731,488,000
748,649,000
Net loss
c168,711,000
d104,519,000
Share earns
-
3.33
Shares outst
29,727,746
28,927,442


Zev Vilnay, Geographer, 87
LEAD: Zev Vilnay, a geographer and author of an authoritative guidebook to Israel, died Thursday.
He was 87 years old.
His ''Israel Guide,'' published in 1955, went through 24 editions and was translated into many languages.


BellSouth May Give Up Federal Phone Contract
LEAD: The BellSouth Corporation said yesterday that it had offered to give up a Government telephone contract because its employees might have used secret bid information belonging to the American Telephone and Telegraph Company to win the contract.


ASK COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASK COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
32,346,000
21,159,000
Net inc
2,252,000
1,995,000
Share earns
.17
.15
6mo rev
58,955,000
41,503,000
Net inc
4,134,000
3,770,000
Share earns
.32
.29


DATAPRODUCTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATAPRODUCTS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
91,171,000
84,842,000
Net inc
1,083,000
2,127,000
Share earns
.05
.10
9mo rev
249,233,000
253,836,000
Net loss
5,268,000
b7,309,000
Share earns
-
.35


DRECO ENERGY SERVICES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DRECO ENERGY SERVICES LTD
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
4,482,000
9,041,000
Net loss
760,000
27,000


TANDYCRAFTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TANDYCRAFTS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
28,950,000
25,418,000
Net inc
1,310,000
183,000
Share earns
.59
.08
6mo sales
51,356,000
43,013,000
Net inc
1,409,000
229,000
Share earns
.62
.10


Sun State Drops Holding Unit Plan
LEAD: Sun State Savings and Loan Association said it had dropped a proposal to form a holding company, a plan opposed by a dissident shareholder and director who is seeking control of the company.
Sun State said it had filed suit Thursday against the dissident, David P. Maniatis, in United States District Court in Phoenix.


Bush Takes Hard Knocks at School
LEAD: Vice President Bush, attempting to narrow the hefty Iowa lead of Senator Bob Dole, was pressed today by hostile student questioners who sought explanations for several changes in his past positions and on his role in the Iran-contra affair.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.61
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.69
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.82
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
11.07
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


Reynolds Is 400 Winner In Kodak Invitational
LEAD: Butch Reynolds outdueled Antonio McKay for the victory in the 400-meter dash, and Marcus O'Sullivan continued his winning form in the mile tonight in the Kodak Invitational indoor meet.


Moments of Truth for U.S. and the Sandinistas
LEAD: THE coming Congressional vote on renewing aid to the Nicaraguan rebels and the demands made by a frayed regional peace treaty have combined to make the next two weeks perhaps the most decisive of the many turning points in Central America's current turbulent passage.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: BREATHES there a soul in this city who has never been whacked or tripped by a duffel bag, backpack, briefcase or shopping bag?
Maybe -if that soul has a car and driver and a personal shopper, never stands in movie lines and confines his or her walking to thoroughfares like Madison and Fifth Avenues between 2 and 4 A


WADING RIVER TRIES TO RETAIN TRANQUIL PACE
LEAD: FOR more than 300 years, since the first eight families settled here, residents of Wading River, a community that depends on others for government, have enjoyed the rural flavor of farm stands, a local general store, open fields and country roads.
But a spurt of growth in the last decade is threatening to change the bucolic character of this waterfront community, and is generating a good deal of concern.


Body and Mind; Defining Hypertension
LEAD: DEFINITION OF disease is a tricky business.


ALLISON W. CUTLER TO WED F. E. FOX
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Newton Cutler Jr. of New Vernon, N.J., and Edgartown, Mass., of the engagement of their daughter Allison Waring Cutler to Francis E. Fox, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Fox of Ardmore, Pa.
The couple plan to marry in May.


Correction
LEAD: A chart in The Times Magazine on Jan. 10 with the Body and Mind column, about the effect of alcohol on the removal of body fats, omitted credit for the source of the data.
The credit line should have read as follows:


IN PHYSICS, DO TINIER FACTS ADD UP TO THE GRAND TRUTH?
LEAD: FROM a 2,000-foot television tower in North Carolina comes news guaranteed to irritate physicists who thought that their theory of the universe -with four fundamental forces and dozens of subatomic particles - was already cluttered enough.


Food Inspection Results
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 22 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


Costa Rica's Quiet Beaches And Lush Landchief of The New York Times.
LEAD: DIPPING and bobbing in their awkward way, the flock of shimmering green parrots swept into the bare guanacaste tree where they cacklingly congratulated themselves on their abrupt landing.
All beak and feet, large parrots are poor airmen who seem ridiculously relieved to arrive anywhere at all.
The noisy comedians of


OUR TOWNS AND CHANGE
LEAD: Sharlene A. McEvoy asked what happened to ''Our Town'' as it appeared in Thornton Wilder's 1938 play.
Her answer was that it was ''ravaged by hordes of greedy developers'' and changed to ''their town.'' My answer is a little different.
It is 50 years later and ''our town'' has changed quite a bit.


Bantam's $250,000 Gamble on Jorge Amado of Brazil
LEAD: THE first novel by Jorge Amado was published in the United States in 1945 and more than a dozen others by the Brazilian author have been published here since.
While Mr.
Amado is one of the most popular foreign authors elsewhere in the world, his sales in the United States have never begun to match his international reputation.


Japanese Cello Music
LEAD: The 13th annual ''Music From Japan'' series, under direction of Naoyuki Miura, begins at 5 P.M. today at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue at 70th Street Tickets for the concert and a reception afterward are $10.
Information: (212) 517-2742.


Taking a Trip Overseas With the Kids
LEAD: ON that always anxious night before the end of winter vacation, our 10-year-old son, Josh, sat on the edge of the bed, legs swinging.


VACCINE FOR FOOT-IN-MOUTH DISEASE IS A POTION OF PLATITUDES AND CLICHES
LEAD: THE vocal misadventure of Senator Joseph Biden, in which the then, but now former, Presidential aspirant recaptured - unfortunately, verbatim - Neil Kinnock's musings about the proletarian characteristics of his British ancestors, reveals a common peril for public figures.


Cyprus
LEAD: To the Editor: With reference to the item ''Visiting Cyprus,'' I would like to comment on the last paragraph, which, to our profound disappointment, purported to deal with issues pertaining to travel to Northern Cyprus in a very misleading fashion and totally based on false information provided by sources other than the authorized representatives of the Turkish Republic of Northern


DR. JOANNE LESLIE TO MARRY IN MAY
LEAD: The engagement of Dr.
Joanne Leslie to Dr.
Jonathan Ames, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Ames of Tucson, Ariz., and Nantucket, Mass., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Leslie of Jackson Heights, Queens.
The couple plan to marry in May.


SALEM DRIVE RALLIES TO WIN AT GULFSTREAM
LEAD: Salem Drive scored his third stakes victory of the Florida winter season when he surged through on the inside to run down Equalize and win the $157,100 Gulfstream Park Breeders' Cup Handicap today at Gulfstream.


SOVIET IMPLICATES OFFICIALS IN BRIBES
LEAD: A five-year investigation has uncovered bribery and corruption that cost the Uzbek Republic at least $6.5 billion and involved high-ranking officials, including the son-in-law of Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Communist Party newspaper Pravda said today.


SAN DIEGO MAKES LEAP TO WORLD-CLASS CENTER
LEAD: ROBERT PAYNE thinks of the Super Bowl as literally the biggest thing ever to hit this city.


The Case of the Missing Mail
LEAD: Families who moved into a new development on the Warren-Bristol line had no idea they were moving into an area overlooked by the Postal Service.


Venezuelan Ban Throws Auto Rally Off Track
LEAD: Bending to pressure from environmental groups here, the Government has refused to allow a transcontinental automobile rally sponsored by the Exploration Society of America to cross Venezuelan territory.


Veteran Whose Legs Were Severed Is Sued
LEAD: On Sept. 1, S. Brian Willson and two other demonstrators protesting arms shipments to Central America sat down on the railroad tracks leading to the Navy's Concord Naval Weapons Station, about 20 miles east of here.


First the Lucky Break - and Then?
LEAD: WHOEVER FIRST SAID ''I'D rather be lucky than good'' was on to something, of course.
In music, it does appear as if careers often rise and fall at the spin of the wheel.
A conductor in Rio de Janeiro is hissed off the podium, a young cellist named Arturo Toscanini jumps in as his replacement and a musical legend is set in motion.


The Foreign Policy Tussle
LEAD: JAMES CLAUDE WRIGHT JR., the Speaker of the House, is perfectly happy to bask in the glow of a historic moment, but he is not one to waste time on social small talk.
So when he arrived at the White House for the state dinner last month honoring Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Texan was determined to catch the ear of a ranking Soviet official and promote his views of the Central American peace process.


PAMELA BIEL PLANS TO WED JAMES R. WETZEL 2D IN JUNE
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Biel Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Pamela Biel to James R. Wetzel 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Wetzel of Baltimore.


POTATO DISHES PROVIDE SUSTAINING WINTER FARE
LEAD: EVERY time I go back for a visit to England I realize how good potatoes can be.


Israel Says Troops in Arab Areas Will Be More Closely Supervised
LEAD: The Israeli Army, concerned about reports of excessive brutality and beatings of Palestinians by Israeli soldiers, said today it would take steps to increase supervision of soldiers in the field.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Jan. 10 about E. F. Hutton &amp; Company misidentified Launny Steffens.
He is chief executive of Merrill Lynch Consumer Markets.


66 WAYS OF LOOKING AT OUR LITERATURE
LEAD:  COLUMBIA LITERARY HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES  Emory Elliott, general editor.
Martha Banta, Terence Martin, David Minter, Marjorie Perloff and Daniel B. Shea, associate editors.
Houston A. Baker, Nina Baym, Sacvan Bercovitch and Louis D. Rubin Jr., advisory editors. 1,263 pp.
New York: Columbia University Press.


JENNIFER HALL ARLEN, A LAW PROFESSOR, TO WED ROBERT LEE HOTZ, A REPORTER
LEAD: Jennifer Hall Arlen and Robert Lee Hotz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Hotz of Washington and Middletown, Md., plan to marry in May, the parents of the future bride, Ann Warner Arlen and Michael Arlen, both of New York, have announced.


AN AGENDA FOR DEALING WITH 1988
LEAD: IT has been my observation that Long Island has changed fundamentally in recent decades, and that we, by which I mean all those concerned about public issues in our region, have not yet fully come to terms with those changes and what they mean for the future.


MS. MCNENNEY WED TO W. J. BURKE 3D
LEAD: Lauren Mary McNenney, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. McNenney of Scarsdale, N.Y., and William Joseph Burke 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burke Jr. of Wellesley Hills, Mass., Hyannis Port, Mass., and Stuart, Fla., were married yesterday in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Damian O'Connell performed the ceremony at St.


HELPING THE FLEDGLING LEAVE THE NEST
LEAD: HE entered my life last July in a bowl of Depression glass, covered with a light blue embroidered hand towel.
He was naked, pinkish-purple, all mouth and decidedly not cute.


MARGUERITE LEE TO WED IN MAY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis Vandegrift Lee of Charlestown, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Marguerite Lammot Lee to Frank Perkins Hixon Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hixon of Franklin, Tenn.


SAVING LIVES BY PHONE BEFORE RESCUERS ARRIVE
LEAD: ON Jan. 9, a phone call was received at the Medical Communications Center in East Meadow.
Man: ''The baby is turning blue!'' Medical technician: ''An ambulance is on the way.'' Woman: ''She's turning blue!'' Technician: ''Listen carefully.
Lay the baby flat on her back.
Lift the chin, slightly back.


BEHIND THE FLOOD OF MAIL: NAME BROKERS
LEAD: LOOKING for a millionaire under 40 who owns a sailboat?
Or a New England high school coach?
Their names and millions of others are readily available from three Westchester list brokers, who specialize in renting out names.


MS. PRESENT IS AFFIANCED
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel H. Present of New York and Pittsfield, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Stephanie Danielle Present to Michael Joseph Podolak, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Podolak of Kensington, Md.


RESIDENTIAL RESALES
LEAD:  Closings in the week ending Jan. 9  MANHATTAN  Midtown East  $116,000  321 East 54th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 725-sq.-ft., co-op in prewar Tudor-style building; large kitchen, beamed-ceilings, hardwood floors, southern exposure; maintenance $776, 58% tax-deductible (Broker: Penthouse Properties)


ARAFAT HAS PLEA FOR ARAB NATIONS
LEAD: Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, asked Arab nations tonight to provide support for the protests by Palestinians in Israeli-occupied territories ''so the revolution can continue.''


AS CARTOON MUSEUM STRUGGLES, ITS WILSON SHOW DELIGHTS
LEAD: THE Museum of Cartoon Art's castle was already cracking when this reviewer first saw it almost a decade ago.
Now, the concrete edifice, which is on Comly Avenue in Rye Brook, has plastic protecting part of an outside wall and wood beams shoring up its curving colonnade.
These and other temporary measures cost $30,000, said the museum's curator, Sherman Krisher, who added that ''the building is collapsing faster than we can raise money for the radical surgery that it needs.


Fear of Crime, Fear of Justice; Innocent Whites - and Innocent Blacks
LEAD: I was skating once with a group of my white friends . . . a policeman walked over to me and he pushed me against the wall, and he took out his club and he was like, 'What do you think, you're like them?
Do you think you have the privileges they do?' . . .
I do well in school, I'm a nice young person, I don't seem dangerous, I don't think.


Armstrong on Team
LEAD: SHE won a gold medal at the 1984 Olympic Winter Games, and if all goes well, Debbie Armstrong, will win another in Calgary next month.
At least she'll have a chance.
Armstrong, who has been hampered by injuries since the 1984 Games, was one of five women named yesterday to the United States women's Olympic ski team.


CBS AND SNYDER
LEAD: RACISM crawled out from under a rock of silence and onto the network airwaves once again last week.
Jimmy (the Greek) Snyder's comments to a Washington television news reporter for a report about the progress of blacks in society revealed a mind married to a number of dangerous stereotypes.


A CORRECTION
LEAD: The name of the writer of an article on Jan. 10 on Nebraska farm real estate was misspelled.
The correct spelling is Dick Herman.


STATE'S GROUP HOME ANGERS COMMUNITY
LEAD: THE state has acquired a five-bedroom home here as the start of an $11 million program to reduce, from 835 to 500, the number of patients at the overcrowded Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital in Morris County.


FACING THE 'STICKY ISSUES'
LEAD:  BETWEEN WOMEN  Love, Envy, and Competition in Women's Friendships.
By Luise Eichenbaum and Susie Orbach. 223 pp.
New York: Viking. $17.95.


NEW YORK FAULTED ON TUBERCULOSIS
LEAD: Amid a disturbing resurgence of tuberculosis in New York City, a Federal review has found major failings in local prevention efforts, and city health officials have vowed to revamp the entire program.


The Wealth Effect
LEAD: To The Editor:


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  D.A.R., ALIVE AND KICKING


PATRIOTS AND OTHER SUSPECTS
LEAD:  QUEST FOR AN ISLAND  Vassily Aksyonov. 246 pp.
New York: PAJ Publications/ Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $17.95.


What the Police and Courts Could Do
LEAD: Beyond public attitudes, the police and the courts could do much to build confidence in the criminal justice system with specific reforms.


Snyder Resting
LEAD: ONE week after being dismissed by CBS Sports because of controversial remarks on black people and athletics, Jimmy (the Greek) Snyder checked into a North Carolina hospital complaining of chest pains on Friday, but hospital officials said yesterday that he was in good condition and in no apparent danger.


INTELLECTUALS AND ASSASSINS - ANNALS OF STALIN'S KILLERATI
LEAD: IN the latter half of the 1930's a gang of killers appeared in Western Europe whose accumulated crimes - considering their impact on history - are probably unequaled in the annals of murder.
They were agents of the Soviet secret police - then called the N.K.V.D., now the K.G.B. - operating in a special unit dedicated to terrorism.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  East Islip  $240,000
44 Quail Run
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old ranch; dining room, den, stone fireplace, 0.75 acre; taxes $6,400.
Old Bethpage  $242,000
12 Lido Place
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old high ranch; den with fireplace, sun room, 1-car garage; taxes $4,400.


CAREFUL SHOPPER
LEAD:  A Variety of Futons And Accessories  Arise Futon Mattress Company in White Plains and a franchise in Mount Kisco are part of a group of metropolitan-area stores supplying cotton foldable mattresses, easy-to-assemble frames and convertible, wood-slatted sitting-or-sleeping arrangements for studio apartments and college dormitories, family rooms and offices, living rooms and wherever else overnight guests are stowed in what is usually sitting space.


REDUCING MISSLES IN EUROPE: HOW THE SENATE BATTLE SHAPES UP
LEAD:  THE PROVISIONS  Missiles eliminated


Headliners; Point of Departure
LEAD: Some people can take it, but can't, or won't, dish it out.


Du Pont's Iowa Strategy Is Hanging by a Thread
LEAD: How does a Presidential candidate who is trailing badly in the polls make a breakthrough and convince voters he is worth supporting?


10 Minutes From Doom
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Connally on the Block


DATA BANK: January 24, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,835.9
$3,795.3
$3,683.3
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.3
2.5
2.79
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$141.9
$134.5
$130.2


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Edison  $144,000
65 Idlewild Road
5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 34-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace in family room, pool, 2-zone heat; taxes $1,972.
Fair Lawn  $212,000
39-19 Brookside Avenue
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; finished basement, patio, fireplace; taxes $2,017.


AN IDENTITY LEFT BEHIND AT THE ALTAR
LEAD: I WAS the only single woman left among my friends until three years ago.
I remember that time well, because while my friends were altering their existence for a lifetime partnership, I was preparing for what I thought would be a life alone.


Rock: No Safety, A Quintet, at P.S. 122
LEAD: THE first installment of ''Cement Chalet,'' a weekly mixed-media series at Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, was headlined on Thursday by No Safety, a rock band featuring downtown improvisers.
While Chris Cochrane, the guitarist, and Zeena Parkins, the keyboardist and harpist, have built reputations with noisy, open-ended improvisations, No Safety plays crisply structured rock - knotty with dissonance, fond of noise, clattery and asymmetrical, but as carefully plotted as a Joe


Some Things Are New
LEAD: OLYMPUS, the Japanese camera maker, which featured off-the-film flash metering and compact single-lens-reflex design, has announced a handful of new products.
They range from a budget-priced point-and-shoot camera to a Super-VHS format video camcorder.


SPREADING THE WESTERN DISEASE
LEAD:  THE WORLD REVOLUTION OF WESTERNIZATION  The Twentieth Century in Global Perspective.
By Theodore H. Von Laue. 396 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $24.95.


Teldec Label Trying Again In the U.S.
LEAD: IN THE 1960's, WHEN THE authentic-instrument revolution began gathering steam, record collectors had few places to turn for performances played on early instruments and based on the latest musicological discoveries or theories.
One label that saw the potential of the early-music market early was Telefunken, which introduced its Das Alte Werk line in 1958 (joining Archiv, Deutsche Grammophon's early-music line, established a decade earlier).


New HAVEN COLISEUM'S DEMISE IS FEARED
LEAD: A PROPOSAL by Mayor Biagio DiLieto to tear down the New Haven Veterans Memorial Coliseum and use the site for a shopping mall has raised fears that the arena will not be replaced.


SLED DOGS FINDING WORK ONCE AGAIN
LEAD: LACK of adequate snow cover will probably cause the postponement of the 10th Annual International Sled Dog Races that were to have taken place at Saranac Lake, N.Y., next Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
The new dates would be Feb. 27 and 28.


Yugoslav's Data Link Waldheim to Atrocities
LEAD: A Yugoslav adviser to an international commission investigating Kurt Waldheim said today that he had seen documents implicating the Austrian President in war crimes.


WAITNG OUT THE SECOND COMING
LEAD:  REFORMING FUNDAMENTALISM  Fuller Seminary and the New Evangelicalism.
By George Marsden.
Illustrated. 319 pp.
Grand Rapids, Mich.: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. $19.95.


POTATO DISHES PROVIDE SUSTAINING WINTER FARE
LEAD: EVERY time I go back for a visit to England I realize how good potatoes can be.


CONTRA AID FOES GAINING IN HOUSE
LEAD: With a crucial vote less than two weeks away, there is a growing reluctance in Congress to approve new military aid for the Nicaraguan rebels, even among some members of Congress who are key to the Administration's strategy.


DOES PRO GOLF NEED A NEW STAR TO SUCCEED?
LEAD: The PGA Tour has reached the burping contentment stages of success.
Just ask the young pro who will bank hundreds of thousands of dollars without ever being described as ''in the hunt.'' As the money becomes all but meaningless, and commitments clog his calendar and choke off his practice time, the pro can only blink in wonder at how quickly he has crossed that microfine line between winner and also-ran.


THE BLACK WRITER AND THE MAGIC OF THE WORD
LEAD: AT a certain point in my writing career, after I had done three books, I made a decision.
I wanted to reach out to readers that the earlier works had perhaps excluded.
I wanted to get everybody's ear.
I had in mind a book for people familiar with America, with the technique and history of the novel - a book that audience could appreciate and applaud and relate to the Great Traditions, if there really are such things.


A Deceptive Strategy
LEAD: THAT clever satirist, Tom Lehrer, once explained in song the mental processes involved in subtraction: ''If you are over 35 and went to a private school, . . '' and so on.
Where and when you learned your subject is also important for bridge players.


A 1905 Melodrama Is Alive and Well in Soho
LEAD: ''AN AMERICAN JOURNALIST WAS absolutely infuriated with all the drama that was coming over here from England - angry that the theater was being so dominated by the British, when America had a perfectly good drama of its own.
That was in 1832,'' says British-born Julian Webber, who is directing the revival of David Belasco's 1905 melodrama, ''The Girl of the Golden West,'' opening Friday at the Soho Repertory Theater.


Concert: Focus Festival at Tully Hall
LEAD: YEARS hence, perhaps in 2016 when Milton Babbitt turns 100 years old, some venturesome organization will mount the premiere of ''Fabulous Voyage,'' a musical-comedy version of Homer's Odyssey by Mr.
Babbitt.
I don't mean that when the arch-serialist and academician attains his century he will suddenly be moved by a desire to make money and try his luck on Broadway; the show has already been written.


Haas Shoots 68-268 to Lead Tway by a Stroke in Hope Golf
LEAD: On the fourth straight perfect day for golf in this desert resort area, Jay Haas once again took the sole lead after 72 holes of the 90-hole Bob Hope Chrysler Classic.


CHICAGO'S GRUMPY GURU
LEAD: James Atlas describes the upheaval at Cornell University in the spring of 1969, when ''gun-toting blacks occupied Willard Straight Hall and threatened terrified administrators with a whole agenda of demands,'' an episode from which Mr.
Bloom is ''still deeply traumatized.'' Readers might want to be reminded that these students did not just take it into their heads one day to pick up weapons and occupy the student union, as Mr.


KURT A. CORSO, AN ARTIST, IS MARRIED TO SUSAN FALK
LEAD: At the Gramercy Park Hotel in Manhattan yesterday, Susan Lucia Falk and Kurt Antony Corso were married by the Rev.
Mary Alice Brown of the Unity Church of Christ in Teaneck, N.J.


'LE CORSAIRE': PASSIONATE TALE TOLD ANEW
LEAD: LENINGRAD'S KIROV BALLET RECENTLY concluded a two-month season in Paris that included the first full-length version of ''Le Corsaire'' seen in the West since this initially French work was staged in Russia in the 19th century.
So fascinating and entertaining was this venture that one even felt impelled to go back to the ballet's literary inspiration - namely, the long poem Byron wrote in 1814 and entitled ''The Corsair.


'Professionalizing' New York Cabbies
LEAD: THE idea, the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission said, was to ''improve the image'' of the cabbies, ''professionalize'' them and ''respond to consumer complaints.''


Reagan to Seek Reduction on Capital Gains Tax
LEAD: President Reagan will ask Congress next week to reduce the tax on capital gains, White House officials said today.


Southwestern Breakfasts
LEAD: BREAKFAST MAY BE THE FIRST meal of the day, but lately it has seemed last in our affections.
The crackle and spatter of eggs, bacon and sausage on the griddle have become a casualty of hectic schedules and the latest diet plan.
Breakfast seems to have lost its esthetic and psychological properties - warm, sustaining food shared by the family early in the day's labor - to become, at best, an injection of nutrients.


STEPHANIE GOSLER ENGAGED TO ALAN H. FREUDENSTEIN
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Joel H. Gosler of Jersey City have announced the engagement of their daughter Stephanie Lynn Gosler to Alan Howard Freudenstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Freudenstein of Teaneck, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.


Vivid Images From An Ancient World
LEAD: ANCIENT CARTHAGE - A city of immense wealth where commerce and culture flourished - left a legacy of some of antiquity's most compelling mosaics, 17 of which are on view at the American Museum of Natural History through May 1.


The Small Museums of Montreal
LEAD: IN Montreal, as elsewhere, large museums with a broad variety of programs and large-scale exhibitions receive lots of attention, but specialized small museums are all too often passed by.


VILLANOVA KEEPS LEAD IN BIG EAST
LEAD: Kenny Wilson scored 21 points and Mark Plansky added 20 tonight as Villanova defeated Seton Hall, 69-63, in a Big East Conference game.


City Ballet: 3 Works by Balanchine and Martins
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the musical compositions by Michael Torke that serve as the accompaniment for Peter Martins's ''Ecstatic Orange'' are called ''Green,'' ''Purple'' and, like the ballet itself, ''Ecstatic Orange,'' the dancers wear simple black costumes.
Nevertheless, Mr.
Martin's choreography is always bright, and sometimes even glaring in its intensity.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Jan. 10 about a Gallup poll on the 10 men most admired by Americans misstated the year in which the list was first compiled.
It was 1946.


In the Debates, Appearance Conquers Substance
LEAD: GEORGE BUSH WAS IN TROUBLE; Pat Robertson had said the Vice President didn't know the difference between a missile and a warhead, and for an instant, which is a very long time on television, the Vice President appeared confused.
Missile?
Warhead?
He really didn't seem to know the difference.
One thought of Gerald Ford in 1976, when he said that Eastern Europe was not under Soviet domination.


Temple Freshman a Wise Owl
LEAD: AFTER the hordes of college recruiters have offered all they can offer, a high school basketball star chooses the school that has displayed something special for him.
The temptation is not always wholesome, but for Mark Macon it was.
He wanted a good education and a chance to see the country, but the hook would be a straight coach, someone he could trust.


Correction
LEAD: A listing on Jan. 3 with an article about Zurs, Austria, gave hotel rates incorrectly.
The rates cited were for one person in double occupancy, not for two people in a room.


Tokyo Action Seen Over Jet
LEAD: The Japanese Government plans to impose sanctions on North Korea for its suspected role in the destruction of a South Korean airliner Nov. 29 with 115 people aboard, news reports said today.
Newspapers, quoting unidentified Foreign Ministry officials, said the measures would include a ban on North Korean officials entering Japan, and barring most trips to North Korea by Japanese officials.


Headliners; Telling Story
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton, a Brooklyn minister, orbited on the periphery of civil rights and political circles for years before his leadership of recent demonstrations against racism brought him the high visibility he admittedly enjoys.
But the spotlight got a little warm last week after New York Newsday reported that Mr.


FIREFIGHTERS SEEK DATA ON STORAGE OF TOXINS
LEAD: MANUFACTURERS in the state are filling out forms this month that will warn firefighters of any hazardous materials stored on company property.


Union City Arcade: $4 Million Project
LEAD: At 3:20 A.M. on March 15, 1987, Robert DeRuggiero got a rude awakening.
A phone call informed him that his building in downtown Union City, N.J., was on fire. ''Just as I got there, I saw my offices collapse,'' he said. ''It was quite a shock.'' The building at 4100 Bergenline Avenue had housed Mr.


A WIND-CHILL FACTOR OF ABOUT 200 FEET UP
LEAD: THEIR eyes were set on the sky, where multi-colored triangles wafted in the breeze.
Their feet were lodged in snow.


On the Drive: Fringe Co-ops
LEAD: Proximity to a sewage treatment plant is not always a draw for co-op buyers, but Bernard McElhone hopes the $1 billion North River facility and New York State's promise to carpet its roof with grass and trees by the end of next year will attract purchasers to the upper reaches of Riverside Drive.
His 31-unit building at 604 Riverside Drive is opposite the entrance at 138th Street to the planned Riverbank


ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER: SUPERSTAR
LEAD: John Rockwell refers in his article to the phrase ''The Record-Breaking Broadway Musical,'' which is used in advertisements for the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical ''Starlight Express.'' In repeating the phrase, he adds, ''just which record is left unsaid.''


F. W. LAFFERTY JR. AND HILARY EDDY TO MARRY IN MAY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John Sackett Eddy of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Hilary Clark Eddy, to Frederick Wayne Lafferty Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lafferty of Baltimore.
A May wedding is planned.


Jersey Gas Tax to Rise to Help Pay for Road Work
LEAD: Starting July 1, New Jersey's tax on gasoline will rise to 10.5 cents a gallon, from 8 cents, following Governor Kean's signing this week of a law to help finance a seven-year $5.7 billion highway construction program.


Airport X-Rays
LEAD: To the Editor: As a documentary filmmaker who longs for the easy, good ol' days when you could just walk from car to plane with your film in your carry-on bag, I might be of some help to the travelers who complain that their trip was ruined by some security officer in Austria or Hong Kong.


Revised Financing Bill May Help Incumbents
LEAD: A last-minute change in the New York City Council's bill for public financing of city election campaigns could be a boon to some current officeholders, including the Council majority leader, Peter F. Vallone.


ON DEMOCRACY, LATIN GENERALS REMAIN UNCONVINCED
LEAD: A BOOK was published last month that contained 39 military proclamations issued during coups and attempted coups since the last civilian president of Argentina completed his term 60 years ago.
Had the book been delayed, the list would have been longer.
Last week, there was yet another army revolt and, while it failed, it produced the customary grandiose pronouncements.


SNYDER STIRS MANY REACTIONS
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Back to Basics
LEAD: To the Editor:


ENVIRONMENTALISTS DECRY TEST OF PLASTICS
LEAD: THE New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection has, since October, been putting eight-ounce plastic vials containing self-addressed and color-coded postcards into Raritan Bay and New York Harbor.


HORSES WANT TO KILL
LEAD:  TALES OF AN OLD HORSETRADER  The First Hundred Years.
By Leroy Judson Daniels.
As told to Helen S. Herrick. 235 pp.
Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
Cloth, $24.95.
Paper, $9.95.


Toward South Africa
LEAD: Last July a Palestinian lawyer, Mona Rishmawi, went to the Ramallah prison to interview a client.
While there she saw a handcuffed detainee being held with a heavy hood over his head, making it difficult for him to breathe.
The temperature was 100 degrees Fahrenheit.


SNYDER STIRS MANY REACTIONS
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


What Israel Is Losing
LEAD: It would be a profound mistake for Israel to believe that it can restore order in occupied Gaza and the West Bank by resorting to brazen brutality and betraying its own values.
How can that open a path to serious political talks with the Palestinians?


New Measurements
LEAD: IT'S going to be easier to visit the outfield monuments in Yankee Stadium this season, but don't give the credit to Jack Clark.
It's true that the project to widen the access paths to the monuments will require moving the fences in a bit at the left-center-field power alley, but Yankee officials say the plans were in place last July, well before the team picked up the right-handed power-hitter from the St.


Dissident Said to Get Visa
LEAD: Naum S. Meiman, the 76-year-old mathematician who is among the last of the prominent Soviet dissidents denied exit visas, has been told that Soviet officials have decided to allow him to emigrate.
Mr.
Meiman reported Friday evening that he had received a telephone call from the French writer Simone Veil, who has taken an interest in his 14-year struggle to emigrate.


Q And A
LEAD:  Condo Improvements


AUTO-INSURANCE RESOLUTION SOUGHT
LEAD: PRESSURE on the pocketbook, the type both the public and elected officials respond to, began building last week behind the need to change the state's automobile insurance system.


FIDEL CASTRO WANTS A COKE
LEAD:  MONGOOSE R.I.P.
A Blackford Oakes Novel.
By William F. Buckley Jr. 322 pp.
New York: Random House. $17.95.


MISS LYONS PLANS OCTOBER WEDDING
LEAD: The engagement of Katherine M. Lyons, a daughter of Jane C. Lyons of Irvington, N.Y., and the late Robert K. Lyons, to Robert C. Michele has been announced by the future bride's mother.
Mr.
Michele is the son of Dr.
Evelyn W. Michele of Bryn Mawr, Pa., and the late Dr.
Charles T. Michele.
An October wedding is planned.


POND'S ICY SURFACE YIELDS A GLIMPSE OF SPRING
LEAD: FROM my office in an old North Shore mansion, as I sip my lukewarm coffee and aim my little heater at my frozen feet, I watch a mallard in the pond below that appears to be walking on water.


LAWRENCE J. PEREZ AND MISS PERSICO TO MARRY IN JULY
LEAD: Vanya Maria Persico and Lawrence Jeffrey Perez, staff members of the New York State Assembly, plan to marry in July, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph E. Persico of Albany and San Miguel de Allende, Mexico, have announced.


RETIREMENT: DAYS OF FREEDOM AND NATURAL WONDERS
LEAD: HE wears retirement like a burnoose; it surrounds him but doesn't quite fit.


5 Slain in Landover, Md.
LEAD: Five people were killed and one was wounded in apparently drug-related violence in this Washington suburb, said a police spokeswoman, Officer Carol Landrum.
She said the five people, whose bodies were found in an apartment, had not been identified.
The spokeswoman declined to say why police believed the killings were drug-related.


4 Arab Envoys Ask U.S. Aide For More Pressure on Israel
LEAD: The representative of the Arab League and three other Arab diplomats met with a senior State Department official today to complain about what they considered inadequate United States pressure on Israel to halt the violence against Palestinians in Jerusalem, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.


A MOTHER ASKS: WHAT PRICE GLORY?
LEAD: A RECENT issue of a national news magazine brought some surprising news to my attention: It isn't enough to eat and rest well, avoid drugs and alcohol and see my doctor regularly to lead the proper pregnant life.
Now, halfway into my third pregnancy, I learn that I should be playing ''educational'' tapes for my developing fetus to hear and presumably gain greater intelligence from.


POTATO DISHES PROVIDE SUSTAINING WINTER FARE
LEAD: EVERY time I go back for a visit to England I realize how good potatoes can be.


SENATE HEARINGS ON MISSILE TREATY A TEST FOR REAGAN
LEAD: Against the backdrop of election-year politics, rivalries among Senators and uncertainty over the future of arms control, the Senate begins consideration Monday of the arms treaty that President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev signed at their summit meeting here last month.


TENEMENT VIRTUES
LEAD: To the Editor:


REFUSING TO BE A PUSSYCAT
LEAD:  HER OWN TERMS  By Judith Grossman. 277 pp. New York: Soho Press. $16.95.


Periwigs and Brocade
LEAD:  THE RISE OF CATHERINE THE GREAT  With Douglas Fairbanks Jr. (in photo), Flora Robson and Elizabeth Bergner.
Embassy/Nelson Entertainment. 88 minutes. $39.95.


FISH OR CUT BAIT, SAYS MARINE EXPERT
LEAD: The article, ''New State Law in Licensing Fishermen Stirs Debate''  [ Dec. 27 ]  does not adequately describe the provisions of the new law and erroneously states that all New York State residents fishing in state waters must obtain a $100 license.


SCHOOL VIDEOS OPEN NEW DOORS FOR PRODUCERS AND ACTORS
LEAD: AN ambulance speeds down a narrow street in Irvington and stops beside a teen-ager lying in the road, severely injured after being thrown from her car in a collision.
As ambulance volunteers prepare the girl to be taken to a hospital, a silent group watches intently.
One films the incident from atop a truck, one holds a microphone, and a third studies the drama on a television monitor.


HOLLY TROXELL PLANS TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Holly Dana Troxell to Peter Eric Ruhlin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Ruhlin of New Canaan, Conn., and Hilton Head, S.C., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
D.
Chase Troxell of Short Hills, N.J., and Chatham, Mass.
The couple plan to marry in June.


HOUSECLEANING PLAN FOR THE HALL OF FAME
LEAD: ARGUMENTS about mediocre ballplayers in the Hall of Fame come up all the time.
When they do, I always think of the term Thomas Hoving dreamed up while delicately cleaning house as director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
He wasn't getting rid of masterpieces, merely ''deaccessioning'' a few works the museum no longer needed.


Blueberry Growers Gain Use of Pesticide in Maine
LEAD: The growers of Maine's famed wild blueberries, fearing large losses to their $50 million-a-year crop this summer because of an outbreak of the span worm, have persuaded the State Pesticides Control Board to make a rule change that will let them use a pesticide against the bloom-eating worm.


FOR WASHINGTON, IDEAS TO SECURE AMERICA'S FUTURE
LEAD: TOMORROWrrxh, the 100th Congress will convene for its second session, and Ronald Reagan will go to Capitol Hill to deliver to the assembled legislators the State of Union Message for his final year in office.
The expectation, encouraged by the comments of senior White House officials, is for few new initiatives.


Bid for Grand Slam Now in Graf's Path
LEAD: Steffi Graf became the Australian Open women's champion for the first time today.
Now she can concentrate on winning the elusive Grand Slam.


WARSAW
LEAD: Poland Extends An Official Hand To Rebel Artists Once Held At Arm's Length


She's The Top
LEAD: SHE HAS AN ATHLETE'S lithe body and a trumpeting soprano voice.
But when Patti LuPone makes her entrance in ''Anything Goes,'' what grabs you is her face.
Emphasized by stage lighting and set off by a turban and orange wig, Ms.
LuPone's face positively stretches forward: a hooked Roman nose above big lips and a strong chin.


MARIA GUREWITSCH PLANS TO BE WED TO JACQUES BRAND
LEAD: Mrs.
A.
David Gurewitsch of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter Maria Anna Gurewitsch to Jacques Brand, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Felix Brand of New York and Brussels.
The couple plan to marry in June.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article last Sunday about AIDS education, discussing the prevalence of AIDS in the Bronx, characterized an estimate incorrectly.
Dr.
Peter Gillette, an assistant professor of medicine at the State University of New York Health Science Center at Brooklyn, indeed said ''30 percent of the kids'' in the South Bronx test positive for the AIDS virus.


Exploring A Jungle Park In Costa Rica
LEAD: MOST visitors arrive barefoot -and with warm, wet sand between their toes - at the entrance to Manuel Antonio National Park on Costa Rica's Pacific coast.
We were no exception, having shed our sandals to stroll along North Espadilla Beach just outside the park, then ford a shallow, sun-warmed estuary that hugs the tumble of rock and vegetation at beach's end.


HOW RACISM IS EMBEDDED IN THE FABRIC OF LANGUAGE
LEAD: ''WALL Street's Blackest Day Rocks Nation'' was the The New York Post's Page 1 headline on Oct. 30, 1987.
News magazines like Newsweek also reported (Nov. 2, 1987) ''How a handful of brokers and traders survived Black Monday -and its even scarier aftermath.''


Stockholm
LEAD: To the Editor: I enjoyed Richard Kostelanetz's article ''In Stockholm, the Sounds of Silence'' (Travel, Dec. 6) but question his report of helium-filled balloons carrying people over the city.


SHIRA MORRISON ENGAGED TO J. I. KANTER
LEAD: The engagement of Shira Ilena Morrison to Jonathan I. Kanter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Kanter of Clifton, N.J., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Morrison of Summit, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.


Man Hired to Aid Wright Doesn't
LEAD: A press aide hired by House Speaker Jim Wright to polish his image could lose his job in the wake of disclosures that he wrote a sex book in 1982, Congressional sources said today.


ARMY BACKING OUT ON AIRCRAFT DEAL
LEAD: The Army, in a move that could drive up expenses for the other armed services, has reportedly decided it will not buy a combat aircraft designed to take off and land like a helicopter but fly like an airplane.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A caption on Jan. 10 incorrectly attributed the lithograph ''Elfriede Mahler, Dance.'' The artist was Marguerite Doernbach.


UNMOVED BY TAX CUTS: Underground Economy Is Not Rising To the Bait
LEAD: LOWER tax rates, the Reagan Adminstration long maintained, would not only encourage people to work harder but would also make them more honest.
If less was taken by various tax collectors, the argument ran, fewer people would risk evasion, and significant numbers of moonlighters, barterers and other members of the ''underground'' economy would be lured into fiscal rectitude.


Unethical Lawyers Are Target of Bar Unit
LEAD: The Connecticut Bar Association adopted measures this week intended to protect clients from unscrupulous lawyers.


A Mayan Past, A Latin Present In Guatemala
LEAD: ARRIVING in Antigua, Guatemala, is like falling into a time warp and ending up in 16th- or 17th-century Spain.
Colonial-style mansions line the landscape, shrouded by eight-foot walls that hide pools, gardens brimming with multitudes of flowers and, beyond, elaborate hand-carved woodwork.


ADJUSTING TO THE TRANSITIONS OF LIFE
LEAD: THE other day, I took my wife's car to the garage for a periodic checkup.
Six hours later and $436.61 poorer, I had the ransomed car back home.


FRAMED BY HER HUSBAND
LEAD:  LULLABY AND GOOD NIGHT  By Vincent T. Bugliosi with William Stadiem. 405 pp.
New York: New American Library. $17.95.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  RESCUE: The Exodus of the Ethiopian Jews.
By Ruth Gruber. (Atheneum, $19.95.) ''For the first time in history, white people were transporting black men and women and children out of Africa not to be sold but to be saved,'' writes Ruth Gruber, the author of 12 previous books and the only foreign correspondent permitted to witness the secret mission that the world came to know as Operation Moses.


HARVEY'S OVERTIME PAYS OFF
LEAD: For the last three days, Connecticut players studied the scouting report that focused on how to contain Greg (Boo) Harvey and Michael Porter, St.
John's stunning backcourt combination.
The secret: cut off the drive, keep them out of the paint, give them the outside shot and encourage the 3-point shot.


DEMOCRATS IN IOWA GO ON THE ATTACK
LEAD: The Democratic Presidential candidates, searching for ways of moving a still highly volatile and uncertain Iowa electorate, stepped up their attacks on one another today in a series of forums held just 16 days before the state's Presidential caucuses.


Cashmere That's Lean And Spare
LEAD: ''EITHER very square and loose, or very spare - nothing in between.'' That's how Michael Kors describes his fall cashmere collection for Lyle &amp; Scott, the Scottish sweater manufacturer.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: Protecting Against A Weak Dollar


Stories Make a Family
LEAD: IN THE BEGINNING, AS FAR back in my family as anyone could go, was my great-grandmother, and her name was Annunziata.
In the next generation, it would be my grandmother's name, in the generation after that (in its Anglicized form, Nancy) it would be my aunt's first name and my mother's middle name, and in the generation after that, my sister's middle name as well.


ELIZABETH DANIELS RICH TO WED IN JULY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Weber of New York have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Weber's daughter, Elizabeth Daniels Rich, to Michael Lindsay, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Lindsay of Union City,, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.


CLEVELAND ORCHESTRA TO PERFORM IN HARTFORD
LEAD: FIVE state orchestras, as well as the Cleveland Orchestra, perform this week.


A New Era Is Dawning for the Grand Concourse
LEAD: ON DEC. 18, New York City officials turned over the last five vacant apartment buildings on the Grand Concourse to private developers for rehabilitation into badly needed housing for the Bronx.


Cable TV
LEAD: Let's face it - you can't keep a good phantom down.
On Monday, the night before Broadway unwraps Andrew Lloyd Webber's highly-touted, musical ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' home cable is showing the original Lon Chaney film from 1925 (and Gaston Leroux's novel) - at 9 P.M. and 1 A.M. on Arts &amp; Entertainment.


SUSAN EINBINDER TO MARRY EDITOR
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Jason R. Einbinder of Lincroft, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Dana Einbinder to Aaron Michael Brenner, the son of Dr.
Robert P. Brenner of Los Angeles and Dr.
Johanna Brenner of Portland, Ore.
A May wedding is planned.


Aiding the Homeless Is Goal of Donors to Neediest
LEAD: Erna Weill, a sculptor who lives in Teaneck, N.J., has been troubled for some time by the sight of families living out in the open.


Stockholm
LEAD: To the Editor: The eloquent description provided by Mr.
Kostelanetz is like a bit of madeleine for those of us who have shared the delights of which he speaks.
Unintentionally, however, he gives too short shrift to the attractions of Kungstradgarden, the green oasis in downtown Stockholm.


William Manee; Real-Estate Investor, 91
LEAD: William Manee, a New York lawyer and real-estate investor, died of a heart attack Jan. 16 at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
He was 91 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Verbatim; The Shadow and the Act
LEAD: 'Intellectuals should make themselves heard by putting forward their perceptions of what is right.
Then let the politicians worry about what is possible.'  Henry A. Kissinger
speaking as one of 76 Nobel laureates summoned by President Francois Mitterrand of France to discuss the problems of the 21st century.


TALE OF TWO TOWERS ON BOSTON BOYLSTON STREET
LEAD: There are times, occasion-ally, when the cumbersome, irritating, ponderous and essentially irrational process of public review of large building projects yields positive results, and this saga of two towers on Boylston Street is one of them.
It is a long story that can be summarized like this: In 1982, the New England (formerly the New England Life Insurance Company), along with the Gerald D.


A Town in California Where Waste Isn't Wasted
LEAD: Public restrooms in this coastal city are called ''pre-treatment facilities.'' An office in City Hall is decorated with a poster of a toilet headlined ''The Origin.'' And every September, thousands of people are drawn to this city's foggy shoreline for the ''Flush With Pride'' festival.


Agrippa and the Hamburger
LEAD: THE name, in two-foot-high bronze letters, on the portico of the Pantheon is that of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa.
He was the general, admiral and son-in-law of Augustus, the emperor who in 27 B.C. built the complex of baths, water gardens - and the temple that has survived.
The name newly inscribed in black and gold on the 18th-century house facing the Pantheon is Burghy.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, JANUARY 24, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-19


ASSESSING THE RISKY JOB OF RISK ASSESSMENT
LEAD: EARLY this century, the principal insecticide used on fruits and vegetables went by the elegant appellation ''Paris green.'' Today's chemists have a less appetizing name for the toxin - lead arsenate.


PETERS SEEKS OPTIONS ON SENTENCES
LEAD: JUDGES need more options when they impose sentences on criminals, according to Chief Justice Ellen A. Peters of the Connecticut Supreme Court.
The options now, she said, are generally limited to probation and incarceration.


New Canaan Offices: Another Story
LEAD: When downtown zoning in New Canaan, Conn., allowed for three-story structures, most builders limited themselves to one.
But that was when the Fairfield County town was still manufacturing shoes.
Now, with a growing docksider population and new, two-story zoning, many of those buildings are getting an extra floor.


About Men; A Brother's Dreams
LEAD: EACH TIME I GO home to see my parents at their house near Poughkeepsie, N.Y., my brother, a schizophrenic for almost nine years now, comes to visit from the halfway house where he lives nearby.
He owns a car that my parents help him to maintain, and his food and washing are taken care of by the halfway house.


LISA KAREN SMITH TO WED
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Neil Smith of Greensboro, N.C., of the engagement of their daughter Lisa Karen Smith to Warren Seth Waters, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Waters of Clifton, N.J., and Boca Raton, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.
The future bride is a senior at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro.


Fresh Winds Blow Through French Museums
LEAD: IN PARIS, THERE HAS LATELY BEEN more good art than almost anyone can keep up with.
Momentarily, there will be much more.
To those who remember how long and slow was the recovery of the great city from the effects of World War II, there is an element of wild exhilaration about the current exhibition schedule.


Millesgarden
LEAD: To the Editor: Re the article on Carl Milles: a quibble.
Milles did not bring a forest of antique sculptures filling his living room to Cranbrook in order to use them as teaching aids for his students.
When I was in his home with a group of students in 1944, Milles told us, ''These are my resource books, my library.


ISLANDERS REGROUP AND WIN
LEAD: On Friday they had a meeting to articulate the soul-searching that went on during the silent bus ride home from Thursday's loss, their third in a row.
Tonight, they skipped their morning practice, regrouped at game time, and plowed their way to a 3-2 victory against Edmonton.


The Opera: Pavarotti and Freni in 'La Boheme'
LEAD: CARLOS KLEIBER, who made his Metropolitan Opera debut on Friday evening as conductor of the season's eighth ''La Boheme,'' arrived on a wave of excited expectation that had to make one wary.
Before he even lifted the baton, the 57-year-old German musician was treated to the kind of heady ovation that many conductors do not receive after their finest performances.


Spaniards Around U.S. Base Divided Over Closing
LEAD: Standing in front of his insurance company as a jet plane whizzed overhead, Ismael Recio seemed in shock.


Cabaret: Julienne Scanlon Sings
LEAD: JULIENNE MARIE SCANLON, who was known only as Julienne Marie when she played leads in musicals on Broadway in the 1960's and early 70's, has renewed her singing career after a 10-year retirement with an act made up of songs that were sung in musicals by ''the other woman,'' the second female leads.


Suriname's Civilian Leaders to Be Sworn in Tomorrow
LEAD: Henck Arron, who is to be the Vice President and Prime Minister of Suriname, speaking at a news conference Friday in Paramaribo.
With him was Ramsewak Shankar, the President-elect.
Their inauguration tomorrow will return the South American country to civilian rule after eight years of military rule.


ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER: SUPERSTAR
LEAD: John Rockwell's defense of Andrew Lloyd Webber's oft-charged ''derivativeness and even plagiarism'' employed an ill-chosen example (''Andrew Lloyd Webber: Superstar,'' Dec. 20).
Yes, ''I Don't Know How to Love Him'' (from ''Jesus Christ, Superstar'') possesses a ''big, arching tune and sweeping melodic momentum.


MS. KINBERG ENGAGED TO ARTHUR J. DECROSS
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard D. Kinberg of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Donna Kinberg, to Arthur Joseph DeCross, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur DeCross Jr. of West Brighton, S.I.
The couple plan to marry in June.


From Whitman to Plath, PBS Gives Poets a Voice
LEAD: AMERICA FORGETS HER POETS.


Thwarting Terror At U.S. Centers
LEAD: IT LOOKS like an ordinary suburban sports van, but that's when the machine gun is stored inside.
Actually it is an antiterrorist patrol vehicle, and a gunner can deploy the weapon through a motor-operated roof hatch.


Navy Trident 2 Missile Fails For First Time in 9 Launches
LEAD: The Navy's new Trident 2 submarine missile has failed for the first time in nine test launchings, officials have reported.


HELPING CHILDREN TO FAIL
LEAD: q THE LEARNING MYSTIQUE  A Critical Look at ''Learning Disabilities.'' By Gerald Coles. 330 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $22.95.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bridgeport, Conn.  $150,000
480 Frenchtown Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; private lake rights, eat-in kitchen; taxes $2,248.
Canton, Conn.  $188,000
734 Cherrybrook Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old raised ranch; freshly painted throughout, brick patio, 1.3 acres; taxes $1,919.


Drop in the Dollar Brings an Increase In Tourism in U.S.
LEAD: Benefiting from a steep, three-year decline in the value of the dollar, the tourism industry is prospering around the nation, with a rising number of visitors coming from overseas.


Union Aide Draws 15 Years
LEAD: Stephen Traitz Jr., a union leader convicted of conspiracy to bribe judges and embezzle union funds, was sentenced in Federal District Court here Friday to 15 years in prison and a $50,000 fine.
Mr.
Traitz, the 50-year-old business manager of Local 30-30B of the Roofers Union, was convicted in November along with two sons, a son-in-law and eight former officials of the local.


Sweden's Set of Six Depicts Its Inland Boats
LEAD: INLAND boats and waterways play an important role in philately.
Sweden recently added to the field with a set of six stamps that use inland boats as a commom motif.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  THE LOCKED ROOM: The New York Trilogy, Volume Three, by Paul Auster. (Penguin, $5.95.) In the latest of Paul Auster's self-reflexive, metafictional whodunits, a biographer turns detective and sets out to solve the literary and linguistic mysteries surrounding the disappearance of a friend.
Last year our reviewer, Stephen Schiff, said he had found the author's previous two novels annoyingly austere, but added that in ''The Locked Room,'' his ''philosophical asides now sound heartfelt instead of stentorian and his descents into semiological Angst feel genuinely anguished and near.


Actresses And the Oscar Race
LEAD: ''WHO IS PEARL HARBOR?'' SALLY White asks in Woody Allen's ''Radio Days.'' Sally's big break as a radio actress has been abruptly terminated by the announcement that the Japanese have attacked the United States naval base on Oahu.
One minute before air time, Sally's debut performance has been canceled to make way for a special news broadcast.


HALF A NATION DEAD OR DISPLACED
LEAD:  THE WIND BLOWS AWAY OUR WORDS  And Other Documents Relating to the Afghan Resistance.
By Doris Lessing. 171 pp.
New York: Vintage Books.
Paper, $5.95.


Restaurants
LEAD: To the Editor: This past fall we spent an enjoyable two weeks in Paris.
We particularly delighted in the quality of the French cuisine; not only the subtleties and nuances of fragrance and taste but also its beauty of presentation, the elegance of restaurant decor and the impeccable service.
However, into the midst of this culinary splendor, our privacy and senses were assaulted on numerous occasions by smokers, often seated in close proximity.


RELIGIOUS SCHOOLS GET U.S. AID ABROAD
LEAD: The United States has funneled tens of millions of dollars to religious-affiliated schools and hospitals around the world under a little-known program administered by the Agency for International Development, The program, American Schools and Hospitals Abroad, has since 1971 quietly financed Jewish, Catholic and Protestant schools and hospitals in Africa, Latin America, Asia and the Middle East.


CHICAGO'S GRUMPY GURU
LEAD: James Atlas describes well the Chicago I knew as an undergraduate (''Chicago's Grumpy Guru: Best-Selling Professor Allan Bloom,'' Jan. 3).
I studied with Allan Bloom and other members of the Committee on Social Thought.
It was an invigorating education that continuously forced us to consider what it means to be a human being and a member of civil society.


Comedy: Jeffrey Essmann
LEAD: JEFFREY ESSMANN, a character comedian whose fine-tuned sensibility places him in the tradition of Ruth Draper, Lily Tomlin and Danitra Vance, is a performer whose pursuit of comic truth embraces all ages and freely crosses sexual boundaries.
Mr.
Essmann is also something of a literary daredevil, for his most ambitious pieces assume some historical knowledge and steer away from pat comic formulas.


Jazz Refreshes Itself With a Dash of Brazil
LEAD: MUSICIANS, LIKE MOST FOLK, love to travel.
Unlike other tourists who bring home clothing and carvings or other such bric-a-brac, musicians pick up odd-sounding rhythms, exotic melodies, new ways of turning a phrase.
Sometimes what they accomplish amounts to colonialist plunder.
But at times their wanderlust produces unexpected insights.


U.S. OLYMPIC OUTLOOK: GOLD COULD BE RARE
LEAD: IN the good old summertime of 1984, the most popular song on the charts was ''The Star-Spangled Banner.'' Now, it's the winter of 1988, and by the close of the Olympic Games next month, the national anthem may seem like a golden oldie.


Rohde Wins Brilliancy and a Double Prize
LEAD: IT isn't often that the same game gets both a brilliancy prize and a prize for excellence in the end game, but Michael Rohde showed, in the 1987 United States Championship, that such a feat is not impossible.


A Mixed Harvest Of 1987 Statistics
LEAD: The harvest of statistics from 1987 continued.
A steep, 16.2 percent plunge in housing starts in December got the most attention.
That put housing construction for all of 1987 at 1.62 million units, the lowest since 1982 and down 10 percent from 1986.
Much of the December decline was in apartment construction, which has lagged since tax laws changed last year.


Missile Treaty Deserves to Be Ratified Quickly
LEAD: To the Editor:


OUR TOWNS AND CHANGE
LEAD: Thank Heavens for public hearings!
Often loud and argumentative, they are a unique part of our Yankee heritage and have determined the face of our Connecticut towns.


WILLIAM SIMON'S PACIFIC OVERTURES
LEAD: If William Simon does become taipan of a trans-Pacific trading company, he will be able to develop such extraordinary opportunities for small American companies that he will silence his detractors (''William Simon's Pacific Overtures,'' by L. J. Davis, Dec. 27).


Tuner Separates Bach From the Beasties
LEAD: MORE PEOPLE NOW live farther from urban centers than at any time in recent years.


Free Bus Rides And the Clergy
LEAD: FOR more than a century, Roman Catholic nuns and priests had received free public transportation in New Orleans.
But not until last October did the practice come under legal challenge.


TRUCK RESTRICTIONS SAID TO POSE THREAT
LEAD: FEDERAL transportation officials have ruled that environmental safety in Westchester is indirectly threatened by New York City regulations restricting the size of fuel tankers that can enter the city.
The officials also said that the restrictions violate Federal law and also threaten the environment in parts of New


SNOWTHROWERS: CARE AND FEEDING
LEAD: TO those who own or use a snowthrower, happiness is trouble-free operation.
Although knowing how to operate a snowthrower safely and skillfully is important, smooth sailing throughout the snow season depends largely on performing manufacturer-recommended maintenance thoroughly and on time.
Complete maintenance information is usually printed in the owner's manual furnished with the snowthrower or available from the manufacturer.


Social Events; Divertissements of the Night
LEAD:  Raffle Par Excellence


No Dream Matchup
LEAD: St.
Anthony of Jersey City and St.
Nicholas of Tolentine from the Bronx, two of the top high school basketball teams in the country, will be on the same program one more time this season.
Unfortunately, they won't be playing each other.


Oil of North Slope in Alaska Is Reported Polluting Tundra
LEAD: Oil production at Prudhoe Bay on Alaska's North Slope is polluting the fragile tundra and has resulted in hundreds of violations of environmental regulations, three environmental organizations have charged.


SARAH VAN ALLEN WED IN PRINCETON
LEAD: At Trinity Episcopal Church in Princeton, N.J., Sarah Halsey Van Allen, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James A. Van Allen of Iowa City, Iowa, and Southampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Gerald Roark Trimble, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald R. Trimble of Atlantic City.
The Rev.
Raul H. Mattei performed the ceremony.


FICTION
LEAD:  BLOOD HUNT.
By Neil M. Gunn. (Walker, $15.95.) Though this book, first published in Britain in 1952, includes a murderer on the run, a wronged woman and a revenge-obsessed policeman, it is not really a mystery or a thriller.
It is, rather, a charming, old-fashioned novel of life in a remote section of the Scottish Highlands right after World War II.


If You're Thinking of Living in:; Dobbs Ferry
LEAD: LAURENCE DENGLER stood in the dining room of his red-brick ranch in suburban Westchester County and pointed to a towering, 600-year-old beech tree in the backyard.


WHAT IN THE WORLD IS GOING ON IN ARIZONA?
LEAD: AT the first day of hearings on whether Governor Evan Mecham should be impeached, it was quickly apparent that his critics had a good deal of ammunition.
But it was also clear that Mr.
Mecham's greatest sin may not have been corruption or deceit, but that he had embarrassed Arizona.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  BASEBALL CLINIC  Bobby Valentine, manager of the Texas Rangers, is to be one of seven speakers at a baseball clinic from 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Saturday in the Physical Education Center on the West Hartford campus of the University of Hartford.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Two Office Buildings Rising in Peekskill
LEAD: THANKS to a combination of grants, tax abatements and low-interest mortgages, and a cleanup effort ''that overnight turned a sea of useless muck into valuable topsoil,'' construction began this month on two new office buildings in downtown Peekskill, the first in 25 years.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  MODEL RAILROADING


KNICKS LOSE AS SHOT MISSES AT BUZZER
LEAD: Reggie Theus scored 22 points and the Sacramento Kings blew a 15-point lead before rallying for a 97-94 victory over the Knicks tonight.


DR. LISA S. WHITE TO WED IN APRIL
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert White of Medford, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Lisa Sue White to Dr.
Barry Stephen Paul, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Paul of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The couple plan to marry in April.


IRIS M. SCHNEIDER MARRIES IRA DON ROSEN, A PRODUCER
LEAD: At Temple Judea in Manhasset, L.I., Iris Miriam Schneider, a daughter of Bernard Schneider of Roslyn, L.I., and the late Anita Schneider, was married last evening to Ira Don Rosen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Rosen of Fresh Meadows, Queens.
Rabbi Perry Rank officiated.
The bride, the director of research and planning at the New York Telephone Company, graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in communications from George Washington University.


WILLIAM L. GATES WEDS ANNE O'NEILL IN JERSEY
LEAD: Anne O'Neill, a daughter of Mrs.
Hugh John O'Neill of Brewster, N.Y., and the late Dr.
O'Neill, was married in Princeton, N.J., yesterday to William Lippincott Gates, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Moore Gates Jr. of Princeton.
The Rev.
Richard J. Devine, a Roman Catholic priest and a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University


SUDS SLIP UP A SHORTCUT
LEAD: FOR people who live in Port Washington and drive to work in Great Neck, or vice versa, there is something between the villages called Northern Boulevard, or 25A.
It is loved by drivers of enormous trucks in no hurry to get where they're going and by non-North Shore notorists in no hurry either because they don't even know where they've been.


GEORGE ST: 'LEAR' WITH TWISTS
LEAD: IT is 1957 and a stooped-over but imposing elderly woman, wearing a fur-trimmed dressing gown, darts about at a backyard barbecue party in Smyrna, Ga., wielding a cane and followed by her entourage.
She doles out pieces of cake to her three sons, demanding to know which loves her most.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  'DANCIN' FEET'  There is nothing static about either the name or the contents of the North Shore Dance Theater's latest production.
It is called ''Dancin' Feet'' and that is what members of the energetic young, Huntington-based jazz dance company, under the direction of Sandi Bloomberg, a former Rockette, and Toni Wortman employ today at the Harborfields Public Library.


Streetscapes: 13th Regiment Armory; A Brooklyn Fortress Yields to the Changing Times
LEAD: NEW YORK CITY'S armories are generally elaborate structures, often with 200-foot-wide drill halls and unusual architectural character.
But as the need for armories has declined since their heyday at the turn of the century, several have been demolished and it has been hard to find alternative uses for the others.


SHRUGGING OFF THE INVADERS
LEAD:  CHRONICLE IN STONE  By Ismail Kadare. 277 pp.
New York: New Amsterdam Books/ The Meredith Press. $17.95.


Research Findings
LEAD: CHECK indoor plant collection for presence of mealybugs, white flies, aphids and spider mites; control if found.
Use water-soluble fertilizer sparingly; indoor plants are semi-dormant during the winter months since light levels are low.
Keep up with seed and nursery catalogue orders; plan the garden for this spring and summer.


TWIN EVILS SPUR METHADONE CLINICS
LEAD: INCREASES in addicts lured by cheaper, stronger and more widely available heroin and in the spread of AIDS through intravenous drug use have given new impetus to opening more methadone clinics around the state, officials say.


A Blow to Journalism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 30-year-old house has cedar shakes on the outside.
To my knowledge, these shakes have never been painted or treated in any way.
Should we leave them as is, or should they be treated in some way?


Hart Aides Accused In an Effort to Raise Illegal Contributions
LEAD: Gary Hart's top campaign aides instructed at least one supporter to ''raise and conceal hundreds of thousands of dollars in illegal contributions,'' The Orange County (Calif.) Register reported in a copyright article yesterday.


Schubert - Note by Note
LEAD: DEVOTEES OF SCHUBERT WILL BE HAPPY to know that the next 10 years of their lives have been planned for them.
In an act of extraordinary devotion and tenacity, the 92d Street Y has committed itself to performing the 600 songs, nine symphonies, 22 piano sonatas and 15 string quartets, plus the duos, quintets, trios, octets, operas, masses and choruses that poured out in such profusion over


N.C.A.A. Ticket Lottery
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association's Eastern Regional basketball tournament at Byrne Meadowlands Arena March 24 and March 26 will allocate tickets by lottery.


Honor for 11 Ex-Stars
LEAD: FAME can be fleeting, but the National Football Foundation does its part to keep the names of former stars fresh at its College Football Hall of Fame in Kings Island, Ohio.
In the process, its annual inductions can provide fresh ammunition for trivia buffs.


DOES PRO GOLF NEED A NEW STAR TO SUCCEED?
LEAD: Pro golf is a slow, noncontact sport.
It would only be more boring if one new ''star'' would predictably win every tournament.
ROBERT J. MOORE
Bloomfield, N.J.


Borrowing Against Life Insurance
LEAD: A NEW JERSEY executive, eager to participate in a joint venture, ''needed to get his hands on some funds, fast,'' said the executive's financial planner, Paul S. Brienes, president of Paul Stewart Associates in Princeton, N.J.
After assessing his client's portfolio, Mr.
Brienes tapped the executive's life insurance policy for a loan.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Drawing the Line On Liquor License


What's Doing In Dallas
LEAD: A few years back local slogan makers decided to dub Dallas the Time of Your Life City.
It's not clear exactly what that was supposed to mean, but its hint of French Quarter-style merriment rang hollow as an inducement to visit Dallas.


THE FIRST PROFESSIONAL AUTHOR
LEAD:  JOHN DRYDEN AND HIS WORLD  By James Anderson Winn.
Illustrated. 651 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $29.95.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  CELLO CONCERTO  In keeping with his mission to promote the contemporary and rarely played cello repertory, Yehuda Hanani, the Israeli cellist, will perform Luigi Boccherini's Cello Concerto in B Flat Major at 8 P.M.
Saturday as soloist with the Chappaqua Orchestra at Horace Greeley High School.


Asylum News Is a Miracle To L.I. Family
LEAD: The news came to Tamas Koppany last Saturday, in a form letter from the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Because his request for political asylum had been denied and he had failed to leave the country, the letter said, deportation proceedings would begin against him, his wife and their 3-year-old daughter.


Sports of The Times; Tyson, Spinks Closer
LEAD: IN his wispy voice, Mike Tyson was talking about how ''Larry Holmes was a great and courageous champion in his time.
I just wanted to let him know his time is over.'' And let the world know that Mike Tyson's time is now.
But until the heavyweight champion fights Michael Spinks, his time will be clouded by the presence of the one heavyweight with the style that might confuse him, that might even conquer him.


JERSEY'S GAMBLING: TOO MUCH OF A BAD THING?
LEAD: LEGALIZED gambling in New Jersey has generated more than $4 billion in state revenues over the last 17 years, but there is a growing sense of alarm about its social effects.


B.Y.U. HITS 14-0; IOWA STATE UPSET
LEAD: Jim Usevitch scored 24 points and led a strong inside game today that powered Brigham Young to an 89-82 Western Athletic Conference victory over New Mexico.


IRAN DEAL HAUNTING THE BUSH CAMPAIGN
LEAD: GEORGE BUSH'S role in the Iran-contra affair has come back to haunt him at a critical juncture in his Presidential campaign.
The problem isn't so much what Mr.
Bush has said he knew about the affair as what he has said he didn't know: that it was an arms-for-hostages swap, from which funds were diverted to the contras.


Removal of Dixie Flag Barred in Alabama
LEAD: The state president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People will not be allowed to pull down the Confederate flag atop the Alabama Capitol, Gov.
Guy Hunt said today.


Opera Patron Dies in Plunge From a Balcony at the Met
LEAD: An elderly man plunged to his death from the top balcony of the Metropolitan Opera House yesterday afternoon during an intermission of the Metropolitan Opera's performance of ''Macbeth.''


CONTEMPORARY SOLO SHOWS IN HARTFORD AND MARLBOROUGH
LEAD: BORN a storefront enterprise in 1975, Real Art Ways has long since grown into a sleek arts center with many sponsors in the public and private sectors.


GIBSON MAY FIND FREE AGENCY WONDERFUL 2D TIME AROUNG
LEAD: SO now can anyone other than the Detroit Tigers use Kirk Gibson?


The Editorial Notebook; The Loyalty of Good Soldiers
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver North may still be ''a national hero'' to President Reagan, but he's no paragon in the military.
To high-ranking officers who met recently at the National Defense University, men every bit as loyal as he, Ollie North is an embarrassment.


British Intelligence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Design of Cup Defender Causes a Dispute
LEAD: A new and potentially disruptive dispute has risen over an announcement Friday by the San Diego Yacht Club that it would sail a multihull yacht against New Zealand's monohull challenger in the America's Cup next fall.


Attack Case Might Get a Special Prosecutor
LEAD: Governor Cuomo will use a panel of top legal aides to decide if a special state prosecutor should be appointed in what has been described as a racial and sexual attack on a teen-age girl, a spokesman said today.


Millesgarden
LEAD: To The Editor: Gunilla Martenson's article on Millesgarden, Carl Milles's villa at Stockholm (Travel, Dec. 27), failed to point out that practically all of the great sculptor's original works are in the United States where they may be seen free of charge from 10 A.M. to sunset seven days a week.
In a wooded setting covering several square miles of trees, pine shrubs and gardens at the Robert Allerton Estate at Monticello, Ill., 29 miles from Champaign, one may wander among these priceless


MAESTRO'S PROTEGE TO LEAD SYMPHONY
LEAD: ANTONIO PAPPANO lived in London until 1973, when he was about 13 years old.
But it was his life in Brideport, not Europe, that led him onto the podiums of many internationally renowned concert halls and opera houses.


Somers Conversion: Waiting Barn
LEAD: The year-old magazines will be familiar, but not the rough-hewn beams above or archeological artifacts displayed along the walls.
The 100-year-old barn is being converted into the waiting room for three doctors in Somers, N.Y.
Behind it, a new structure is being built for offices and examination rooms.


The United States and Nicaragua
LEAD: To the Editor:


DEBORAH A. OESTREICH WEDS JASON SETH RUBIN
LEAD: The marriage of Deborah Ann Oestreich, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Oestreich of Scarsdale, N.Y., to Jason Seth Rubin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mel Rubin of Great Neck, L.I., took place last evening at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Rabbis Arnold S. Turetsky and Jeffrey S. Salkin officiated.


DATA UPDATE
LEAD:  HOUSING COSTS/N.Y.-NortheastN.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Dec.
Nov.
Dec. 86
Rents[1]
134.7
0.7
6.6
Homeowner's costs[1]
140.7
1.8
10.4
Fuel and utilities[2]
363.8
-0.3
0.1
*Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.


Replacement Players in Line for Super Payoff
LEAD: From their living rooms, about 80 former Redskin and Bronco players will share in next Sunday's Super Bowl winnings, adding from $9,000 to $18,000 apiece to their postseason swag.


SNOWTHROWERS: CARE AND FEEDING
LEAD: TO those who own or use a snowthrower, happiness is trouble-free operation.
Although knowing how to operate a snowthrower safely and skillfully is important, smooth sailing throughout the snow season depends largely on performing manufacturer-recommended maintenance thoroughly and on time.
Complete maintenance information is usually printed in the owner's manual furnished with the snowthrower or available from the manufacturer.


JAMES G. TURINO AND JULIE L. KALBERER, ARCHIRTECTS, PLAN TO BE MARRIED IN JULY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Kalberer, of Providence and Wakefield, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Julie Lawton Kalberer to James Gerard Turino, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerard Turino of Alpine, N.J, and East Hampton, L.I.
A July wedding is planned.


DOES PRO GOLF NEED A NEW STAR TO SUCCEED?
LEAD: The answer has to be no.
People who watch golf are for the most part more interested in good shot-making, better coverage and carrying an event to its conclusion.
STEVEN S. WEBER
Brooklyn


FISHERMEN DISPUTE BAN ON SITE NEAR GLEN COVE
LEAD: A GROUP of fishermen, some of whom have been fishing peacefully for more than 50 years off East Island in Glen Cove, are appealing a decision by a State Supreme Court justice that they are trespassing and must stop.


LISA DEZANGER TO WED ROBERT STUART SILBAUGH
LEAD: The engagement of Lisa Suzanne deZanger to Robert Stuart Silbaugh, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart Silbaugh of Garden City, L.I., and Boynton Beach, Fla., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Arie deZanger 2d of New York and Sugar Loaf, N.Y.
The couple plan to marry in July.


Commercial Property: Model Offices; Setting Up on a Small Scale Helps to Avoid Trouble
LEAD: IN the showroom and on the design schematic, the leather-backed chair and the pedestal desk seemed to be a great combination for 95 offices in the headquarters center American Re-Insurance is erecting in Plainsboro, N.J.


An Extraordinary Portrait
LEAD:  ONCE AT A BORDER: ASPECTS OF STRAVINSKY  With Igor Stravinsky, Robert Craft, others.
Directed by Tony Palmer. 1981.
Kultur. 166 minutes (2 cassettes). $69.95.


CARA BACHENHEIMER, A LAWYER, TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Cara Conway Bachenheimer to Neal Joseph Reynolds, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Joseph Reynolds of Boston, has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph James Bachenheimer of Greenwich, Conn., parents of the bride-to-be.


JODI F. KRIEGER ENGAGED
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
David E. Krieger of Spring Valley, N.Y., of the engagement of their daughter Jodi F. Krieger to Gary Alan Kittrell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Kittrell of Brooklyn.
Ms.
Krieger and her fiance expect to graduate in May from the Brooklyn Law School.
She is an alumna of the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.


OUR TOWNS AND CHANGE
LEAD: ''Whose Town Is It, Anyway?'' was interesting and many of Sharlene A. McEvoy's statements were right on the money.
The problem seems obvious to me in her statement that ''we have watched our beloved small towns being ravaged.'' Hers is a plea for political action, for when one ''watches,'' the inevitable happens: the course of least resistance results in results not always to the liking of the watcher.


MICHELLE RITHOLZ ENGAGED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Ritholz of Bellmore, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Michelle Ritholz to Gary Bernstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Bernstein of Searingtown, L.I.
Miss Ritholz is a special assistant United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York.
Her fiance is an associate in the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler.


The Treaty in the Senate
LEAD: What the intermediate-range missle treaty would do, the issues in dispute and the people likely to lead the debate.
Page 12.


Practical Traveler; Bypassing Waiver Fees
LEAD: THE year has begun with a tug-of-war over auto rental companies' coverage for collision damage.
On New Year's Day, the Hertz Corporation placed a greater burden on those choosing not to pay Hertz for this coverage.
Within days, a large insurance organization responded, saying that it was insuring holders of certain credit cards against this and any other new risks the auto rental companies might hold the customer responsible for.


'Spare Rib,' a Revue,
LEAD: ''The Spare Rib Variety Show,'' a two-hour revue featuring female musicians, comedians, performance artists and writers, will be presented Monday at 8 o'clock at Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Casanova's Anticlimax
Casanova, the great lover, talker, intriguer, came to a sad end as librarian to a count in Bohemia, where he complained away his last 13 years.
This is from ''Casanova: A New Perspective,'' by J. Rives Childs (Giniger/Paragon House).


OPERA, FOR LACK OF A BETTER WORD
LEAD:  MUSIC BY PHILIP GLASS  By Philip Glass.
Edited and with supplementary material by Robert T. Jones.
Illustrated. 222 pp.
New York: Harper &amp; Row. $22.95.


Classical Music
LEAD: A lot of next week's music will come in twos, with four duos competing for attention Sunday alone.
Bradshaw and Buono, the pianists, offer new music (by Elizabeth Bell), a recent piece (by the late Vincent Persichetti) and more traditional repertory by Schubert, Rachmaninoff and Liszt - all at 2 this afternoon at Alice Tully Hall.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  LINCOLN  A Photobiography.
By Russell Freedman.
Illustrated. 150 pp.
New York: Clarion Books/Ticknor &amp; Fields. $15.95. (Age 9 and up)


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 30-year-old house has cedar shakes on the outside.
To my knowledge, these shakes have never been painted or treated in any way.
Should we leave them as is, or should they be treated in some way?


The Stage: Jawole Zollar In 'Song of Lawino'
LEAD: JAWOLE WILLA JO ZOLLAR has had a consistent and innovative interest in mining tradition and creating new ritual, most notably with her Urban Bush Women company and with Edwina Lee Tyler and Tiye Giraud, composers and musicians who share her passionate involvement.
In ''Song of Lawino,'' which opened Thursday at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, the three women have joined Valeria Vasilevski, the experimentalist director and writer, for an evening of incomparably rich and powerful theater.


Dan Daniel, Virginia Congressman, Is Dead at 73
LEAD: Representative Dan Daniel, a 10-term Democratic Congressman from Virginia, died today after suffering a heart attack.
He was 73 years old.
Mr.
Daniel earlier this week said that poor health would prevent him from seeking re-election.


CHICAGO'S GRUMPY GURU
LEAD: Allan Bloom's colleague Saul Bellow asks: ''Who is the Tolstoy of the Zulus?
The Proust of the Papuans?'' He implies that these people have not reached the stage of civilization required to produce artists of this stature.


Utah Police Step Up Pressure on Barricaded House
LEAD: The police stepped up psychological pressure today on an armed group barricaded in a log house in an effort to arrest some of the members in connection with the bombing of a Mormon Church chapel.


Truth in Travel
LEAD: To the Editor:


Safety in Numbers: A Shiny New Look
LEAD: THE safety pin has had nothing if not an interesting existence.
It started off keeping diapers together; in a few old-fashioned families it still serves that purpose.
Then came the punk movement, which turned this humble clasp into a symbol of rebellion.


A Tape Measure of the Top 10
LEAD: MUSIC CRITICS LEAD A pampered life.
While we can skip record-store and box-office lines, we can generally count on decent concert seats and early pressings of the latest LP's.
Presumably this Olympian, streamlined existence makes us objective, but every so often, I start to wonder what it's like for more typical music fans.


On Language; Ruling the Jet Set
LEAD: Keep your eye on ruling,'' advised Maureen Dowd, a reporter for The New York Times, more than a year ago.
She said that ruling, long used by Soviet propagandists to derogate American democracy in the term ruling circles, was now being used here as a participle to mean ''advanced, with-it, avant-garde'' or ''in.


Tyson Never Let Up
LEAD: Back in November, at the Larry Holmes Training Center in Easton, Pa., the man after whom the facility was named was standing before the speed bag, talking - riffing, really - as his hands beat a steady rhythm on the small bag.


New Moves From Two Grand Old Men of Retailing
LEAD: THEY both started with a single store in the South.
Over the years, those stores multiplied and grew into sprawling empires blanketing the region and, lately, some of the rest of the country.
Now, at a time when most of their contemporaries have long since given up the game, Sam M. Walton, the 70-year-old founder and chairman of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., and William Dillard, 74, his counterpart at Dillard Department Stores


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  CABARET STARS  Julie Wilson, singer and actress, and Marilyn Michaels, comedian, will present an evening of music and comedy Saturday at Raritan Valley Community College in North Branch.


Headliners; Prescient Verse
LEAD: The Soviet poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko continues to display a knack for sensing when changes in the Kremlin's view of the past are about to affect the future.
In a poem that he wrote and read around Moscow last summer, but which has only recently turned up in the United States, Mr.
Yevtushenko expressed admiration of Nikolai I.


THE REGION: A 30-Year Reign; MOB RULING AN EMPIRE OF GARBAGE
LEAD: GARBAGE is still very much the Mafia's bag.


Milton Adler Dies at 82; Ran for Congress
LEAD: Milton H. Adler, a former assistant attorney general in New York, died of a heart attack Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old.


YVETTE D. HELLMAN TO WED GARY DAVID ANSEL IN MAY
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Hellman of New York of the engagement of their daughter, Yvette Dawn Hellman, to Gary David Ansel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Darrell Ansel of Minnetonka, Minn.
The couple plan to marry in May.


So Don't Let Them Discover Dubuque
LEAD: To the Editor:


TOKYO QUARTET TO PLAY AT PURCHASE
LEAD: MANY ensembles take on the complete cycle of Beethoven Quartets as an early challenge in their collective careers, but not so the Tokyo String Quartet.
It took well more than 15 years of international concertizing before the Tokyo felt ready to tackle this most demanding of musical enterprises.
That was in the summer of 1986, and since then the quartet has repeated the cycle a number of times, always to great critical and audience acclaim.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 30-year-old house has cedar shakes on the outside.
To my knowledge, these shakes have never been painted or treated in any way.
Should we leave them as is, or should they be treated in some way?


Key to High School Censorship Case Was Public Ownership
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


The Sun May Set On More and More U.S. Bases Abroad
LEAD: THE showdown between Spain and the United States over the F-16 fighter planes based near Madrid illustrates just how prickly a number of American allies have become about having American troops on their soil.
While welcoming the revenue that the presence of thousands of soldiers brings, they have doubts about American reliability and they desire to shed the most visible vestige of postwar dependence on the United


Wallis Bleecker Dunckel; Banker, 86
LEAD: Wallis Bleecker Dunckel, the president of Bankers Trust Company from 1960 to 1966, died Thursday at Danbury (Conn.) Hospital after a brief illness.
He was 86 years old and lived in Easton, Conn.


WHEN JUSTICE IS JUST ANOTHER FORM OF INSANITY
LEAD: WHEN Soviet authorities announced earlier this month that new legal safeguards were being introduced to protect the rights of psychiatric patients, human rights advocates were pleased but skeptical.
The Soviet Union has continued to use mental wards as holding tanks for nonconformists and the politically suspect, despite years of world protest.


U.S. Reporting Arrest of Politician in Zaire
LEAD: Zairian police forces arrested a prominent opposition figure in the capital of the African nation during a violent confrontation last Sunday, according to the State Department.


Next Week; Who Will Win The Super Bowl?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Former Actresses Compete for Political Power in India State
LEAD: Indian politics were enlivened last week by a dramatic confrontation between two women, both former actresses, competing for power and office in the southern state of Tamil Nadu.


Iraqi's Death in Sudan Linked to Iran Faction
LEAD: A prominent Iraqi dissident was shot to death in a Sudanese hotel last weekend, and Arab diplomats in Lebanon linked his death to a plan by opponents of the Baghdad Government to establish a rival government backed by Iran.


Beauty; BODY LANGUAGE
LEAD: JUST AS SKIRT lengths and shapes go in and out of style, so too do body types.
When the reedy, angular physique of models in the 1960's and 70's was replaced by a more curvaceous ideal, many fashion pundits declared that, at last, womanly women were attractive again.
But the new ideal, shown off in the tight and skimpy spring clothes that crowded the runways late last fall, seems even more demanding than the old one.


Looking Back on A Cavalcade of TV
LEAD: IT WAS NOT THE AMERICANS BUT the British who largely invented television, as the new public-TV series ''Television'' makes clear.
And so, there may be a certain poetic justice in the fact that this eight-part retrospective of the medium, which makes its hourlong debut tomorrow night at 8 on Channel 13, is based on a British series that ran three years ago in England but was never shown in this country.


Off by $4 Billion and 14 Years, Michigan Nuclear Plant Starts
LEAD: The Enrico Fermi II nuclear power plant went into commercial operation today, 14 years late and about $4 billion over its budget.


Columbia U. Announces the Appointment of 66 to Jury for the Pulitzer Prizes
LEAD: Columbia University yesterday announced the 66 newspaper editors, executives and others who will make up the jury to nominate entries for this year's Pulitzer Prizes in journalism.


Amusement and a Feast: Formula for Franchises?
LEAD: The mammoth neon cactus and life-size fiberglass cows that guard the Hilltop Steak House here may soon become familiar emblems around the world as the owners work out a plan to franchise the restaurant.


SPACE DRIVE'S TILT TO INDUSTRY GAINS WIDE NEW IMPETUS
LEAD: In a series of policy decisions, some known publicly and some not, President Reagan has accelerated his campaign to increase the role of private enterprise in the nation's space effort.
And Administration officials hope they can set in motion forces that will change the character of both the civilian and the military space programs.


VARIATIONS ON FAMILIAR CHINESE
LEAD: ''YOU can never have too many Chinese restaurants,'' a Sinophile and friend of ours once said.
And it does seem that Chinese restaurants have been proliferating in Fairfield County in the last 10 years.


DOES PRO GOLF NEED A NEW STAR TO SUCCEED?
LEAD: No!
There are many players on the PGA Tour who possess both the talent and qualities needed to attain star status.
It is rather that viewers are subjected to media coverage that focuses on past achievers and achievements.
Jack Nicklaus attracts much too much camera time, even when he's playing 7 over par.


SENATE'S DAY ON CABLE TV
LEAD: Live television coverage of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearings on the Soviet-American treaty on intermediate-range nuclear missiles will be carried by C-SPAN, the Cable-Satellite Public Affairs Network, beginning at 10 A.M. on Monday.


A LITTLE NOTICE FOR A LITTLE-KNOWN SPORT
LEAD: WHEN Evelyn Nostrand mentions curling to her friends, they usually assume she's referring to her hair. ''I tell them, no, I'm not talking about hair, but about my favorite winter sport,'' she said.


SNOWTHROWERS: CARE AND FEEDING
LEAD: TO those who own or use a snowthrower, happiness is trouble-free operation.
Although knowing how to operate a snowthrower safely and skillfully is important, smooth sailing throughout the snow season depends largely on performing manufacturer-recommended maintenance thoroughly and on time.
Complete maintenance information is usually printed in the owner's manual furnished with the snowthrower or available from the manufacturer.


FOUR COMMUNITIES TO ASSESS PLANS FOR HOUSING HOMELESS
LEAD: THE first four sites have been chosen for 258 temporary homes for Westchester's homeless but it will be three to six months before a shovel goes into the ground on any of them, according to Robert Schulman, the designated developer for the housing.


Japan and Iceland Will Defy Ban on the Killing of Whales
LEAD: Japan and Iceland will continue to hunt whales despite an international moratorium and have threatened to leave the International Whaling Commission if the organization objects, Icelandic radio and officials said today.


City Hall Notes; Press Office Is a Perpetual-Motion Machine
LEAD: Every day, one of the most active hubs of Mayor Koch's administration, his press office, works at making news, an endeavor that some might consider superfluous, given Mr.
Koch's own efforts in that pursuit.


2 New York Charities to Merge in Effort to Aid Fund-Raising
LEAD: Two of New York's charity establishments are about to be restructured into one.


Guns Mark End of Mourning for Tribal Chief in Afghanistan
LEAD: The thud of artillery and the crackle of gunfire filled Jalalabad today, a day after two terrorist bombs killed 17 mourners during the funeral of Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the pacifist leader of the Pathan people.


Wave of Palestinian Unrest Reaches Once-Quiet Village
LEAD: Israeli-Occupied West Bank, Jan. 22 - ''Greetings to the children of the stones,'' intoned the voice from the minaret of the lone mosque in this little Palestinian village. ''Greetings to the uprising.''


Heyward to Pros?
LEAD: HE has a year of collegiate eligibility left, but Craig (Ironhead) Heyward, the Pittsburgh running back who was the nation's second-leading rusher last season, has apparently given up on college and plans to seek a pro career.
According to The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Heyward did poorly in his courses last fall, has not been going to classes at all this term and has told friends he wants to turn pro.


Already, a New Look at a Legend
LEAD: THE date was Oct. 9, 1982, a Saturday in the hinterlands of Virginia, and Paul A. Volcker had just addressed a private meeting of chief executives of companies like General Motors, General Electric and I.B.M. at the Homestead resort.
As he strode to the stage of the hotel's movie theater for a news conference, the sometimes-jocular and engaging Mr.


ART VIEW
LEAD: WHEN FORTUNE MAGAZINE hired Charles Sheeler to paint a series of pictures for its December, 1940, issue celebrating the glories of American technology they found just the man for the job.
Sheeler had by then become known for his paintings and photographs of cities and machines.
For Fortune, the artist created steely, crisp images of an airplane propeller, a steam locomotive's wheels, a turbine engine, an electric transmission tower - pictures that treated the bits and pieces of technology as if they were icons of a new, bracing religion.


Why Being Fired Is Losing Its Taint
LEAD: ITEM: Just a few weeks after Richard D. Bernard learned that his job as manager of merchandise marketing at NBC would be eliminated last May, he was given a shot at another position in the company.
Mr.
Bernard chose instead to take his chances as an unemployed job hunter. ''I wasn't so sure that being a survivor was any better than being let go with a severance package,'' he said.


SNOWTHROWERS: CARE AND FEEDING
LEAD: TO those who own or use a snowthrower, happiness is trouble-free operation.
Although knowing how to operate a snowthrower safely and skillfully is important, smooth sailing throughout the snow season depends largely on performing manufacturer-recommended maintenance thoroughly and on time.
Complete maintenance information is usually printed in the owner's manual furnished with the snowthrower or available from the manufacturer.


BLACK WRITERS IN PRAISE OF TONI MORRISON
LEAD:  I will call them my people  which were not my people:  and her beloved  which was not beloved. - Romans 9:25


WHEN BRADLEY IS READY . . .
LEAD: AS THE small commuter plane flew through a storm, Bill Bradley outlined for Michael Kaye, a political media consultant, his plan for Federal tax reform.
The plane rocked violently and Mr.
Kaye paled at the prospect of a crash.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''This country faces a great problem with entrenched management.
If shareholders don't stand up for their rights, we are going to be a third-rate power.''


THE CELESTIAL CHILD
LEAD:  POINTS OF LIGHT  By Linda Gray Sexton. 308 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $16.95.


SNYDER STIRS MANY REACTIONS
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Tax Cut Sought On Capital Gain
LEAD: President Reagan will ask Congress next week to reduce the tax on capital gains, White House officials said today.


PENNY WOLFSON IS WED TO ROBERT LIEBERBERG
LEAD: The marriage of Penny Joy Wolfson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliott Wolfson of New York, to Robert Lieberberg, a son of Col. and Mrs.
George Lieberberg of Westfield, N.J., took place last evening at the Lotos Club in New York.
Rabbi Charles A. Kroloff, assisted by Cantor Martha Novick, performed the ceremony.


WHAT'S NEW IN THE SUPERCONDUCTIVITY BUSINESS
LEAD: UNTIL 1986, most people had never heard of superconductivity.
But for 75 years scientists have known that certain materials lose all resistance in conducting electricity under conditions of extreme cold.
Such temperatures can be achieved only by cooling with liquid helium, which is quite expensive and difficult to use.


SOME ISRAELI VIEWS ON THE CONSEQUENCES OF OCCUPATION
LEAD: INrrxh Israel's occupied territories, fighting was sporadic last week, but military law was firmer than ever.
As the Palestinian protests entered their seventh week, soldiers were carrying out a new policy of force in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Palestinians and foreign relief workers said hundreds of people were brutally beaten, some in street clashes and some in house-to-house searches, as the Army tried to break a general strike.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I am especially concerned with voter registration programs.
I think it's sort of sad to know that we have to push for such now after the long struggle we had in the South to become registered voters and to be able to vote freely.
It is hard to understand how it could be that those who have the opportunity to do so seem to be indifferent and complacent.


Don't Link the Dollar to Commodities
LEAD: JAMES A. BAKER 3d, the Secretary of the Treasury, has been winning articulate supporters for his suggestion that a market bushel of commodities, including gold, be relied on as a guides to stablize dollar exchange rates and credit market conditions.
But the concept raises disturbing questions which its proponents ignore.


DOES PRO GOLF NEED A NEW STAR TO SUCCEED?
LEAD: Do you think the tens of thousands of fans who cheer for Seve, Fuzzy, Greg and Jack realize that not one of them won during the 1987 tour?
The PGA had 37 winners out of its 46 events in 1987.
Corporate sponsorship, spectator attendance, prize money, charitable contributions and media coverage all were up last year.


ASBESTOS PIPE REPLACEMENT IS URGED
LEAD: A WATER-QUALITY study that revealed minute levels of asbestos in one area of the Dix Hills Water District has prompted district officials to recommend replacement of 10 miles of asbestos-cement pipe in the 160-mile system even though ''there is no health hazard,'' the administrator of the district said.


Condo And Co-op Challenges
LEAD: THE final weeks of January are traditionally the time in New York City when co-op directors and thousands of individual condominium owners start thinking about challenging their property tax assessments.


A Soviet Composer Awaiting Discovery
LEAD: IT'S EXCITING TO COME ACROSS A talented new composer or performer.


Cyprus
LEAD: To the Editor: It is not surprising to see a question on Cyprus appear in the Q. &amp; A. column (Travel, Jan. 3).


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Mexico  Question: I have heard there is an organization that conducts tours and seminars for Americans considering retirement in Mexico.
Do you have the address and details? - L. V., New York, N.Y.
Answer: A travel company called RIM, for Retirement in Mexico, was formed in Mexico City about a year ago, and since October has been represented by Barvi Tours, a Los Angeles company.


Sunday Observer; Life in the Waist Land
LEAD: LIVING IN NEW YORK you forget about driving.
It's one of the great luxuries of New York that a car is absolutely superfluous there.
Unless you dedicate your life to parking, you can't keep the thing at the curb, and unless you are Croesus, you can't afford garage space.


Theater Problems? Call Dr. Chekhov
LEAD: THERE'S A POPULAR STORY going around the theatrical community in Los Angeles.
Apparently a casting director called a Hollywood agent about setting up an audition for his client in a local production of ''The Three Sisters'' and the agent efficiently queried, ''Will the playwright be present at the audition?


Ex-Head of California Board Sentenced for Embezzlement
LEAD: The former chairman of the state teachers pension board has been sentenced to 15 years in prison for embezzlement and taking a $1 million bribe.


DEBBIE ISAACS TO WED C. M. KAMINER IN JUNE
LEAD: The engagement of Debbie May Isaacs to Craig Martin Kaminer has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Isaacs 3d of St.
Louis, parents of the future bride.
Mr.
Kaminer is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard A. Kaminer of New York.
A June wedding is planned.


BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 24, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
12
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom
Wolfe. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.95.) A bond
trader caught in the jungles of New York.
2
1
9
THE TOMMYKNOCKERS, by Stephen King.


STEPHANIE SHEPARD TO WED
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
William Seth Shepard of Potomac, Md., of the engagement of their daughter Stephanie Lee Shepard to Erik Lipson, a son of Seymour Lipson of Philadelphia and Britt Lipson of Beulah, Mich.


LISA JANE MELONE MARRIES IN JERSEY
LEAD: Lisa Jane Melone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph J. Melone of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday to Robert Charles Cloughen Jr., the son of Dolores Cloughen of West Palm Beach, Fla., and Mr.
Cloughen of Boynton Beach, Fla.
Msgr.
Harold Murray performed the ceremony at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic


Passion and Intrigue Seethe On a Greek Island in 1908
LEAD: HERE, WHERE COLOSSUS IS said to have straddled the harbor and where history hides behind the geometric sprawl of modernity, James Dearden, who wrote the hugely successul ''Fatal Attraction,'' turned for his next excursion into passion, intrigue and betrayal.


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  What's in Store for Banks?


REFUSING TO BE A PUSSYCAT
LEAD:  KRAZY KAT  A Novel in Five Panels.
By Jay Cantor.
Illustrated. 250 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.


Perspectives: Staten Island Wetlands; Looking to an Appeals Board for Relief
LEAD: IT is easier to cry ''Save the wetlands!'' than it is to figure out what a wetland is - or so one can conclude from the debate that has swirled around New York State's efforts in the last several years to designate freshwater wetlands on Staten Island.


FICTION
LEAD:  BONES OF THE MOON.
By Jonathan Carroll. (Arbor House, $15.95.) Cullen James is not your ordinary Manhattan housewife.
Though she and her all-American husband have a cute little girl and a lovely apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, when Cullen goes to sleep at night she dreams of Rondua, a land of strange beasts and quests and hidden dangers that could be straight out of C.


Growth Raises Fear in Southampton
LEAD: Very little ties this community to Queens, 70 miles to the west.
Very little, that is, except the fears of some Southampton residents who worry that rapid growth is turning their town of 50,000 into a tiny, tonier version of New York City.


THE QUANDARY OF AIDS AND INSURANCE
LEAD: SINCE AIDS began its cruel assault, the insurance industry and homosexual rights advocates have been locked in a rancorous debate over the testing of insurance applicants for antibodies to the disease.
But the groups are finding common ground on two issues: regulatory AIDS guidelines designed to keep discrimination out of the underwriting business, and health insurance pools for so-called uninsurable people, such as those who test positive for the virus.


From the Necks Down
LEAD: ''I'D SAY WE'RE ONE OF THE world's smallest manufacturers of electric guitars,'' says Jolyon Dantzig, who with his partner, Frank Untermyer (above), operates Hamer Guitars in Arlington Heights, Ill.
Specialists in custom-made instruments for professional musicians, Hamer does regular business with rockers like The Police, Judas Priest, Billy Idol and Steve Stevens.


The Senate and Conditions
LEAD: Although senators routinely speak of offering amendments, reservations or understandings to the Soviet-American treaty on intermediate-range nuclear missiles, staff members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee say these terms are outmoded.


And This Little Piggy Had Modern Genetics
LEAD: His office is adorned with color posters of pigs.
His tie has a pig embroidered on it.
His car has a chrome-plated pig mounted on the hood.


HART CAMP STRUCK RARE DEAL ON DEBT
LEAD: In accepting 10 cents on the dollar, the company that was owned by a businessman now embroiled in the controversy over Gary Hart's finances agreed to an unusually low settlement of the debt it was owed by Mr.
Hart's 1984 Presidential campaign.


RUNAWAY YOUTHS OFTEN HOMELESS
LEAD: A GROWING number of teen-age runaways in Westchester are in reality homeless youths who are abandoning bleak motel rooms and trying to return to their own communities, according to the county Youth Board.
Its latest report also describes how young males who lack education and training are deliberately putting themselves in jail and says that nearly 100 percent of homeless teen-age women in the county become pregnant.


O. O. GABUGAH INTERVIEWS HIMSELF
LEAD:  THINGS AIN'T WHAT THEY USED TO BE  Musical Memoirs.
By Al Young.
Illustrated. 233 pp.
Berkeley, Calif.: A Donald S. Ellis Book/ Creative Arts Book Company.
Paper, $8.95.


EFFECT ON STATE OF NEW U.S. LAWS ASSESSED
LEAD: A RECENT survey of Federal laws that have taken effect since Jan. 1 shows that several - ranging from changes in income tax provisions to the appropriation of hundreds of millions of dollars to clean up toxic-waste sites and build highways and tunnels - will have multiple effects on New Jersey.


ZARZUELA'S TUNE: AUTHENTIC IBERIAN
LEAD: TO music lovers, La Zarzuela is Spanish opera.
To serious eaters, it's a classic seafood casserole.
But, many Long Islanders think of a six-year-old Spanish restaurant in Rockville Centre when they hear La Zarzuela.


POTATO DISHES PROVIDE SUSTAINING WINTER FARE
LEAD: EVERY time I go back for a visit to England I realize how good potatoes can be.


GERI L. FRIEDLAENDER TO MARRY E. A. BAND
LEAD: Geri Lynn Friedlaender, a consultant in occupational therapy, and Edward A. Band, an assistant manager and a senior financial analyst at Citicorp Credit Services in Manhattan, plan to be married in October.
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles S. Friedlaender of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced their daughter's engagement to the son of Mr.


Aid Cuts Push Haiti Finances to Brink
LEAD: On the cable television programs here, stores in the capital advertise for foreign exchange, offering to purchase American dollars and travelers' checks at a premium over the official exchange rate of five Haitian gourdes to the dollar.


New Effort for Victims of Lead Paint
LEAD: For what is believed to be the first time, the companies that made and sold lead pigment for paint used in houses around the country for most of this century have been sued on behalf of children poisoned by the lead.


New York State to Add To Forest Preserve Area
LEAD: New York State has agreed to buy 16,796 acres of land to add to the state forest preserve in the Adirondack and Catskill Mountains.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 30-year-old house has cedar shakes on the outside.
To my knowledge, these shakes have never been painted or treated in any way.
Should we leave them as is, or should they be treated in some way?


Art
LEAD: Showing an artist in 1986, 1987 and now in 1988, as the CDS Gallery (13 East 75th Street) has done with the painter Peter Booth, is often an indication that an artist is being pushed too hard.
But Booth lives in Australia, far from the pressures of New York, he has a career of work behind him, and prior to 1986, he had never had a solo show in the United States.


In Iowa Caucuses, Uncommitted Did Better Than Jimmy Carter
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nizar Jwaideh; Editor, 55
LEAD: Nizar Jwaideh, director of public affairs for the Washington mission of the Arab League and editor of the magazine Arab Perspectives, died Wednesday of pancreatic cancer at George Washington University Hospital in Washington, D.C.
He was 55 years old.


RONNA L. TULGAN TO MARRY THOMAS W. OSTHEIMER
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Henry Tulgan of Pittsfield, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ronna Lynn Tulgan, to Thomas Winslow Ostheimer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Ostheimer of York, Me.


Civil Rights 'Patron Saint' Comes to Brooklyn
LEAD: As the tiny, bespectacled woman made her way into the House of the Lord Pentecostal Church in Brooklyn, an audience of 1,200 rose in admiration and curiosity, their Kodaks and Polaroids flashing.
Downstairs, in the fellowship hall, an overflow crowd of several hundred watched on closed-circuit television.


Crazy Horse Saloon
LEAD: To the Editor: My husband and I are irritated by the ''ranks lower than the others'' rating that Paul Chutkow gave the Crazy Horse Saloon (''Paris Is Still Kicking,'' Travel, Jan. 3).


Bringing Down the Gavel on the Life of a Texan
LEAD: His eye took in a quarter-million-dollar painting, fabulous antiques and imposing mementos of fame and power, but as he looked across the possessions of a lifetime Friday, John B. Connally Jr. found himself musing about a 12-gauge shotgun he won at the Grand National Quail Shoot in Enid, Okla., in 1967.


Should Congress Take the Cap Off Retirement Income?
LEAD: DR.
OTIS R. BOWEN, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and other top officials in the department want Congress to repeal a law that limits most elderly people's earnings to $8,400 a year.
For those 65 to 69 years old, the law reduces benefits by $1 for every $2 of earnings above that amount, until, when earnings top $20,000, no benefit is paid at all.


Falmouth, Mass.: Homeowners On an Airstrip
LEAD: WHEN they look for sites on which to build $300,000 homes, most developers stay as far away from an airfield as they can.


Auto Executive Ready To Take On the T.V.A.
LEAD: In the nearly 55 years since the Tennessee Valley Authority was created as a public agency with the flexibility to operate much like a private corporation, it has wandered from that ideal on a path as meandering as the mountain rivers it has sought to tame.


Flamboyant Mayor of Washington Says He's Trying to Change His Act
LEAD: Mayor Marion Barry was standing bare-chested in his office, surrounded by polished mahogany, inscribed brass plaques and tables piled high with the wordage of urban government, his stocking feet planted a good half-inch deep in the baby blue pile of the wall-to-wall carpet.
An aide stood by, proffering a freshly starched tuxedo shirt.


Farm Upturn Clouds Issues In Campaign
LEAD: Down at the Maid-Rite snack bar in Perry, where farmers from Dallas County have long sought refuge on winter mornings, the talk used to be of hard times and worse choices: who was in trouble with the bank, who had gone broke, who wasn't going to be around for spring planting.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Dirty Dancing  Starring Jennifer Grey, Patrick Swayze, Cynthia Rhodes, Jerry Orbach, Jack Weston.
Directed by Emile Ardolino. 1987.
Vestron Video. 100 minutes. $89.95.
Rated PG-13.


James Harris: Almost in the Super Bowl
LEAD: HE came as close as a quarterback can come - second and goal on the Vikings' 1-yard line, fourth quarter, 4 points behind, needing a touchdown to lead his team to the Super Bowl.


Towns Use Zoning To Rein In Growth
LEAD: IN heightened efforts to prevent overdevelopment and to preserve the character of suburban communities, several Nassau County municipalities have recently revised their zoning codes, and in most cases, the amendments provide more restrictive requirements for single-family homes, two-family housing, parking lots and building heights.


Propping Up Payments at the Bottom
LEAD: ONE of the most contentious pieces of legislation that Congress will face when it convenes a new session tomorrow is a bill to raise the minimum hourly wage, which has been $3.35 since 1981.


With the Smiling Face
LEAD: Michael Deaver, that Icarus of influence peddlers, has a new lease on freedom.
A Federal appeals court struck down the independent counsel law as unconstitutional, holding that it invaded the authority of the executive branch.
Because the overconfident Deaver prosecutor disdained a parallel appointment from the Justice Department (as the Iran-contra prosecutor was careful to accept),


Pop Music
LEAD: Throughout his career, Irving Berlin has been creating precedents and today another will be launched.
In celebration of Mr.
Berlin's 100th birthday on May 11 the ''Lyrics and Lyricists'' series at the 92nd Street Y (1395 Lexington Avenue), which has been examining American songs and songwriters for 17 years, will for the first time devote its entire five-concert season to the work of a single songwriter.


Ortega Said to Face Challenge Inside His Regime
LEAD: Only a week after winning an important diplomatic victory at the summit meeting of Central American leaders, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra is facing an unexpected challenge from within his Sandinista regime.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 24, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
(Signet/NAL, $4.50.) A fairy tale, complete with
an aged king, an evil wizard and a mouse.
2
11
WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
(Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.


4 COMEDIES ON THE BILL IN YALE REP WINTERFEST SERIES
LEAD: AT Winterfest, the annual plays-in-progress series at Yale Rep, the accent this year is on comedy.


CONJURING AN EERIE WORLD FOR THE PHANTOM
LEAD: VENICE AT NIGHT. THE PAINTER DEGAS.


James D. Theberge; Former Ambassador, 56
LEAD: James D. Theberge, a former United States Ambassador to Nicaragua and Chile, died of a heart attack Wednesday on a visit to Jamaica.
He was 57 years old and had lived in Washington.


A Great Hospital In Crisis
LEAD: ANDY WARHOL HATED hospitals, so when the pain in his upper abdomen came on, he turned to his chiropractor-nutritionist.
The pain persisted, and a specialist who gave the 58-year-old Pop artist collagen injections for smoothing face wrinkles urged him to see an internist.
On Feb. 18, 1987, Warhol was advised by his regular physician, Dr.


THE SHOULDER PAD: LIKE IT OR LUMP IT
LEAD: THIS will be remembered as the year of the shoulder pads.
As fast as I could take them out, designers and manufacturers were putting them in.


SAY HEY, GROVER LOWDERMILK!
LEAD:  CLASSIC BASEBALL CARDS  The Golden Years 1886-1956.
By Frank Slocum.
Foreword by Yogi Berra.
Illustrated.
Unpaged.
New York: Warner Books. $79.95.
BASEBALL IN THE '50S  A Decade of Transition.
By Donald Honig.
Illustrated. 238 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $24.95.
MAYS, MANTLE, SNIDER  A Celebration.


Fiery Train Collision Kills Man in California
LEAD: A freight train collided with another train that was halted in its path, exploding in a fireball that killed one worker, injured two others and sent engines and train cars careening into a residential street.


FAIRFIELD DEFEATED BY FORDHAM, 63-61
LEAD: Fred Quartlebaum, a reserve guard, sank two free throws with 10 seconds to play today to break a tie and give Fordham a 63-61 Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference victory over Fairfield.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  FOOTBALL  North 21, South 7: Chris Chandler of Washington and Don McPherson of Syracuse each passed for a touchdown to lead the North in the 39th Senior Bowl yesterday.
Chandler led a 99-yard scoring drive in the first period, hitting Willie Anderson of U.C.L.A. for a 36-yard touchdown.


MEASURING HOW DRUGS, CRIME MIX
LEAD: IT seemed last week that Government experts were suddenly discovering what any grocery store owner or police officer in the inner city had known long ago: the problems of street crime and drugs are inevitably intertwined.


Correction
LEAD: A notice yesterday about a memorial service for the sculptor Nathan Rapoport gave an incorrect address for the service.
It will be held at 11 A.M. today at the Park Avenue Synagogue, 50 East 87th Street in Manhattan.


Buying Perfumes In the Bahamas
LEAD: TRAVEL easterly through the Bahamas and you come to Crooked and Acklins Islands, fragrant with cascarilla bark, the base for Campari.


WELL DREAMT AND SPLENDILY WOVEN
LEAD: ''When a Maya woman puts on her huipil she emerges through the neckhole symbolically in the axis of the world.
The designs of the universe radiate from her head extending over the sleeves and bodice,'' Walter F. Morris Jr. writes in LIVING MAYA (Abrams, $40).
During 14 years of research, this American anthropologist found parallels between the diamond patterning woven into intricately brocaded blouses of contemporary Mayas in Chiapas, Mexico, and the fabric designs depicted 1,200 years ago in the art of their ancestors, the Classic Mayas.


MARY MCMANUS, NURSE, ENGAGED
LEAD: Mrs.
John Herbert McManus of Bethesda, Md., has announced the engagement of her daughter Mary Alice McManus to Dr.
Richard L. White Jr., a son of Mrs.
John H. Keating Jr. of Rumson, N.J., and the late Dr.
White.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss McManus is also a daughter of the late Mr.
McManus, a lawyer for the United Mine Workers of America in Washington.


Apple Completes Its Transformation
LEAD: THE MacWorld Expo, a computer trade show and conference held here earlier this month, signaled the success of Apple Computer Inc.'s transformation from a renegade manufacturer of hobbyists' computers to supplier of information systems to the most powerful corporations in America.


Culture Clashes
LEAD: To the Editor:


DOES PRO GOLF NEED A NEW STAR TO SUCCEED?
LEAD: The PGA may have to liberalize its rules to permit more foreign players to compete more frequently in the United States.
A Seve Ballesteros, a Greg Norman, an Ian Woosnam radiate a charisma now missing among American players.
The college education and PGA training process seems to have bleached the color out of our current crop of leading money-winning pros.


MIR STATION RECEIVES CARGO
LEAD: A cargo craft carrying food, fuel and mail docked today with the Mir space station, according to Tass, the official Soviet press agency.
The Russians periodically send cargo to the space station, where two Soviet astronauts are one month into a yearlong mission.


Man's Death at Opera Is Called a Suicide
LEAD: The death of a singing coach who plunged from an upper balcony to the orchestra of the Metropolitan Opera House was a suicide, the New York City Medical Examiner's office said yesterday.


Ferrer, at Inauguration, Sees Bronx Shedding Glum Image
LEAD: Offering an image of the Bronx as ''the front line, the proving ground of urban America,'' Fernando Ferrer took his first oath of office yesterday as the elected Borough President of the Bronx.


San Diego's Super Roots
LEAD: ONCE it was known as a sleepy Navy town near the Mexican border, the best place in California to get a tattoo.
But now San Diego awaits the circus maximus of sports, Super Bowl week.
And when the thousands of visitors depart after the Denver Broncos and the Washington Redskins determine the Super Bowl XXII champion Sunday, an estimated $140 million will have been spent during the circus max in this sparkling harbor city that the American Football League discovered.


The Right Twitch
LEAD: As its name suggests, the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, which was established in St.
Andrews, Scotland, in 1754, is steeped in tradition, much of it reflected in the club's priceless collection of paintings, prints and historic relics.


In Robin Williams's World, Delight Is a Many-Sided Thing
LEAD: Suddenly, ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' is a smash hit, and Robin Williams was coping with this information as might be expected.
The star of the film said he was appropriately delighted.
He added that he was understandably grateful.
And, as he paced his suite in the Carlyle Hotel in Manhattan, he spoke rather earnestly of America's fascination with the


Business and the Law; New Wrangles In Texaco Case
LEAD: THE lawyers for Texaco Inc., after a victory in a key battle in bankruptcy court last Friday, are gearing up for a new round of legal wrangling this week, this time over a disclosure statement that is intended to provide the details on how the company plans to restructure.


PRESIDENT OF RADCLIFF COLLEGE PLANS TO RESIGN IN JUNE '89
LEAD: Matina S. Horner has announced that she will resign the presidency of Radcliffe College, a post she has held since 1972, to pursue her research into social change and women's issues.


CBS Plans 'Noids' Cartoon Series
LEAD: CBS, looking for an edge in the heated Saturday morning children's television competition, is trying an unusual and potentially problematic programming ploy, developing a weekly cartoon series based on the trademark character of a national pizza chain.


AFTER THE HOLIDAYS, DONORS CONTINUE TO AID THE NEEDIEST
LEAD: Stephen and Lois Plumlee of Sarasota, Fla., deliberately sent their contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund after the holidays.


Advertising; Job Awarded To Ammirati By GE/RCA
LEAD: BRITISH-owned Ammirati &amp; Puris has won the GE/RCA consumer electronics business.
Its $20 million in billings make it the biggest account in the agency's 14-year history.


U.S. Envoy at Funeral for South African Journalist
LEAD: Edward Perkins, the American Ambassador, attending a funeral yesterday in Soweto for Percy Peter Qoboza, a black newspaper editor who was one of South Africa's most respected journalists.
About 5,000 mourners of all races attended the four-hour service. (Reuters)


Girl, 2, Is Raped in Queens, And Relative, 18, Is Arrested
LEAD: A 2-year-old girl was raped early yesterday in Queens, and an Astoria man was arrested and charged with the attack, the police said.


Advertising; Richmond Shop Gets Work for a CSX Unit
LEAD: The Martin Agency in Richmond, a subsidiary of Scali, McCabe, Sloves, is going to be doing the advertising for CSX/Sea-Land Intermodal, a recently created business unit of the CSX Corporation.


Treasury's February Plans Expected
LEAD: Treasury financing looms large in the credit markets this week.


Democrats Grow Testy As the Contest Tightens
LEAD: With a scrappiness symptomatic of a tightening race, the seven Democratic candidates for President squared off here today over the trade imbalance and the Federal deficit.


Advertising; Newspaper Ad Bureau Gets Detroit Manager
LEAD: William J. Tausch, 52, a former executive vice president at Lintas: Campbell-Ewald, where he once headed the Chevrolet account, is joining the Newspaper Advertising Bureau as vice president, automotive marketing, and manager of the Detroit office.
He replaces Valentine Corradi, who has retired.


Signs of a Slowdown in Buybacks
LEAD: They were a ray of hope in the dark days following the Oct. 19 collapse of the stock market: signaling a vote of confidence in the financial markets, corporations big and small announced large buybacks of their shares, telling investors that they stood ready to buy their companies' stock even if no one else would.


Top Teams Roll to Victory
LEAD: St.
Anthony of Jersey City, ranked as the top high school team in the country by USA Today, easily improved its record to 13-1 yesterday with a 60-47 victory over All Hallows of the Bronx.


Bridge: Nell Wells Was an Example Of Longevity and Optimism
LEAD: There are two generalizations about bridge enthusiasts that seem valid.


A Paradox for Haiti's Presidency: Leslie Francois Manigat
LEAD: On the morning after Haiti's widely criticized presidential election, Leslie F. Manigat, an energetic former professor of political science, strode through his crowded campaign headquarters smiling broadly and waving one hand high in a victory sign.


Bidder for Post Ready to Omit Its Real Estate
LEAD: Leonard Stern, the chairman of Hartz Mountain Industries and owner of The Village Voice, said yesterday that he would offer to buy The New York Post without its real estate if economic agreements could be struck with the newspaper's labor unions.


MULTIPLE FETUSES RAISE NEW ISSUES TIED TO ABORTION
LEAD: Quietly, with virtually no publicity, a number of doctors have begun offering a way out for women who are pregnant with more fetuses than they want or can carry safely: They are aborting some of the fetuses while allowing the rest to proceed to birth.


The Immediate Threat
LEAD: The designation in Washington of the Martin Marietta Corporation to operate a billion-dollar computer complex as an important part of President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative may suggest that a ''Star Wars'' missile defense is just around the corner.


Metro Matters; Beyond a Lobby In Manhattan, Corridors of Pain
LEAD: One year ago today, Yvonne McCain and her children finally left the ranks of the homeless.


23 Palestinians Seized by Jordan; Plot to Subvert Regime Is Charged
LEAD: More than 20 Palestinian militants have been arrested in Jordan, according to the Government there and a radical Palestinian group, amid signs that several Arab Governments are concerned that the unrest in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip may spill over into their territory.


More Than Just a Treaty
LEAD: Washington goes back to work today with the usual State of the Union pomp but also with hearings, starting this morning, on what might be Ronald Reagan's most important legacy: agreement on arms control with the Soviet Union.


Two Killed in the West As Small Planes Crash
LEAD: Two planes collided Saturday over this Los Angeles suburb, and two men aboard one plane were killed when it crashed, the authorities said.
The other plane landed safely.


Steinberg's Chief Seen As Suitor if It Is Sold
LEAD: Always try to give the customer ''a little more than expected'' was the credo of Ida Steinberg, a Hungarian immigrant who opened a small grocery store in Montreal in 1917.


Outdoors: Hints on How Not to Hunt for Ducks
LEAD: A SHORT while ago when the waning moon was a brilliant sliver above the heaving Atlantic, I was driving along the outer beach of Martha's Vineyard island an hour and a half before dawn wondering when the three quick cups of black coffee I had quaffed would begin to rouse me from my torpor.


Gulf War Spurs Brazil Arms Makers
LEAD: After a lull of several years, Brazil is re-emerging as a major supplier of weapons to the Middle East.
The Persian Gulf war has given a major impetus to Brazilian arms makers and they are competing with the big powers with increasing success.


Advertising; USA Weekend To Offer Scent
LEAD: Ramon Gaulke, president of USA Weekend, the Gannett Company supplement that appears in 293 newspapers with a circulation of 14.6 million, reports that there is something in the wind.


Democrat Outlines Arms-Pact Strategy
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden, Jr., previewing a likely Democratic strategy for dealing with the new missile accord the Senate will begin considering on Monday, said today that he plans to attach ''conditions'' to the accord that would define a broad arms control agenda for the United States.


ISRAEL IS REBUKED ON ARAB BEATINGS
LEAD: A leader of Reform Judaism in the United States yesterday urged Israel to end its policy of beating Arabs to quell violence in the West Bank and Gaza, calling the practice ''an offense to the Jewish spirit'' that ''betrays the Zionist dream.''


Temple Suffers First Defeat
LEAD: Anthony Todd hit a 10-foot jumper with two seconds left today as Nevada-Las Vegas rallied from a 12-point deficit to defeat previously unbeaten Temple, 59-58.


HAITI REGIME SAYS EX-PROFESSOR WON PRESIDENTIAL VOTE
LEAD: One week after elections marred by widespread irregularities and charges of fraud, Haiti's government-appointed electoral council today declared Leslie F. Manigat, a 57-year-old former political science professor, as the country's next president.


Sled Dog Races Are Postponed
LEAD: The 10th Annual International Sled Dog Races, which were scheduled to be held at Saranac Lake, N.Y., next weekend, will now take place Feb. 27-28, according to Peter Lesser, executive director of the community's chamber of commerce.


Confidence Index Down
LEAD: Business leaders' confidence in the United States economy has fallen sharply in the last few months and now stands at a five-year low, the Conference Board said.


Sanford-Ford Proposal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Decent, Affordable Housing for All
LEAD: The 1980's have been a disaster for affordable housing.
Federal housing assistance has shrunk by 75 percent, from $33 billion to less than $8 billion.
Construction of new housing for the poor has come to a virtual halt.
The result has been a decline in home ownership (for the first time since World War


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 25, 1988:
MONDAY
Acme Electric
Consol Freightways
Archer-Daniels-Midland
Foster Wheeler
Armstrong World Indus
Lubrizol Corp
Black &amp; Decker
Phila Elec Co
TUESDAY
Ball Corp
Interstate Pwr
Becton, Dickinson &amp; Co
Interstate Securities
Black Hills Corp
NUI Corp
Borden Inc
Norwest Corp
Cilcorp Inc
Phila Suburban Corp
Duke Power
Santa Fe Southern Pacific
EDO Corp
UGI Corp
Fedders Corp
USX Corp
Glenfed Inc
WEDNESDAY
AMP Inc
Oneida Ltd
Alltel Corp
Philips Indus
Amer


Market Place; Is Orion a Target? Drama Builds Up
LEAD: THE situation at the Orion Pictures Corporation is certainly a curious one.
Two of the wealthiest men in the media industry have gradually been buying up stock in the relatively small motion picture and television company.
Its recent films include ''Platoon,'' ''Robocop,'' ''No Way Out'' and ''Throw Momma From the Train,'' and its television series include ''Cagney and Lacey.


Nay to Trendy Culotte
LEAD: The struggle to maintain decorum in the Capitol has pitted its custodians against the fashion industry, specifically: the new mid-thigh-length culotte suits being featured for spring.


Sharpton Reports Cause Anguish In an Uneasy Civil Rights Alliance
LEAD: Reports that the Rev.
Al Sharpton may have been a Federal informant have caused deep consternation among black New Yorkers who had been forging an alliance, sometimes uneasy, to address concerns ranging from the public schools to racially motivated violence.


Babbitt and Gephardt Given Iowa Voter List in Fund Deal
LEAD: In a special arrangement that may violate Federal election laws, two Presidential campaigns obtained copies of a list of Iowa caucus participants and other voters from the state's Democratic Party and in exchange each campaign got its supporters to contribute $10,000 to the party.


Israelis Worry About Their Image
LEAD: The new Israeli policy of beating Palestinians to stop the protests in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip has spurred relatively little official debate here, but brought mounting worries over Israel's image abroad.


PLOT TO SUBVERT REGIME IS CHARGED; Arabs Pledge Support
LEAD: Arab foreign ministers today pledged moral and financial support to Palestinians who for nearly two months have been violently protesting the Israeli occupation of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.


Pan Am and the Rise of Union Power
LEAD: In his spacious 46th-floor office, C. Edward Acker, chairman and chief executive of the Pan Am Corporation, and Martin R. Shugrue, the vice chairman, were going over airline schedules and seat sales last Thursday morning.
They were trying their best, it seemed, to keep their minds off a far more pressing matter.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: SKIING  Swiss Get 1-2 Sweep: Daniel Mahrer led a 1-2 Swiss sweep yesterday in the men's World Cup downhill at Leukerbad, Switzerland.
Mahrer scored his second victory of the season with a surge of speed near the bottom of the course, sweeping through an icy curve and finish slope to win in 2 minutes 17.53 seconds.


Question Box
LEAD:  Question: Years ago, before the T-formation became standard, the single-wing formation was the most popular one in the National Football League.
Which pro team was the last one to give it up?


Advertising; History to Be Stressed In Parker Celebration
LEAD: The Parker Pen Company, whose management, after a leveraged buyout, has halted its downward skid, is in high spirits as it approaches its 100th anniversary this year.


Joggers' Kids Can Roll Along
LEAD: Phil Baechler, a 39-year-old athlete from Yakima, Wash., wanted to spend more time with his newborn son, Travis.
But Baechler had a crowded schedule: he had a full-time job as a copy editor, and he was a competitive runner.


Bronx Borough President Is Sworn In
LEAD: Fernando Ferrer at his inauguration yesterday.
He had been interim Borough President since April, replacing Stanley Simon.
Page B3. (NYT/Sara Krulwich)


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Comstock Group Inc., Danbury, Conn., an engineering and construction company, elected Joseph G. Munisteri president, chief executive and a director.


Playground Clearance
LEAD: Luke Holland had plenty of room to spare as he deftly kept his balance and guided his bicycle over an obstacle, in this case another bicycle, during a jump in the playground at Washington Square Park. (NYT/Vic DeLucia)


Mental Health on the Street
LEAD: It remains to be seen whether Joyce Brown's release from the hospital to a residential program puts a happy ending to the story of a homeless woman's fight against involuntary psychiatric treatment.
Beyond law, her case dramatizes the failure of a policy - deinstitutionalization, the emptying of state mental hospitals during the 1970's.


Seemingly Endless War Is Strangling Mozambique
LEAD: This desperately poor nation on the southeastern coast of Africa is playing out a tragic drama whose chapters are scrawled in blood.
A 12-year-old conflict is strangling Mozambique.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, JANUARY 25, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-14


Lacroix in High Spirits for Spring
LEAD: For the second successive season, Christian Lacroix has opened the couture showings here on an exuberant note.
He is always high-spirited and his clothes always merry.
Because the season at hand is spring and summer, usually a lighthearted time for fashion, he has been inspired to new heights of gaiety.


HAWAIIANS CONCLUDE YEARLONG CELEBRATION
LEAD: With the sounding of conch shells, revelers wrapped up a yearlong celebration of Hawaii's 1,000-year-old native culture.


Far-Away Home Court
LEAD: When Billy Ray Bates was signed by the Portland Trail Blazers out of the Continental Basketball Association in 1980, his acrobatic slam dunks and spinning moves to the basket made him an instant crowd favorite and earned him a nickname: The Great Legend of the Northwest.


London Marchers Call For Stepped-Up Fight Against AIDS
LEAD: Demonstrators marching yesterday from Hyde Park to the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Center in Westminster, where an international conference on AIDS is scheduled to begin tomorrow.
The marchers called for more spending on AIDS research and care, anti-discrimination laws and free AIDS drugs. (AP)


Poll Puts 3 Democrats Neck and Neck in Iowa
LEAD: Three Democratic Presidential candidates are running almost even with two weeks left until Iowa's precinct caucuses, according to a poll published yesterday in The Des Moines Sunday Register.


Name Game: Who's Who
LEAD: A cast of larger-than-life characters that makes grown people go ''Oink'' and others shout ''Ole!'' is invading San Diego.


Sri Lanka Leader Going to India
LEAD: President J. R. Jayewardene is to travel to New Delhi Monday to discuss the possibilities of a mutual-assistance treaty between Sri Lanka and India and the phased withdrawal of 38,000 Indian troops who were sent to support a plan for ending the Tamil insurgency here.


Oak Park Journal; No Welcome Mat for Black Church
LEAD: Officials in this predominantly white Chicago suburb have been wrangling in recent days over a black church's efforts to move into town.


Haas Wins Hope Golf By 2 Shots
LEAD: Jay Haas, one of the consistent but not spectacular players on the PGA Tour for the last dozen years, played just that way today - managing steady but not spectacular golf - to win the 29th annual Bob Hope Chrysler Classic by two shots over David Edwards.


Boeing Losing Chairman As It Adds 2 Jet Models
LEAD: Tonight, Thornton A. Wilson, who is 66, intends to ''have fun'' at his retirement party at a Seattle hotel where he will be toasted by 500 friends and international business associates.
They are flying in to celebrate his 17 years of guiding the Boeing Company out of the ''Boeing Bust'' of 1970 to its position today as the world's largest aerospace company, with revenues of $16.3 billion in 1986.


Poor Example Is Set
LEAD: To the Editor:


Secret Is Out on Listing China as Hostile Country
LEAD: An obscure Federal court case here has compelled the Defense Department to disclose a minor secret that has implications for sensitive issues in American foreign policy.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Durable Goods Dec.
Wednesday  G.N.P.
Fourth Quarter  Thursday  Personal Income Dec.
Friday


Ann Rork Light, Former Actress, 79
LEAD: Ann Rork Light, who was a silent film actress, died here Saturday at the Vanderbilt University Hospital.
She was 79 years old and was being treated for emphysema and lung cancer.


Dance: 'Supply Side' And '3 Chairs for Bach'
LEAD: AT times, actions spoke louder than words and dancing was more vivid than scenic effects in the program that Dancecompass offered Saturday night at the Emanu-El Midtown Y. At other times, choreography was subservient to gimmickry.


Just Misinformed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Advertising; Southern Bride Added To Pace Magazine List
LEAD: Southern Bride is a new magazine from Pace Communications, Greensboro, N.C., that will serve the nuptially inclined in 17 Southern states and the District of Columbia.


Park Popularity Threatens Virgin Islands Paradise
LEAD: The words rasped through the afternoon air with no-nonsense authority:


Express Train Derailed in China; 90 Reported Dead and 66 Injured
LEAD: An express train derailed early today in the mountains of southern China, and 90 people were killed and 66 others seriously injured, the official New China News Agency reported.


Two Falls Take Their Toll As Orser Adjusts His Routine
LEAD: Brian Orser, the reigning world champion, won his eighth consecutive Canadian figure skating championship Saturday night, but not in the way he expected.


Paul J. Babbitt Sr., 89, Father of Candidate
LEAD: Paul J. Babbitt Sr., the father of former Gov.
Bruce Babbitt, a Democratic Presidential candidate, died today.
He was 89 years old.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''No one's attempting to hide it.


Music: Tsuyoshi Tsutsumi
LEAD: TSUYOSHI TSUTSUMI played solo cello pieces by Japanese composers at the Asia Society late Saturday afternoon.
Five of the six have been written in the past three years and one especially for this concert.


India's Fading Airlines Stir First-Class Hopes
LEAD: In an effort to polish the image of India's Government-controlled airlines and prepare for an anticipated surge in tourists and traffic, a band of ambitious technocrats and officials is beginning a sweeping overhaul of two big carriers.


Australia, at 200, Suffers An Attack of Self-Doubt
LEAD: Australia is preparing for the celebration of its bicentennial on Tuesday with a characteristic mixture of flamboyance and self-doubt.


Dollar's Plunge Expected to Make Unemployment Worse for Europe
LEAD: Western Europe's unemployment picture, which has been exceedingly grim for several years, is expected to grow even grimmer over the next few months as a result of the dollar's plunge, which has made American goods more competitive with European products.


New Learjet Head Plans International Sales Push
LEAD: Beverly N. Lancaster received his given name from a clerk in a rural Kansas hospital who mistook the British boy's name, Bevley, for the misspelling of the more common girl's name.
During the Depression, his parents did not have $2 to change his birth certificate.


ABC Crew Works on Its Game Plan
LEAD: For ABC, the good news about its Super Bowl telecast is that the teams feature two prominent and distinct quarterbacks: John Elway, the Yuppie-looking scrambler, and Doug Williams, the drop-back passer and the first black quarterback to start a Super Bowl.


U.S. SAYS POLAND AIDED TERRORISTS
LEAD: The Abu Nidal terrorist network for at least four years maintained an important financial operation in Warsaw that traded arms and consumer goods to raise funds for terrorist acts, according to a classified State Department report on the group's operations.


Forecasts Favoring Lower Rates
LEAD: At the present time the credit markets are leaning in the direction of lower interest rates, as traders and investors seem to be anticipating weak economic data in the first several months of 1988.


Machine Tool Orders Surge 76.7%
LEAD: Orders for American-made machine tools surged 76.7 percent in December from the previous month, to $242.5 million, according to a report scheduled to be released today by the industry's trade association.


Dallas Ballet Forced to Close
LEAD: The Dallas Ballet, which is $1.8 million in debt, has canceled its spring program and laid off its 33 dancers and most staff members.


Kodak's Diversification Plan Moves Into a Higher Gear
LEAD: Until the Eastman Kodak Company agreed Friday to spend $5.1 billion to acquire Sterling Drug Inc., it had been pursuing a diversification strategy that could best be described as busy but dainty.


Hawks Hold Off Pesky Nets
LEAD: Dominique Wilkins scored 31 points but the Atlanta Hawks had to withstand a fourth-quarter rally to defeat the New Jersey Nets, 118-111, today.


Roy Blount Jr. Puts His Misadventures on Stage
LEAD: Roy Blount Jr. has rafted down the Amazon River, taking a brief swim that ended abruptly when he realized piranhas had wiggled into his bathing suit and were nibbling at his upper thigh - an unpleasant experience that nonetheless enabled him to write an account of the trip that began with the lead of a lifetime: ''Wild fish tore my flesh.


Gore Campaign Testing Value of Endorsements
LEAD: Every few days for the last several months, another Southern politician has endorsed Senator Albert Gore Jr. for the Democratic Presidential nomination.


What's Happening to the Neighborhood Bank
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wilander Needs An Extra Effort
LEAD: Pat Cash was hoping to turn the Australian Open into a national celebration, but Mats Wilander spoiled the party.


Exchange Plan To Add Stocks
LEAD: The Midwest Stock Exchange said this week that it plans to list 700 additional stocks for trading.


11 BELIEVED KILLED IN NICARAGUA; Plane Struck by Missiles
LEAD: The contra supply plane that crashed in southern Nicaragua on Saturday was hit twice by Soviet-made surface-to-air missiles, foreign reporters taken to the scene today were told.


Organ Services Vying for Franchises
LEAD: A looming Federal deadline has set off intense competition among private agencies that retrieve kidneys and other organs for transplanting.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: EMPEROR OF THE AIR. By Ethan Canin. 179 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $15.95.


Educators Seek Answers as Bias on Campus Rises
LEAD: An increase in the number of racial and anti-Semitic incidents on campuses is forcing soul-searching at many of the nation's institutions of higher learning, according to educators at a conference on racism.


Growth Seen For Germany
LEAD: West Germany's economy is expected to grow between 1.5 percent and 2 percent this year, compared with 1.7 percent growth in 1987, the Economics Minister, Martin Bangemann, said today.


BURNED BODY OF A CHILD FOUND
LEAD: The badly burned body of a child, possibly 4 years old, was found in a plastic bag in a vacant lot in Harlem by a passer-by yesterday morning, the police said.


Possible Law Violations Under Study by S.E.C.
LEAD: As part of its broad investigation of the October stock market collapse, the Securities and Exchange Commission is studying the extent to which companies may have announced stock buyback plans without actually intending to buy the stock.


Molestations Spread Fear in Queens
LEAD: A gaggle of girls and boys from the St.
Joan of Arc School in Jackson Heights, Queens, crowd the Glendale Bakery every day, eyeing and buying sweets and sandwiches.
But in recent weeks the children have not lingered long after school.


'Last Emperor' Wins 4 Golden Globe Awards
LEAD: ''The Last Emperor,'' a panoramic history of modern China, won four Golden Globe Awards, including best dramatic motion picture, on Saturday night while Sally Kirkland, who played an emigre actress in ''Anna,'' and Michael Douglas, a ruthless trader in ''Wall Street,'' took top honors for actors in dramas.


Back Again: Ethics Issue in Albany
LEAD: Just six months after the State Legislature passed a set of ethics bills hailed as among the most important reform measures in New York's history, the issue of legislative ethics has again begun to dominate debate here.


BAD TIMES FADING FOR DEVILS' SCORER
LEAD: He came of age suffering the indignities of being on a poor team and fearful of losing a career at 21 because of a freakish accident.
But an improved team and the mastery of modern medicine are beginning to erase the bad memories for the New Jersey Devils' Pat Verbeek.


Iranian Said To Link Hostage Release Gulf War
LEAD: Iran has informed Lebanon that all foreign hostages held by extremists loyal to Teheran will be released once the war in the Persian Gulf ends, Lebanese Government officials said this week.


Canadian Offering $4 Billion For Owner of Bloomingdale's
LEAD: In its second major excursion into the United States in just over a year, the Campeau Corporation of Canada last night began a $4.2 billion offer for Federated Department Stores Inc., the owner of Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and Filene's.


New Yorkers &amp; Co. A Man Paid to Get in People's Hair
LEAD: Louis Licari can't tell you whether it's true blondes have more fun.
But he can answer that other question asked in the old Clairol hair color commercials, ''Does she or doesn't she?''


The Election Process; IOWA'S WEIGHTY CAUCUSES: SIGNIFICANCE BY ACCIDENT
LEAD: They started with a creaky mimeograph machine and an aroused Governor, and they grew into a political institution.


No Hats in Ring for Big Fight
LEAD: Negotiations between representatives of Mike Tyson and Michael Spinks broke down over the weekend, making the prospect of a fight between Tyson, the undisputed heavyweight champion, and Spinks in the near future seem unlikely.


Elway Triggers The Denver Shotgun
LEAD: ''THE greatest Elway play?''


Dance: Tsai Fung Troupe, In a Mixture of Styles
LEAD: THE Tsai Fung Dance Company aims for the integration of contemporary and traditional dance forms.
But the pieces that were the most compelling in a program presented on Friday at Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street, were those that seemed the purest.


Advertising; Shandwick in Canada
LEAD: For its ninth acquisition in North America, Britain's Shandwick P.L.C., a public relations concern, has made its first move into Canada, buying PIR (Public and Industrial Relations of Canada) Communications.
Shandwick is putting up $2.9 million in cash, with the payout over four years not to exceed $9.2 million.


Advertising; David Deutsch Agency Lands 4 Assignments
LEAD: David Deutsch, chairman of David Deutsch Associates, took time out from his busy vacation schedule in sunny Florida to call New York about his agency's new assignments.


Merger Resulting in Big Fees for Some on Hutton's Board
LEAD: The outside members of the board of the E. F. Hutton Group will receive more than $2.5 million in fees as a result of the brokerage firm's merger with Shearson Lehman Brothers, according to Hutton officials.
One director, Peter V. Ueberroth, will receive nearly $1 million.


TV Review; Mini-Series From BBC, 'Murder of Moderate Man'
LEAD: EACH of the five episodes of ''Murder of a Moderate Man'' - beginning tonight at 10 on Channel 31 and running through Friday - begins with the same dreamlike sequence.
A distinguished looking man in a white robe is being greeted at an airport.
A small girl hands him flowers.
A hand holding a gun suddenly appears, horrifying the man's supporters.


PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE ON THE AIR TONIGHT
LEAD: President Reagan's State of the Union Message will be broadcast live at 9 o'clock tonight on the ABC, CBS and NBC television networks, on CNN, the Cable News Network, and on C-Span, the Cable-Satellite Public Affairs Network.


A Clash of Styles: Japanese Companies in U.S. Under Fire for Cultural Bias
LEAD: After years of fascination with Japanese management, some American executives are confronting it from a new perspective - as employees of the Japanese enterprises that are multiplying in the United States.


Concert: Montreal Symphony
LEAD: SOMEONE once said of of Gabriel Faure's music that it behaved like a cat - discreet, graceful, with a sense of great adventure but at the end, always landing on its feet no matter how high or dangerous the fall.
His chaste little Pavane - as performed by the orchestra and singers of the Montreal Symphony on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall - was an instructive microcosm of Faure's quiet risk-taking.


Stage: Brook's 'Cherry Orchard'
LEAD: IT is not until the final act of ''The Cherry Orchard'' that the malevolent thud of an ax signals the destruction of a family's ancestral estate and, with it, the traumatic uprooting of a dozen late-19th-century Russian lives.
But in Peter Brook's production of Chekhov's play, the landscape seems to have been cleared before Act I begins.


Trade Bridge to China
LEAD: Clayton K. Yeutter will be the first United States Trade Representative to visit China.
He will leave for Beijing Jan. 31 to sign a pact governing trade in the sensitive sector of textiles.


Dori Ann Hanswirth Marries Joseph N. Lamport
LEAD: Dori Ann Hanswirth, an associate in the New York law firm of Squadron, Ellenoff, Plesent &amp; Lehrer, and Joseph Nathan Lamport, an associate in the New York law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, were married yesterday at Estherwood in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Rabbi Maurice Davis officiated.


'Notch Babies' Bill Will Restore Faith in System
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reagan to Try Again; Call to Lower Taxes on Capital Gains Would Revive Congressional Dispute
LEAD: Prospects are considered slim that President Reagan's call for lower capital gains taxes will go anywhere in the Democratic-controlled Congress in the forseeable future.


Congress Reconvenes Today, Facing Wide Range of Issues
LEAD: After struggling through a first session characterized by confrontations with the White House on the budget and foreign affairs, the 100th Congress will return Monday facing a broad range of unfinished business that must be crowded into a legislative calendar shortened by the 1988 elections.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, JANUARY 25, 1988
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL REPORT  Unemployment in Western Europe is expected to get worse as a result of the dollar's drop, which has made American goods more competitive with European products.
The situation is already grim, with Europe's jobless rate at 11 percent.
No net new jobs have been created in Europe since 1980.


Plane Supplying Contras Crashes; 11 Believed Killed in Nicaragua
LEAD: A DC-6 cargo plane on a supply mission to contra guerrillas crashed inside Nicaragua Saturday night, apparently killing 11 Nicaraguan crewmen and cargo handlers.


Argentina in Glum Search for Aid
LEAD: Warning that the price of failure will be a suspension of its debt payments abroad, Argentina has begun searching for new loans to help cover this year's interest payments on its $54 billion foreign debt, the third largest in Latin America after Brazil and Mexico.


Radium Company Misses a Deadline
LEAD: Nearly a month after the expiration of a state-imposed deadline, a small company in New York City has yet to comply with an order to empty its plant of an enormous inventory of radium-226, a dangerously radioactive material that was once widely used in treating cancer.


Court to Hear Carbide Plea
LEAD: A state court has agreed to hear an appeal by the Union Carbide Corporation of an interim award of $270 million to the victims of the 1984 Bhopal gas leak, a news agency report said.
But the court declined to stay proceedings in a $3 billion damage suit filed by the Indian Government against Carbide, the United News of


Apartment Intruder Fatally Stabs a Man
LEAD: An 82-year-old man was fatally stabbed and his wife was injured during a robbery Saturday in their apartment, the police said yesterday.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly


C.G. King, 91, Dies; Found Vitamin C In Nutrition Study
LEAD: Dr.
Charles Glen King, a nutritionist who co-discovered vitamin C, died of heart failure yesterday at West Chester (Pa.) Hospital.
He was 91 years old and lived in Kennett Square, Pa.


Off-duty Officer Is Stabbed and a 2d Is Shot
LEAD: One off-duty police officer was stabbed in the face in a struggle with a car thief in the South Bronx, and another off-duty officer was shot during a dispute with a motorist in Brooklyn last night, the police said.


Image Maker Aids New Democracy
LEAD: On Monday, when the Republic of Suriname inaugurates a new, freely elected Government headed by President Ramsewak Shankar, there will also be a small festivity here in the tenth floor offices of van Kloberg &amp; Associates, which styles itself as an international consulting firm.


Cincinnati Shuts Water Taps To River as Oil Spill Arrives
LEAD: The million-gallon oil spill floating down the Ohio River from the Pittsburgh area has reached Cincinnati, and intake valves that draw water from the river for about 850,000 people have been closed.


Broken Hill Buyback Plan
LEAD: The Broken Hill Proprietary Company's multibillion-dollar plan to buy back some of its shares would free the Australian mining giant from a possible takeover fight while giving much-needed cash to its two biggest shareholders, according to securities analysts.


Keep the Handcuffs on Prisoners in Hospitals
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stengel's Advice to The Chief
LEAD: Less than 10 months from now, the winner of the Presidential election, exhausted by the campaign, will face an assignment almost as cruel as the campaign itself.


Cynthia Zarin, Writer, Weds a Painter on L.I.
LEAD: Cynthia Rebecca Zarin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael S. Zarin of Great Neck, L.I., and Wellfleet, Mass., was married yesterday to Michael Seccareccia, the son of Michael F. Seccareccia of Pawtucket, R.I., and the late Grace Partridge Seccareccia.
Rabbi Eugene J. Lipsey officiated at the Woman's Club of Great Neck.


Brazil Accepts One U.S. Software Product
LEAD: Acting under the threat of trade reprisals by the United States, Brazil has relaxed some protection of its fast-growing computer industry by authorizing commercialization of an American-made software program.


Saudi Phone Fees Rise
LEAD: Saudi Arabia, in a move to help reduce its budget deficit, has raised telephone charges for the first time in 14 years.
Fouad Abu Mansour, the deputy minister for posts, said in an interview reported today by the Saudi press agency that the move was taken to keep pace with rates in neighboring countries.


Music: Fine Arts Quartet At Alice Tully Hall
LEAD: THE Fine Arts Quartet is an American ensemble with a decided Central European tint.
In its program at Alice Tully Hall Saturday night, one heard a rounded rather than a finely cut edge to phrasing and timbre.
At its worst, the Fine Arts sounds fuzzy to the point of imprecision; yet there is a depth to the group's sound and a relaxed, welcoming quality to the music itself.


Hoyas Surprise Syracuse
LEAD: Georgetown limped into Syracuse this afternoon without a victory in its last three games, punchless on offense and close to falling hopelessly behind in the Big East race.


Talks Intensify to Scrap Shoreham but Not Lilco
LEAD: The Long Island Lighting Company and New York State, trying to put the stalemate on the Shoreham nuclear power plant behind them, have intensified negotiations that could close Shoreham but allow Lilco to remain an independent, investor-owned utility.


MODERN SCIENCE ALLOWS OLD-FASHIONED POLITICKING
LEAD: A Louisiana real estate broker wanted to know what Paul Simon would do if Soviet missiles were launched at America.
A California woman, noting that her mother had prayed after winning a seat on the town council, asked if Michael S. Dukakis would do so in the Oval Office.


'Twentieth Century's Triumphant Entry'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Owner Is Shot Dead In a Booklyn Bakery
LEAD: The owner of a bakery in Brooklyn was shot to death in his office yesterday after three masked and armed men entered the shop, the police said.


Too Steady a State
LEAD: A television commercial promoting tourism in the Garden State employs the slogan, ''New Jersey and you, perfect together.''


It Was All a Mistake
LEAD: With the House convening today, Representative Tom McMillen plans to go before his colleagues to explain that he misinformed them when he described an ''internal, high-level'' Japanese Government memo that turned out to be bogus.


Ortega to Ask Madrid Role 871
LEAD: President Ortega says that during his trip to Spain this week, he will ask the Madrid Government to become active in Central American peace efforts.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Congress Reconvenes


Tokyo Journal; Motto for a New Breed: Less Work and More Play
LEAD: When older Japanese worry about the fate of their country, they tend to think about young people like Hirokazu Kishida.


Advertising; Harvard Changes Look Of Its Business Review
LEAD: As an antidote to the October Wall Street collapse, the Harvard Business Review will include cartoons in a revamping that will make its debut with the January-February issue.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a Washington article on Saturday about illegal aliens misstated the status of a proposal to extend a May 4 deadline for applying for legal status.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service is considering, but has not formally announced, action that would allow aliens who have made known their intention to apply by May 4 to submit the necessary documentation later; they could do so as long as they could show that the delay was caused by reasons beyond their control.


Fitness; It May Not Be Exciting, But You'll Perform Best With a Balanced Diet
LEAD: ONE of the enduring myths of athletics is that eating protein will enhance one's performance.
Since protein is composed of amino acids, some advocates take the notion one step further: loading up on certain amino acids will improve strength, promote muscle building and increase performance.


A.T.&amp;T. Has Doubts About Phone Project
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company has told the General Services Administration that a $25 billion project to replace the Government's antiquated telephone system has been compromised by a growing contract controversy.


Snag at European Talks
LEAD: European Community ministers today resumed their struggle to agree on strict curbs on farm spending that could clear the way for a revamping of the near-bankrupt group's finances.
Diplomats said differences remained unresolved after three days of talks last week and a session that lasted more than 10 hours on Saturday.


Advertising; Executive Is Returning To Travel Magazine
LEAD: Carl J. Portale is returning to European Travel and Life magazine and his old job as its publisher.
He left the magazine, which he had helped found, after Rupert Murdoch acquired it last year.
Since then, the 48-year-old Mr.
Portale helped Tiffany &amp; Company put out a one-shot magazine marking its 150th anniversary.


Black F.B.I. Agent's Ordeal: Meanness That Never Let Up
LEAD: On this one point, the Government's investigators are already agreed: Donald Rochon, an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, was a victim of often brutal racial harassment by his white colleagues.


A Life Defiant, Despite AIDS
LEAD: The brightly lighted hall with its metal folding chairs was a far cry from the dim, smoky clubs where Robert Sanford played before his illness.
And his selection of music was dictated by the fact that his left hand, damaged by chemotherapy, is virtually useless these days, and by his blindness, which limits his keyboard bravado.


Gunman and a Hostage Killed
LEAD: A man sought in a series of abductions was killed along with one of his hostages today in a gun battle with the police.
A second suspect was wounded.


Kennel Operator: Saint Or Abuser of Animals?
LEAD: For nearly 15 years, Justin McCarthy has operated a refuge for hundreds of unwanted cats, dogs and barnyard animals at his 67-acre farm here.
Now he is accused of abusing the animals he pledged to care for until their ''happy, natural death.''


Heyward Meeting Set
LEAD: Mike Gottfried, the Pitt football coach, said today he would meet with Craig Heyward Monday to discuss the all-America tailback's relationship with Bruce Allen, a sports agent.


E-11 UNDAUNTED BY BID FROM AMERICAN BRANDS
LEAD: E-II Holdings Inc. made it clear today that American Brands' ''Pac-Man''' ploy had not dissuaded it from trying to take over the tobacco and consumer goods giant.


Apple's Products
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. has introduced two new software products designed to improve communications between its Macintosh personal computers and the larger computer systems offered by such vendors as the Digital Equipment Corporation.
One product, MacAPPC, establishes standards for software design to the larger computers from microcomputers.


Japan Chip Imports Slip
LEAD: Japanese imports of foreign microchips appear to have tapered off after reaching a peak in the second quarter of 1987, an official with the Ministry of International Trade and Industry said today.
The United States has charged that Japan has failed to open its market to foreign semiconductor makers.


Nissan Raises Prices
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Corporation said today that it had raised the suggested retail price of its cars and light trucks by an average of 1.9 percent, or $224 a vehicle, effective immediately.
The company attributed the increase to the depreciation of the dollar against the yen.
The price increase will not apply to its standard Sentra model or it Pulsar NX model, the company said.


Rivals Will Pray Before They Play
LEAD: Most of the Denver Broncos and the Washington Redskins will join Saturday in a prayer meeting that is believed to be the first to bring together National Football League players from opposing teams on the eve of any game - much less a Super Bowl.


Citicorp Plans to Avoid U.S.-Mexico Debt Swap
LEAD: Citibank does not plan to participate in a Treasury-backed program designed to relieve Mexico's debt burden, John S. Reed, Citicorp's chairman, said in an interview yesterday.


Sabres Down Devils, 5-2
LEAD: Patrick Sundstrom of the Devils trying to get the puck past the Sabres' goalie, Tom Barrasso, as Shawn Anderson helped defend during last night's game at the Meadowlands.
Page B8. (NYT/Ruby Washington)


Group Bids for Canadian Chain
LEAD: A group of Canadian companies has offered to buy Steinberg Inc., one of the country's largest supermarket chains, for $980 million in cash (Canadian), or $764 million (American).
The group is Oxdon Investments Inc., which is owned by the Unicorp Canada Corporation, the Gordon Investments Corporation and the Oxford Development


U.S. Issues Continue to Advance
LEAD: Prices of outstanding Government issues continued to improve yesterday, despite the specter of a heavy supply of new Treasury notes and bonds to be auctioned next week.


IMPERIAL CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMPERIAL CORP OF AMERICA (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b13,788,000
16,290,000
Share earns
.93
1.10
Yr net inc
b51,346,000
c50,340,000
Share earns
3.46
3.41
b-After extraordinary gains of $1,007,000 for the quarter and $887,000 for the year.


People
LEAD: *
Douglas B. Leeds has become president of Thomson-Leeds Company, which has been acquired by the Ogilvy Group.


Careers; Job Hunting On Wall St. In Aftermath
LEAD: ARE dismissed Wall Street middle managers finding jobs?


IMPERIAL OIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMPERIAL OIL CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,958,000,000
1,667,000,000
Net inc
b177,000,000
128,000,000
Share earns
1.08
.78
Yr rev
7,675,000,000
7,064,000,000
Net inc
b745,000,000
c285,000,000
Share earns
4.55
1.74


2 POSSIBLE BUYERS SEEN FOR 6 NBC STATIONS
LEAD: The Emmis Broadcasting Corporation and Quantum Media Inc. are among several companies interested in acquiring the six stations of NBC Radio, according to industry executives familiar with the negotiations.


Computervision In Merger Talks
LEAD: The Computervision Corporation has begun negotiations with Prime Computer Inc. about a possible acquisition by Prime, but the companies warned that no agreement might be reached.
Computervision officials said the company was still urging its stockholders not to tender shares to Prime under its offer of $443.5 million, or $15 a share.


2d Man Pleads Guilty in Killing of Bicyclist
LEAD: A second assailant pleaded guilty yesterday in the fatal beating and stabbing of a 20-year-old Brooklyn man who was riding a bicycle when he was attacked in Coney Island in May 1986, officials said.


Actors Studio, Long in Turmoil, Seeks a New Artistic Director
LEAD: After months of internal turmoil and financial stress at the Actors Studio, a search is under way to find a replacement for the artistic director, Ellen Burstyn.
At the same time, the institution - for more than 40 years the major American training ground for Method acting - is broadening its program to emphasize the development of writers along with actors and directors.


Sandinistas Begin Talks With Indian Rebels
LEAD: The Sandinista Government opened formal peace talks today with Miskito Indian leaders who have been waging a sporadic anti-Sandinista war for seven years.


MERCANTILE BANKSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCANTILE BANKSHARES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
12,060,000
10,394,000
Per share
.93
.82
Yr net inc
46,053,000
39,467,000
Per share
3.60
3.12


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: ROOSEVELT AND DE GAULLE.
Allies in Conflict: A Personal Memoir.
By Raoul Aglion. 237 pages.
Illustrated.


5 Shot, 1 Fatally, on East 28th St.
LEAD: One man was shot and killed and four others were wounded last night in a hail of gunfire during a dispute over illegal drugs on East 28th Street between Fifth and Madison Avenues, the police said.


The Duty of a Democrat in Haiti
LEAD: The Haitian military has stuffed a reasonably good man into the presidency - to the profound indifference of Western Hemisphere leaders.


Opera: Szymanowski's 'King Roger' in California
LEAD: The Long Beach Opera is interesting to sociologists of the operatic scene as a point of entry in this country for the school of deconstructionist stage direction that has flourished in Europe over the past decade or so, especially in Germany.
The dominant artistic presence here in recent years has been that of the brothers Christopher and David Alden, both directors.


Yankees Won't Pursue Gibson
LEAD: Three days after Kirk Gibson and six other players were awarded a second shot at becoming free agents because of collusion among the club owners, the Yankees announced yesterday that they would not pursue Gibson in the open market.


SUFFIELD FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUFFIELD FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b2,456,000
c1,551,000
Per share
-
.26
Yr net inc
1,000
d5,929,000
Per share
-
.97
b-Included a pre-tax loss of $1.5 million from the sale of equity securities and a pre-tax loss of $3.1 million from the writedown of certain securities.


African Movement Fights for Lives Of the Handicapped
LEAD: CHUBBY little Yao is an African serpent child.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on the Law page last Friday about the Texas Supreme Court described appointments to that court incorrectly.
Jack Hightower and Lloyd Doggett are Democrats running for seats on the court; they were not appointed to it by Gov.
Bill Clements.


UNIONFED FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIONFED FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,860,000
4,572,000
Per share
.77
.91
6mo net inc
7,209,000
8,956,000
Per share
1.43
1.79
The per share figures reflect a 50 percent stock dividend paid in September.


Murdoch Is Given Extension Of Date to Give Up The Post
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that Rupert Murdoch may continue to own The New York Post at least until late March, in effect extending a March 6 deadline he had faced.


Simon Tours a Shelter for Homeless in Massachusetts
LEAD: Senator Paul Simon, a Democratic Presidential candidate, speaking with Tony Amoroso during a visit yesterday to the Long Island Shelter for the Homeless in Quincy, Mass. (AP)


American Jews Must Let Israel Know
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shock Torturing Of Drug Suspect Charged at Trial
LEAD: A Queens prosecutor charged in court yesterday that a police sergeant had tortured a drug suspect with an electronic stun gun after beating the man with the help of two other officers.


Freddie Mac Plans Purchase Of Convertible Mortgages
LEAD: The growing popularity of adjustable-rate mortgages convertible to a fixed interest rate led the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation to announce yesterday that it would issue participation certificates in exchange for those mortgages, or else buy the mortgages for cash.


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, JANUARY 26, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-11, B6


Corning Net Surges 72%
LEAD: Corning Glass Works today reported a 72 percent rise in profits in the fourth quarter and a record profit for 1987, thanks to one-time gains in the tax and accounting areas and the addition of an extra week into the financial figuring.


Merrill Shows Profit for Quarter
LEAD: Capping a tumultuous year, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the parent of the nation's largest stock brokerage, yesterday reported a small fourth-quarter profit, surprising analysts who had expected it to post a small loss.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Dusty Baker, who hit 242 home runs during his 14-year career, has been named first-base coach for the San Francisco Giants. . . .
Sean Green, a freshman forward, has transferred from North Carolina State to Iona and will be eligible to play for the Gaels next December. . . .
Billy Martin, the Yankee manager, was married in Danville, Calif., yesterday to Jill Uann Guiver, a freelance photographer.


INSIDE
LEAD:  A Panamanian's Threat  A former Panama official threatened to tell of illegal acts by the military ruler unless he left politics.
Page A3.  'Flapper' Star Dies at 85  Colleen Moore, the silent movie star who personified the ''flapper,'' has died in California.
Page B6.
Ex-Official Helps Inquiry  A former top Queens Democrat, convicted of corruption, has been aiding an inquiry on the judiciary.


Number of Homeless Far Below Shelter Forecasts
LEAD: After years of steady increases, the number of homeless people in New York City shelters and welfare hotels has remained far below levels forecast by the city this winter, leaving city planners and advocates for the homeless puzzling over the unexpected development.


Nascar Drug Testing
LEAD: While saying ''we don't think we have a problem at this time,'' Bill France Jr., the president of Nascar, announced yesterday a drug testing program for Winston Cup Series stock car racing drivers.
The policy, which goes into effect immediately, would incorporate ''reasonable suspicion'' as the basis for testing drivers, mechanics, crew members and Nascar officials.


By Design; French Chic
LEAD: Whatever you call it - chic, cachet or ''chien,'' that odd French expression - it is something Frenchwomen just seem to have.
It's an indefinable quality, a knack for putting oneself together, that results in an enviably stylish look.


Family Opens Home to 63 After Storm Closes Road
LEAD: A couple who saw a line of stranded motorists near their home invited them in for the night and ended up serving breakfast today to 63 new friends, including a missionary from Japan and a couple from England, ''It's been quite fun - it's a lovely group of people,'' said Nickie Jones, 23 years old, of London.


HOWARD SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOWARD SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
9,510,000
6,999,000
Per share
.66
.49
Yr net inc
34,856,000
24,104,000
Per share
2.41
1.71
The 1986 per share earnings adjusted to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split, effected in the form of a 100 percent stock dividend, paid in February 1987.


IN PARIS, GIDDY MOOD IS CATCHING
LEAD: As the spring and summer couture openings take off in earnest after the lively prologue by Christian Lacroix on Sunday, it is clear that the freewheeling Lacroix spirit has left its mark.
Even the most staid, conventional houses have loosened up, so clothes look lighter, brighter and more good humored than they have in many years.


George F. Howe, 86; Historian and Author
LEAD: George Frederick Howe, a historian, author and teacher whose career spanned six decades, died of cancer Jan. 18 at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 86 years old and lived in Harrisville, N.H., and Washington.


Wine Makers Agree To Reduce Urethane
LEAD: American wine producers have reached a voluntary agreement to reduce levels of urethane in table and dessert wines, the Food and Drug Administration announced today.


South Africa Trade Causes Rift in Japan
LEAD: A senior Foreign Ministry official said today that Japan's booming trade with South Africa was an embarrassment to the Government, and he expressed fear that it might undermine the credibility of Japan's anti-apartheid policy.


Aborigines Cast a Cloud Over Australia's Party
LEAD: Thousands of aborigines from around the country met here tonight in what their organizers said could well be the largest gathering of this ancient people in its 40,000-year history.


BOEING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOEING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,599,000,000
4,982,000,000
Net inc
141,000,000
191,000,000
Share earns
.92
1.23
Yr sales
15,355,000,000
16,341,000,000
Net inc
480,000,000
665,000,000
Share earns
3.10
4.28


FIRST AMERICAN BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMERICAN BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,773,000
4,043,000
Per share
.33
.35
Yr net inc
15,740,000
12,204,000
Per share
1.37
-
The bank converted from a mutual to a stock form of ownership on July 24, 1986.


Pre-Nuptial AIDS Screening Taxes Illinois Health System
LEAD: A new Illinois law requiring tests for the AIDS virus before marriage is sending thousands of couples into a health system ill-prepared to handle them and has left health officials wondering how to pay for couples who cannot afford the test.


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, JANUARY 26, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


The Basic Speech; There's No Challenge That 'the American Mind Collectively Cannot Solve'
LEAD: Candidates seeking the Presidential nomination make dozens of speeches in their campaigns.
Some address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
But more often the candidate uses a basic speech.
It summarizes, with little variation from one occasion to the next, how the candidate wants to present himself to the voters.


AMOCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMOCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,916,000,000
4,840,000,000
Net inc
377,000,000
165,000,000
Share earns
1.47
.65
Yr rev
22,391,000,000
20,231,000,000
Net inc
1,360,000,000
747,000,000
Share earns
5.31
2.91


Snow Country to Sell Premier Issue in March
LEAD: While most skiing magazines cover only skiing, here comes a magazine called Snow Country that will also report on off-season activities in its monthly issues.


UNION CARBIDE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION CARBIDE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,850,000,000
1,600,000,000
Net inc
b23,000,000
c495,000,000
Share earns
.17
-
Yr sales
6,910,000,000
6,300,000,000
Net inc
b232,000,000
d496,000,000
Share earns
1.76
4.78


'Praying' Dolls Bring Some Mixed Blessings
LEAD: A new line of dolls that kneel and clasp their hands in a gesture of prayer has drawn mixed reactions from religious groups.


Exxon Net Rises 5.4%; ARCO, Ashland Gain
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation said yesterday that strong sales of chemicals and refined oil products, as well as higher average crude-oil prices, lifted its fourth-quarter net income by 5.4 percent.


Cornerbacks Strive to Avoid Blame
LEAD: They have been targets long before a game was called super.
The development of the passing game and the evolution of two-platoon football created the need for people to be in the right place while hoping that it was not the wrong time.


TIGER INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIGER INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
353,130,000
299,826,000
Net inc
b12,564,000
10,399,000
Share earns
.33
.33
Shares outst
32,864,000
31,558,000
Yr rev
1,231,896,000
1,110,948,000
Net inc
b57,779,000
c45,063,000
Share earns
1.55
-


Schmertz, Mobil's Warrior, Said to Plan Own Business
LEAD: Herbert Schmertz, whose combative responses to critics of the Mobil Corporation and the oil industry made him the nation's best-known corporate public relations executive during the 1970's, is said to be preparing to leave the company to set up his own business.


Belgique Plan By Gevaert
LEAD: Gevaert N.V., a Belgian maker of photographic products, announced today that it would lead a group of investors in an attempt to buy most of the new shares issued last week by Societe Generale de Belgique.


'Natural' Habitats Offer Insights Into Social Behavior of Animals
LEAD: IN a growing effort to learn more about animal behavior, researchers are constructing ecologically complex swamps, aviaries and cages that try to make captive animals feel more at home.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Jan. 14 about a Supreme Court ruling involving promotions in the New York City Police Department misstated the number of officers promoted to sergeant as an outgrowth of a competitive examination first given in 1983.
Of more than 11,000 who took the test, 2,039 have been promoted.


TAUNTON SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TAUNTON SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,009,000
1,378,000
Per share
.31
.43
Yr net inc
4,417,000
4,187,000
Per share
1.37
-
Both year-ago periods' nets include a net gain of $261,000 from a Mutual Savings Central Fund dividend.


42.94 Jump Puts Dow At 1,946.45
LEAD: Stock prices surged in heavy trading yesterday and the Dow Jones industrial average recaptured much of last week's loss, climbing 42.94 points, or 2.3 percent, to 1,946.45.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''What's bugging me is that you seem to get access to early drafts of intelligence.
I don't even get a final copy.''  - Secretary of State George P. Shultz  to Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina.  [ A18:4. ]


Campaign Trail
LEAD:  Basics From Bush


Illicit Trade Is Built on Reptiles in West
LEAD: Wearing high boots and carrying long poles and burlap bags, lawenforcement officers invaded homes, shops and offices in Arizona and eight other states earlier this month, seizing hundreds of rattlesnakes and exotic crawling desert creatures.


ROYAL PALM SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROYAL PALM SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
6,846,669
b165,875
Per share
-
.04
6mo net loss
6,747,748
b605,895
Per share
-
.15
b-Net income


Indianapolis Conductor Wins Stokowski Award
LEAD: William Henry Curry, associate conductor of the Indianapolis Symphony, has been named this year's winner of the Leopold Stokowski Conducting Competition.


Two Convicted of Murder in Plot Linked to California Finance Club
LEAD: Two members of a former Los Angeles social and business club, the Billionaire Boys Club, were convicted in Redwood City today of murdering the father of one of the defendants in a plot to obtain his assets.


MOORE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOORE FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,075,000
4,287,000
Per share
.66
.63
Yr net inc
16,906,000
b3,269,000
Per share
2.25
-
b-Net loss


Building a Future From a Past
LEAD: Jose Limon, one of the major figures in American modern dance, died in 1972.
It has been 10 years since Carla Maxwell, then a Limon dancer with no administrative experience, took over the directorship of the Jose Limon Dance Company.


Variation Detected In Rocket Booster
LEAD: Engineers using new methods to test engine parts of the space shuttle have found unexpected structural variations that could affect the resumption of flights if they prove to be problems, space agency spokesmen said today.


CENVEST INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENVEST INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
874,000
b1,452,000
Per share
-
.37
Yr net inc
3,469,000
3,587,000
Per share
.89
-
b-Net income


Washington Talk: Briefing; Getting Tough
LEAD: There's a bit of a competition in Congress for who can bash Japan hardest in public works.


JEFFERSON SMURFIT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERSON SMURFIT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
290,361,000
240,813,000
Net inc
31,333,000
9,616,000
Share earns
1.62
.50
Yr sales
1,099,465,000
944,356,000
Net inc
91,996,000
28,003,000
Share earns
4.77
1.46


Hertz Concedes It Overcharged For Car Repairs
LEAD: For seven years the Hertz Corporation charged motorists and insurance companies higher prices to repair cars damaged in accidents than it actually paid, the company said yesterday.


BellSouth Purchase
LEAD: The Mobile Communications Corporation of America is negotiating with the BellSouth Corporation to sell its cellular and and certain other businesses.
Mobile said the merger would be structured as a tax-free transaction in which each share of Mobile's class A and class B stock would be exchanged for $24 in BellSouth common stock.


Rather's Questioning of Bush Sets Off Shouting on Live Broadcast
LEAD: Vice President Bush and Dan Rather, the CBS News anchor, shouted at each other in a 10-minute interview about the Iran-contra affair on live national television last night.


Bangladesh Bans Rallies After 8 Are Killed
LEAD: The Government banned rallies and protests today, hours after the opposition vowed to avenge a police fusillade in which at least eight protesters were killed at a rally in Chittagong.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.83
6.57
6.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.82
5.80
5.48
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.21
6.18
5.47
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.26
8.26
7.48
30-YR.


Transcript of Reagan's State of the Union Message to Nation
LEAD: Following is the text of President Reagan's State of the Union Message, prepared for delivery to Congress tonight:


HERCULES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HERCULES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
677,650,000
640,490,000
Net inc
b37,499,000
c38,932,000
Share earns
.73
.69
Shares outst
52,240,936
57,112,191
Yr rev
2,693,002,000
2,615,110,000
Net inc
b820,737,000
c226,733,000
Share earns
14.74
4.02


Ombudsman Agency for Child Abuse Needed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Boxing Notebook; Tyson-Spinks Door Still Open
LEAD: During negotiations last weekend for a Mike Tyson-Michael Spinks match in June, Bill Cayton, Tyson's co-manager, told Butch Lewis, Spinks's promoter, that if he walked out on the discussions not to bother to come back.
Lewis left in spite of the warning.


Nissan Plant in Tennessee is U.A.W. Target
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers Union last week opened a campaign to organize workers at the second-largest union-free Japanese automobile plant in the United States.


Bush and Rather Clash Over Iran
LEAD: Vice President Bush and Dan Rather of CBS News shouted at each other yesterday in a combative, live interview.
Pointed questions about Mr.
Bush's role in the Iran-contra affair brought a forceful response; the Vice President accused CBS of misrepresentation in obtaining the interview.


Britoil Rejects Higher B.P. Offer
LEAD: Britoil P.L.C. has rejected an increased takeover offer from the British Petroleum Company that values Britoil at $:2.5 billion, or about $4.45 billion. ''B.P. has consistently failed to recognize Britoil's true worth,'' said David Walker, Britoil's chairman. ''Its latest offer still significantly undervalues Britoil.


Dissolve the Taxi Commission and Start Again
LEAD: To the Editor:


Business and Health; H.M.O. Troubles With Medicare
LEAD: THE Reagan Administration's program to persuade elderly Americans to join prepaid health plans is gaining momentum, but nearly 20 percent of the health maintenance organizations, or H.M.O.'s, that signed up for the program have dropped out, displacing 80,000 people.


SMITHKLINE BECKMAN CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SMITHKLINE BECKMAN CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,198,700,000
1,043,300,000
Net inc
b141,900,000
147,300,000
Share earns
1.14
.97
Yr sales
4,328,800,000
3,745,400,000
Net inc
b570,100,000
521,100,000
Share earns
4.50
3.39
Shares outst
4,328,800,000
3,745,400,000


UNOCAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNOCAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,333,600,000
2,056,200,000
Net inc
29,800,000
49,200,000
Share earns
.26
.42
Yr rev
9,393,000,000
8,353,100,000
Net inc
181,400,000
b175,800,000
Share earns
1.56
1.51


Yonkers, Ending 2-Year Battle, Agrees to Low-Income Housing
LEAD: After a two-year battle over a court desegregation order that has left Yonkers a divided city, local officials and the plaintiffs yesterday agreed on a plan to build low-income housing in mostly white neighborhoods.


Washington Talk: U.S.-Soviet Exchanges; Pact Endures 30 Tumultuous Years
LEAD: Thirty years ago this week, Moscow and Washington agreed to get to know each other better.


I.B.M. and A.T.&amp;T. Donate Chip Technology to Sematech
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation and the American Telephone and Telegraph Company are expected to announce Tuesday that they will donate designs and manufacturing technology for advanced computer chips to Sematech, the new consortium formed by many of the nation's leading computer and semiconductor companies.


Phelan Defends Specialists In Market's October Plunge
LEAD: On Oct. 19, John J. Phelan Jr., chairman of the New York Stock Exchange, was at the center of one of the worst financial panics of the 20th century.
These days, he is reliving that period as he defends the performance of the Big Board's specialists in the wake of a recent report.


ATLANTIC RICHFIELD CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTIC RICHFIELD CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,585,000,000
3,625,000,000
Net inc
b340,000,000
64,000,000
Share earns
1.86
.35
Yr sales
16,829,000,000
14,993,000,000
Net inc
1,224,000,000
615,000,000
Share earns
6.68
3.38


Cowles Media Unit To Buy Bowhunter
LEAD: Blue-Jay Inc. of Fort Wayne, Ind., the publisher of Bowhunter magazine, is on the verge of being acquired by Historical Times of Harrisburg, Pa., a subsidiary of the Cowles Media Company.
No details of the sale were released.


Congressmen See Confrontation Over Contra Aid
LEAD: Congressional leaders said today that President Reagan's request in his State of the Union message for renewed aid to the Nicaraguan rebels had placed the Administration squarely in confrontation with Congress at the start of the new legislative year.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


BLACK &amp; DECKER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLACK &amp; DECKER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
612,279,000
529,000,000
Net inc
31,118,000
22,385,000
Share earns
.53
.38
Shares outst
58,900,000
58,400,000


Nicaraguans Question Rebel Plane Crash Survivor
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Roberto Calderon, chief of Nicaragua's Fifth Military Zone, displaying photo of Alejandro Sanchez Herrera, survivor of rebel supply plane that crashed Saturday.
Photo shows survivor with three men in military uniform on Swan Island, Honduras, where flight was believed to have originated.


Dismal Devils Lose Fifth Game in Row
LEAD: The Devils have been slipping and sliding on the ice lately and falling in the standings.


Washington Talk; Legacy of 'Granddad'
LEAD: Susan Eisenhower was 9 years old when the man she calls ''granddad'' left the White House.
Now 36 and head of the Eisenhower World Affairs Institute, she is presiding over activities commemorating the 30th anniversary of the United States-Soviet exchange agreement.


Fast-Food Plastic Is Minuscule in Landfill Garbage; Efforts in New York
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Lessons of '68 for Liberals in '88
LEAD: Before we are inundated by the inevitable flood of articles and television specials commemorating the tumultuous events of 20 years ago, any Americans who still call themselves liberals would do well to remember that 1968 was a year of unmitigated disaster for their cause.
It marked the end of New Deal, Fair Deal, New Frontier and Great Society liberalism.


Thomas P. Hackett Jr., Psychiatrist, 59
LEAD: Thomas P. Hackett Jr., chief of psychiatry at Massachusetts General Hospital, died of a heart attack Saturday while horseback riding.
He was 59 years old and lived in Newton, Mass.


TV Reviews; The Rev. Jim Bakker And the Government
LEAD: WHAT did the Rev.
Jim Bakker do, and how did he do it?
Forget the sexual scandal. ''Frontline'' is exploring a more important area: Mr.
Bakker and the Government.
Did some agencies look the other way when the television preacher was piling up money? ''Frontline,'' on Channel 13 at 10 o'clock tonight, suggests they did.


Blast Kills 10 in a Mexican Mine
LEAD: An explosion and fire trapped more than 125 men in a coal mine in northern Mexico today, and authorities said at least 10 had died.


Garberville Journal; Marijuana Once Reigned as the King
LEAD: Not long ago, when hundreds defied the law and grew marijuana openly in this region's remote valleys, cash flowed easily along the town's Main Street, spurring one of the biggest bonanzas in the history of a rawboned town whose economic story has been one long chronicle of boom and bust.


Lights at Wrigley Field?
LEAD: The chairman of the Cubs told a Chicago City Council hearing yesterday that the club would consider leaving Chicago if the city did not allow night baseball games at Wrigley Field.
The chairman, John Madigan, appeared before the council's committee on energy and environmental protection.
The panel is considering a proposal to install lights at Wrigley Field.


Violin: Hanna Lachert Plays
LEAD: HANNA LACHERT is a violinist whose education began in Poland and continued in a gradual westward direction, including a stay at the Royal Conservatory of Brussels.
Ms.
Lachert joined the New York Philharmonic in 1972, settled into the American musical life and has still worked at keeping her status as a solo recitalist.


Ozone Study In Arctic
LEAD: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientists who earlier studied the loss of ozone over the South Pole are now turning their attention to the North Pole, the Federal agency announced today.


Bus Strike Jams Golden Gate
LEAD: Cars jammed the Golden Gate Bridge today as a strike by bus drivers who normally haul 27,000 passengers a day forced commuters to form car pools, ride ferries and seek other ways of getting to work.
About 300 Golden Gate Transit drivers and telephone operators walked off the job early Saturday after negotiators remained deadlocked beyond a Friday midnight strike deadline.


Pacific Telesis Profit Declines
LEAD: The Pacific Telesis Group today reported a 37 percent drop in its fourth-quarter earnings.
A restructuring program, early-retirement incentives and an adverse rate ruling were cited.


KEYSTONE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEYSTONE FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,926,000
3,969,000
Per share
.49
.32
Yr net inc
24,348,000
20,734,000
Per share
2.00
1.75


Home Sales Down 3.8%
LEAD: Sales of existing single-family homes dropped 3.8 percent in December, the National Association of Realtors said today.
It was the second consecutive monthly decline.


Boston Curator Defends Black Artists' Exhibition
LEAD: When Edmund Barry Gaither decided to assemble an exhibition of black artists at the Museum of Fine Arts here, he expected a certain amount of criticism.


WHEELING-PITTSBURGH STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WHEELING-PITTSBURGH STEEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
249,753,000
240,734,000
Net loss
b164,781,000
213,820,000
Yr sales
1,001,370,000
934,450,000
Net loss
b65,732,000
250,923,000
b-After an extraordinary charge of $8,747,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary credit of $31,847,000 for the year, and the both periods included a loss from an accounting change of $149.7 million.


Hearings on Missile Treaty Begin; Shultz Sees New Arms-Control Era
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that the treaty eliminating land-based medium- and shorter-range nuclear missiles would strengthen American and allied security, would enhance international stability and could open a new era in arms control.


Inside the Mob: Agent Recalls 'Game of Wits'
LEAD: An undercover agent who infiltrated the Mafia for five years found that his life inside the mob was filled with boredom, loneliness and the constant danger of death.


CRANE COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRANE COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
323,493,000
311,061,000
Net inc
13,500,000
10,589,000
Share earns
.58
.47
Yr sales
1,283,970,000
1,204,236,000
Net inc
b59,286,000
38,378,000
Share earns
2.53
1.69


Washington Talk: Briefing; Art and the F.T.C.
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission has become involved in a case of alleged art fraud that a commission attorney, calls ''a first'' for the agency.


Johnny Gee Former Pitcher, 72
LEAD: Johnny Gee, who pitched for the Pittsburgh Pirates and the New York Giants in the 1940's and played basketball with the Syracuse Nationals, died Saturday.
He was 72 years old.


SARA LEE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SARA LEE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
2,644,100,000
2,386,000,000
Net inc
99,100,000
77,800,000
Share earns
.88
.70
6mo sales
5,043,000,000
4,527,100,000
Net inc
161,000,000
133,200,000
Share earns
1.42
1.18


CONSOLIDATED FREIGHTWAYS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED FREIGHTWAYS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
618,393,000
548,866,000
Net inc
20,559,000
22,518,000
Share earns
.53
.58
Yr rev
2,296,911,000
2,124,467,000
Net inc
74,570,000
89,109,000
Share earns
1.93
2.31


Beijing Journal; In Baldness War, Rumors of Advance for Hairline
LEAD: His pate gleaming like a freshly peeled potato, the man waited expectantly in the whitewashed room, the buoyant confidence of a lottery ticket buyer lighting his eyes.


FOURTH FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOURTH FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
8,574,000
7,548,000
Per share
.64
.55
Yr net inc
26,608,000
30,466,000
Per share
1.97
2.28


TOP COLOMBIA FOE OF DRUG SMUGGLING DIES IN KIDNAPPING
LEAD: Gunmen kidnapped and killed Colombia's Attorney General near the city of Medellin today, Government officials said.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Executive Changes column of Business Day yesterday misidentified a new director at the GTE Corporation.
He is George V. Grune.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Boston Stock Exchange Inc. said Linda R. Coleman had joined the exchange as executive vice president, planning and development.


You Could Look It Up
LEAD: MODERN reporters write on computers and editors use the electronic equivalents of pencils, erasers and scissors.
Even so, a pile of old-fashioned books can usually be found next to the computer.
Dictionary, thesaurus, stylebook and computer manual - old technology and new technology side by side.


UNITED BANKS OF COLORADO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED BANKS OF COLORADO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
10,300,000
631,000
Per share
.65
.01
Yr net inc
669,000
22,200,000
Per share
-
1.36
The results include after-tax gains from the settlement of the company's retirement plans of $5.5 million, or 38 cents a share, for the latest quarter and $8.2 million, or 56 cents a share, for the year-ago period.


Advertising; Pitney Bowes Switches to Hill, Holliday
LEAD: HILL, HOLLIDAY, CONNORS, COSMOPULOS of Boston has won Pitney Bowes Inc.'s account, which includes the corporate advertising and most of work for the company's business systems.
Billings will be between $7 million and $10 million.
This is the first new account of 1988 for Hill, Holliday, which last year increased its billings 23 percent, to $320 million.


Talkback's Incentives To Read Magazine Ads
LEAD: If magazine readers are given an incentive to read an ad, their awareness of the product climbs measurably.
And awareness is the precursor of sales.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Green Is 5 Million Point Man: Rickey Green, a Jazz reserve, took a shot at National Basketball Association history last night and made it during Utah's 119-96 home victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers.
His 3-point basket at the end of the third quarter pushed the league 1 point over the 5,000,000 mark since play began in 1946.


Heyward Decides He Will Turn Pro
LEAD: Craig Heyward, Pitt's all-America running back, said today that he would forgo his final season of college football eligibility in the hope of playing in the National Football League next season.


No Crimp in Her Style
LEAD: Joan Benoit Samuelson, the Olympic gold medalist and two-time Boston Marathon winner, said that recent motherhood isn't putting a crimp in her running style.
In a 10-kilometer race at Wilton Manors, Fla., on Sunday, she finished first in the women's division in 34 minutes 12 seconds and 11th over all in a field of 560.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Rule Witnesses May Be Barred by Judge
LEAD: In a 5-to-3 decision, the Supreme Court ruled today that criminal trial judges may bar defense witnesses from testifying in order to punish attorneys for failing to disclose the witnesses' identities soon enough.
The Court said the judges could take the action regardless of whether the defendants were at fault.


Dollar Rises in a Quiet Day And Gold Declines Sharply
LEAD: The dollar strengthened yesterday against all major currencies except the Canadian dollar in generally quiet worldwide trading.


Soviet Space Contract
LEAD: A West German concern has signed an agreement with the Soviet Union to use Russian satellites for space experiments.
The company, Kayser Threde, is to conduct three experiments on board the Soviet Foton spacecraft between 1989 and 1992, according to the Soviet news agency Tass.
The news agency gave no details, but said the company was developing a laser device to measure environmental pollution from space.


Few Israelis Dispute Army Tactics in Unrest
LEAD: ''They've risen on us, we didn't rise on them,'' Yehuda Genyan, a tailor, was saying today of the Palestinian protesters. ''They walk around here like kings, but a Jew goes to pray at the wall and he gets stabbed.''


Jews Must Not Break Bones
LEAD: There is a gift that foreign supporters of Israel, particularly Jews, can now give to the country.
And there is a gift that a particular leader of Israel, who has fought for her in war after war, can give.
It would be a gift of great cost to himself, but would burnish his name and that of his perpetually embattled nation.


Former Aide Says He Can Detail Noriega's Corruption
LEAD: A former top adviser to the Panamanian military ruler, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, said yesterday that he would provide details on the general's involvement in drug and arms smuggling, corruption and money laundering, unless the general removed himself from politics.


Federated's Fading Profitability
LEAD: When Howard Goldfeder became chairman of Federated Department Stores Inc. in 1981, he vowed to improve the profitability of a company that had long been one of the nation's most respected retailers.
But Mr.
Goldfeder's failure thus far to accomplish that goal, according to analysts, is a major reason why he now finds himself having to fight off an unwanted $4.2 billion bid from Robert Campeau, the Toronto-based real estate developer.


Lab Dispute Delays Chambers Trial
LEAD: Lawyers and scientists continued to squabble yesterday at a hearing over whether a laboratory test that has apparently never been used in a criminal case in the United States could be used in the trial of Robert E. Chambers Jr.
The test, using a laboratory-engineered antibody, showed a high level of an enzyme found in saliva on a stained denim jacket that investigators discovered in August 1986 with Jennifer Levin's body in Central Park.


Poor Policy to Forgive The Mexican Debt
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Chemical Clamps' May Eliminate Some Surgery
LEAD: MEDICAL researchers have begun experimenting with synthetic hormones that effectively block harmful body secretions, an approach they hope will lead to the better treatments for many common diseases.
In the case of some cancers, the new approach may even eliminate the need for surgery.


Music: Morocco's Gnawa
LEAD: IN Marrakesh, and elsewhere in southern Morocco, Gnawa musicians play for all-night, outdoor rituals with dancing, singing and spirit possession.
A young master Gnawa musician, Hassan Hakmoun, brought a solo version of the music to the Ethnic Folk Arts Center (179 Varick Street) on Sunday, as part of its Music Around the Mediterranean series.


2 Nordiques Suspended
LEAD: Coach Ron Lapointe of the Quebec Nordiques and Terry Carkner, a defenseman for the club, were suspended for five and 10 games, respectively, for leaving the bench during a third-period fight in a game against the Montreal Canadiens on Sunday night.
Lapointe also was fined $1,000 and the team was fined $10,000.


Chess: Gelfand Wins Junior Event With Two Queen Sacrifices
LEAD: Two Soviet players captured the top places in the 1988 European Junior Championship in Arnhem, the Netherlands.
Boris Gelfand won the gold medal with an 11 1/2-1 1/2 score, a half-point ahead of the silver medalist, Vassily Ivanchuk, an international master who was last year's winner.


Figure in Corruption Case Is Said to Be Aiding Inquiry
LEAD: A former Queens Democratic Party official convicted on corruption charges, Richard L. Rubin, has secretly been cooperating with a state agency investigating political corruption and patronage in the Queens judiciary, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.


2 Presidents Named At Chrysler Motors
LEAD: Bennett E. Bidwell and Robert A. Lutz have both gained the title of president, along with some added responsibilities, at the Chrysler Corporation's Chrysler Motors subsidiary.
Their job changes followed the resignation last week of Harold K. Sperlich, the unit's president since 1985.


New York's Shelters: Who Uses Them and Why
LEAD: To many people, the word homeless conjures up a disheveled, middle-aged alcoholic sprawled on the floor in Grand Central Terminal.
But beyond this world of doorways, benches and trash can fires in the night are thousands of homeless people who have never lived on the streets of New York.


PATTERNS
LEAD:  Flanders in Charge


Prices Fall on Talk of Sales Of Gold by Large Producers
LEAD: Precious metal futures were battered yesterday on reports of substantial sales of gold by South Africa and the Soviet Union, the two largest suppliers of bullion.
Meanwhile, copper prices tumbled as more analysts said the yearlong rally in copper prices appeared to be sputtering out.


Seminar Honors 'Queen' of Soap Operas
LEAD: In the world of soap operas, Agnes Nixon is the reigning queen.
She has had at least one show on the air every weekday, 52 weeks a year, for more than 30 years - and that's all original episodes, with no reruns.
Three of ABC's current soaps are her creations: ''One Life To Live,'' which has been on the air for 20 years; ''All My Children,'' a veteran of 18 years; and one relative newcomer, '


NATIONAL SAVINGS BANK (ALANY) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL SAVINGS BANK (ALANY)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
800,593
b872,487
Per share
.69
.76
b-After a tax credit of $259,500.


U.S. Jews Torn Over Arab Beatings
LEAD: Israel's policy of responding to unrest in the occupied territories by having its troops beat Palestinian Arabs has generated some quiet expressions of concern but only a few scattered public complaints among leaders of American Jewish groups.


Power Furnishings
LEAD: Several weeks ago Michael Deaver, the former Presidential adviser, in need of money to pay his legal bills, held a tag sale of his office furnishings.
Last weekend John Connally, a former Governor of Texas in need of money to pay an army of creditors, consigned his worldly goods to auction.
Mr.
Deaver got about $100,000 from his sale.


New Session, Old Odor
LEAD: Congress started over yesterday with the usual inflated pomp and optimism.
But it's hardly a fresh start.
The first half of this 100th Congress ended at a new low, with bad law, furtive deals and the odor of pork.
As President Reagan demonstrated in his State of the Union Message last night, holding up 43 pounds worth of last-minute law, the lesson is plain:


Three Mile Island Cleanup Uncovers New Details
LEAD: When operators lost control of the Unit 2 reactor at Three Mile Island on March 28, 1979, it was widely feared that Pennsylvania, or even the United States, might be bathed in radioactive material.
This did not happen.
The reactor had evidently remained intact.


PEOPLES BANCORP (NORTH CAROLINA)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES BANCORP (NORTH CAROLINA)(O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,539,000
1,945,000
Per share
.38
.31
Yr net inc
9,537,000
8,296,000
Per share
1.44
1.30


Tennis Acts on South Africa
LEAD: Philippe Chatrier, president of the International Tennis Federation, said yesterday that it would no longer require players to play in South Africa.
The decision is intended to placate African nations and anti-apartheid groups, as well as the International Olympic Committee, which had expressed concern about a possible African boycott or disruption of the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, because of the annual tennis tournament held in


St. Patrick's Challenge: Woman Grand Marshal
LEAD: On Sunday, the reporters began to phone.
A photographer visited her yesterday afternoon.
Friends have been calling to wish her luck and the house on Penelope Avenue in Middle Village, Queens, has begun to take on an air of celebration.
The challenge, therefore, for Dorothy Hayden Cudahy has been obvious but not simple: to keep her emotions in order, to be mindful of recent history.


Mite From Asia Poses Big Threat to Honeybees And U.S. Crops
LEAD: A TINY Asian mite that kills honeybees has recently invaded the United States, posing a serious challenge to the nation's beekeepers and farmers.


Irving Bank Offer Reduced
LEAD: The Bank of New York Company yesterday revised its hostile takeover offer for the Irving Bank Corporation for a second time, slashing the value of the cash-and-stock bid by about $140 million from the previous $1.2 billion.


I.C.C. to Get Plea On Santa Fe Unit
LEAD: Kansas City Southern Industries said that it would seek approval from the Interstate Commerce Commission to acquire the Southern Pacific Transportation Company unit of the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation.
Santa Fe has agreed to sell the unit to Rio Grande Industries, but the commission has not approved the agreement.


EXXON CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXXON CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
22,586,000,000
19,145,000,000
Net inc
b1,556,000,000
c1,480,000,000
Share earns
1.12
1.03
Yr rev
84,116,000,000
76,555,000,000
Net inc
4,841,000,000
c5,360,000,000
Share earns
3.43
3.71


Viewers Are Speaking Up About Snyder
LEAD: JIMMY (THE GREEK) SNYDER may be gone, but he is far from forgotten at CBS Sports, or among viewers.


Addendum
LEAD: *
Bill Communications is changing the name of Incentive Marketing magazine to Incentive May 1.


KAUFMAN &amp; BROAD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAUFMAN &amp; BROAD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
507,401,000
380,895,000
Net inc
b19,242,000
c18,880,000
Share earns
.60
.59
Yr rev
1,517,977,000
1,085,172,000
Net inc
b57,345,000
c44,164,000
Share earns
1.83
1.42


Washington Talk: Cabinet; Secret of a Survivor Is Topic of Hot Debate
LEAD: Samuel Riley Pierce Jr., the only member of President Reagan's original Cabinet still in office, says he has survived by doing his job quietly and effectively.


Our Towns; Mother's Stand: AIDS Video And Its Message
LEAD: Normally, Andrew Daly, a junior at Ridgewood High School, would not pay attention to a bunch of parents arguing over whether to show an AIDS video at school. ''Not a chance,'' said Andrew.
Except one day he looked up and realized his mother was one of the video's leading opponents.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Western Union to McCaffrey &amp; McCall Direct Marketing for its Easylink and Infomaster programs.


LOTUS DEVELOPMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOTUS DEVELOPMENT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
115,600,000
81,800,000
Net inc
22,900,000
15,600,000
Share earns
.50
.35
Yr sales
395,600,000
282,900,000
Net inc
72,000,000
48,300,000
Share earns
1.58
1.03


Broncos Fine Receiver
LEAD: The Broncos arrived today for the Sunday Super Bowl game, and Coach Dan Reeves announced he had fined Vance Johnson, his star receiver, for an incident last week.


Unforeseen Resignation At Pittsburgh Brewing
LEAD: Harvey Sanford announced his resignation yesterday as president and chief executive of the Pittsburgh Brewing Company, as a result of its integration into the G. Heileman Brewing Company.


Siamese Twins to Get Skull Plates
LEAD: Two California companies are making plates to repair the skulls of German Siamese twins separated last September, and the plates will be inserted as soon as they are finished, according to officials at Johns Hopkins Hospital.


JACKSON PRESSES FOR RACIAL PEACE
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, campaigning in New York yesterday, called for ''healing'' and ''focusing on common ground'' in the wake of a recent rise in racial tensions in the city.


Cocaine's Many Dangers: The Evidence Mounts
LEAD: AS reports of cocaine-related deaths steadily accumulate, doctors are gaining a sharper awareness of the dangers of the drug.
Increasingly, the doctors realize they must add cocaine abuse to their checklist of considerations when they are confronted with certain medical emergencies - in infants as well as adults.


Hart and Dukakis Clash at Debate in Boston
LEAD: Former Senator Gary Hart and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachussetts went on the offensive tonight against theis rivals for the Democratic Presidenthal nomination and against each other, turning a debate that began cordially into another forum for sparring among the Democratic candidates.


Stage: Roy Blount in Humorists' Series
LEAD: ''ROY BLOUNT'S Happy Hour and a Half'' is one of the season's most self-descriptive titles.
For 90 minutes we are, figuratively, at a bar with the author and raconteur as he expounds wittily on his shaggy life and his and our hard times.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Amoco Corp.
$377,000,000
+128.5
Black &amp; Decker Corp.
31,100,000
+38.8
Boeing Co.
141,000,000
-26.2
Browning-Ferris Industries
50,800,000
+31.9
Consolidated Freightways
20,600,000
-8.4
Corning Glass Works
59,000,000
+72.0
Crane Co.


REAGAN PROMISES TO PURSUE AGENDA TO END OF HIS TERM
LEAD: President Reagan said tonight he would remain a vigorous, aggressive President ''right to the finish line'' of his Administration a year from now.


Cuomo Offers Pension Fund for Loans
LEAD: Governor Cuomo said today that $100 million from the state pension system would be made available for loans to small businesses at below-market interest rates.


The News Movie: A New Form
LEAD: IT has been heading there all along; now it has arrived.
The news movie is here.
CBS News finally gave birth to ''48 Hours.'' What's real is what's real, but properly filmed, edited and scored, it is supposed to reach out and grab us.
The news movie is the television equivalent of the nonfiction novel.


'Bog Man' Reveals Story of a Brutal Ritual
LEAD: ABOUT 2,200 years ago, an aristocratic young Celt was brutally slain and thrown into a bog near what is now Manchester, England.
His body, almost perfectly preserved, has become the focus of a scientific effort that some scholars believe will lead to rewriting the history of ancient Europe.


Rock Cracks Mapped
LEAD: Borrowing from sculptors, scientists have developed a new technique that reveals the microscopic cracks that form as rocks or buildings collapse under pressure.


Molly Berns, 77, Heart Charity Fund Raiser
LEAD: Molly Berns, an honorary chairwoman of the New York Heart Association for which she had been a principal fund raiser for many years, died Sunday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Fast-Food Plastic Is Minuscule in Landfill Garbage
LEAD: To the Editor:


MEMORIES STIR AID TO NEEDIEST
LEAD: Edna M. Telep of Yardley, Pa., recalls fondly how she grew up in New York City and ''benefited from the surroundings and the excellent education,'' all of it free.


New Haiti Chief Seeks To Quiet Vote Critics
LEAD: A day after he was designated President-elect by a Government-appointed electoral council, Leslie F. Manigat tried today to quell renewed charges of fraud and to turn toward the future with a pledge that he would strive to build ''a society of social justice.''


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the financing of political campaigns in Iowa misidentified a Phoenix lawyer who contributed $5,000 to the Iowa Democratic Party on behalf of former Gov.
Bruce Babbitt of Arizona.


Joyner-Kersee Honored
LEAD: One day after Ben Johnson, the sprinter from Canada, was named the Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year, the news agency yesterday selected Jackie Joyner-Kersee as the Female Athlete of the Year.
It was only the third time in the 57-year history of the awards that athletes from the same sport were chosen in the same year.


REAGAN INFLUENCE WANES, POLL FINDS
LEAD: President Reagan's influence is continuing to recede as the 1988 election year commences, and the nation's political mood is one of drift and uncertainty, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.


Readings of Short Stories
LEAD: Selected Shorts: A Celebration of the Short Story, a series of live readings that runs through May, continues on Feb. 3 at 6:30 P.M. at Symphony Space, Broadway and 95th Street.
The writer Calvin Trillin is the host for the reading, which will feature as readers George S. Irving, Josef Sommer, Mercedes Reuhl, Phyllis Newman and Christine Baranski.


Koch Won't Rule Out Seeking Tax Increases
LEAD: Mayor Koch, continuing his drumbeat of dreary fiscal predictions, refused yesterday to rule out proposing increases in any local taxes except those on personal income.
He said higher taxes would be needed to help close what he said would be a $500 million budget gap in the next fiscal year.


Man Convicted Again in Killing of Georgia Family
LEAD: A man convicted more than 13 years ago of murdering six members of a rural Georgia family was again convicted of those murders tonight.


Unit of Affiliated To Buy Publication
LEAD: Billboard Publications, the newest subsidiary of Affiliated Publications Inc., said that it had signed an agreement to acquire The Hollywood Reporter, the trade publication.
The 57-year-old daily, with a circulation of about 20,000, is owned by Hollywood Reporter Industries, which is owned by Tichi Wilkerson Kassal.


Utility Officer Will Resign
LEAD: Charles M. Heidel said today that he would resign as president and chief operating officer of the Detroit Edison Company.


A New Superconductor
LEAD: AMERICAN and Japanese scientists have independently discovered a new high-temperature superconductor that differs dramatically from the family of materials that set off a flood of research over the last year.


THE DAY HE CAUGHT WALTER JOHNSON
LEAD: BOB BERMAN was a 19-year-old rookie for the Washington Senators when he was sent into the game in the bottom of the ninth to catch Walter Johnson.
It was June 12, 1918, 70 years ago this summer, in Sportsman's Park, St.
Louis.


PACIFIC TELESIS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFIC TELESIS GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,415,000,000
2,188,000,000
Net inc
b150,000,000
237,000,000
Share earns
.35
.55
Shares outst
429,403,000
430,480,000
Yr rev
9,131,000,000
8,977,000,000
Net inc
950,000,000
1,079,000,000
Share earns
2.21
2.51
Shares outst
430,630,000
430,126,000


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.Why are days in January colder than those in December, though the amount of sunlight (and hence heat) is steadily increasing as the new year progresses?


Duchess of York Is Pregnant; Child Would Be 5th in Line
LEAD: The Duke and Duchess of York are expecting their first baby in August, Buckingham Palace said today.
The child would be fifth in line to the British throne.


MERRILL LYNCH &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERRILL LYNCH &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Revenue
2,707,836,000
2,764,849,000
Net inc
3,500,000
182,783,000
Share earns
.02
1.70
Yr rev
10,868,206,000
9,606,349,000
Net inc
390,554,000
454,349,000
Share earns
3.58
4.30


Group to Install New Director
LEAD: The International Federation of Advertising Agencies will install Norval B. Stephens Jr., a veteran advertising man, as its managing director next Monday.


Mid-January Vehicle Sales Up 32.7%
LEAD: Mid-January sales of new American-made cars and light trucks were up 32.7 percent from the comparable period a year ago, the eight domestic manufacturers reported today.


Bridge: Unusual Partnership Wins Tournament in the Hague
LEAD: An unusual partnership won an unusual event Sunday in the Hague in the Netherlands.
Zia Mahmood, the globe-trotting Pakistani star who is seldom at his London home, teamed with Eric Rodwell of West Lafayette, Ind., a reigning world champion, to snatch a victory in the Statenbank World Top Tournament, which has a good claim to be considered the world's strongest annual event.


USX President Is Seen As Chairman Candidate
LEAD: The USX Corporation announced yesterday that its board had elected Charles A. Corry, a leading company strategist, as president of the giant steel and energy concern.


Oil Rig Count Declining
LEAD: The number of oil and gas drilling rigs working in the United States fell again last week, by 28, to 1,026, Baker Hughes said today.
The count had dropped by 48 the previous week, to 1,054.
A year ago it was 837.
The count peaked at 4,500 in December 1981 and reached its low of 663 in mid-1986.


Union Carbide Posts a Profit
LEAD: The Union Carbide Corporation yesterday reported fourth-quarter net income of $23 million, or 17 cents a share.
In the period a year earlier, the giant chemical company reported a net loss of $495 million, reflecting an after-tax charge of $473 million from the company's repurchase of shares during a takeover battle with the GAF


Boeing Profit Declines 26%
LEAD: The Boeing Company today reported fourth-quarter earnings of $141 million, or 92 cents a share, down 26.2 percent from $191 million, or $1.23 a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.


VALLEY NATIONAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VALLEY NATIONAL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,598,125
c7,058,763
Per share
.89
.83
Yr net inc
b30,416,670
c28,523,691
Per share
3.59
3.37
b-Included securities gains of $83,397 for the quarter and $846,396 for the year.


CORNING GLASS WORKS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORNING GLASS WORKS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
539,500,000
460,000,000
Net inc
b59,000,000
c34,300,000
Share earns
1.29
.74
Yr rev
2,083,700,000
1,943,700,000
Net inc
b207,500,000
c181,800,000
Share earns
4.49
3.98


GREAT FALLS BANCORP (TOTOA, NJ) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT FALLS BANCORP (TOTOA, NJ)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
82,189
b13,895
Per share
.18
-
Yr net inc
225,904
b273,525
Per share
.49
-
b-Net loss  The latest periods results were after utilizing tax benefits from prior years operating loss of 5 cents per share for the quarter and after 17 cents per share for the year.


Gulf Lull: An Iran Offensive on Hold
LEAD: Iran is hesitating to mount a long-forecast winter offensive against Iraq in the seven-year-old Persian Gulf war, Western and Iraqi officials say, and apparently is concentrating instead on diplomatic efforts to break up a broad coalition of pro-Iraqi Arab nations.


Specialist Gives Up Stock
LEAD: M. J. Meehan &amp; Company, one of Wall Street's largest specialist firms, said yesterday that it had resigned as a market maker in the stock of Gould Inc. after an investigation by the New York Stock Exchange of the way Meehan handled Gould's stock during the week of Oct. 19.


KOPPERS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KOPPERS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
420,400,000
367,800,000
Net loss
b62,300,000
c10,800,000
Share earns
-
.37
Yr sales
1,515,700,000
1,396,400,000
Net inc
b10,800,000
d77,500,000
Share earns
.36
2.59


Poland Says It Expelled Reported Abu Nidal Aide
LEAD: A Polish Government spokesman said today that Warsaw acted this month on American information to expel a Palestinian businessman reported to be a close associate of Abu Nidal, the Palestinian terrorist leader.


CRAY RESEARCH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRAY RESEARCH INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
163,610,000
138,183,000
Net inc
34,083,000
23,333,000
Share earns
1.08
.75
Yr rev
687,336,000
596,685,000
Net inc
147,076,000
124,815,000
Share earns
4.65
3.99


Elton John to Sell Artworks
LEAD: Elton John is selling a major portion of his collection of paintings, personal memorabilia and 20th-century decorative arts - at auction in the early fall at his home near Windsor, Berkshire, a Sotheby's spokesman, Fiona James, said yesterday by telephone from London.


CUBANS WRONGED, MIAMI BISHOP SAYS
LEAD: Auxiliary Bishop Agustin A. Roman of Miami, the Cuban-born prelate who played a major role in the peaceful ending of two prison riots by Cuban inmates, charged today that the Justice Department had not lived up to the spirit of the agreement that brought about the solution to the uprisings.


NEWORLD BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWORLD BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,332,000
b2,571,000
Per share
.48
.52
Yr net inc
9,202,000
b9,314,000
Per share
1.85
1.92
b-After tax credits of $694,000 for the quarter and $3,392,000 for the year.


Federated Stock Soars After Bid
LEAD: A battle between two major department-store operators opened yesterday as the Campeau Corporation of Canada, owner of Jordan Marsh and Brooks Brothers, began its hostile tender offer to buy Federated Department Stores, which owns Bloomingdale's, Bullock's, Rich's and Filene's.


Victim of a Fatal Plunge At Met Seemed Depressed
LEAD: The 82-year-old opera fan who fell to his death Saturday from an upper balcony of the Metropolitan Opera House during an intermission of Verdi's ''Macbeth'' had indicated that he was severely depressed or contemplating suicide.


Corrections
LEAD: A graph in Business Day last Tuesday, with an article about businesses' reluctance to build new factories, bore an incorrect label.
It represented gross spending on machinery and factories.


A 25-Year Term Given in Killing Of a Policeman
LEAD: As more than 50 police officers watched, a man described as a low-level drug dealer was sentenced yesterday to 25 years to life in prison for the murder of a rookie police officer in a gun battle in Queens.


Catfish Slime's Healing Agents
LEAD: CATFISH slime, a gel-like substance secreted by the fish, has remarkable properties that help heal wounds, a team of American and Kuwaiti scientists has discovered.


Japanese Imposing Sanctions on North Korea
LEAD: Japan imposed diplomatic sanctions on North Korea today, saying it was convinced that ''organized terrorism from North Korea'' was responsible for the bombing of a South Korean airliner two months ago.


Providence Suffers A Shattering Loss
LEAD: Jerome Lane had 17 points and 17 rebounds, and halted the game for a half-hour with a backboard-shattering slam dunk tonight as Pittsburgh routed Providence, 90-56, in a Big East Conference game.


EXCEL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXCEL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,148,060
3,498,184
Per share
.31
.38
Yr net inc
10,923,349
9,880,517
Per share
1.55
-
The per share earnings for 1986 is not meaningful because the bank converted from a mutual to a stock organization in September 1986.


Food Units for Sale
LEAD: Rowntree-Mackintosh P.L.C., a confectionery company, said it wanted to sell its British and American snack-food units for at least the $:155 million, or $277 million in United States currency, it paid for them.
The company said that both the Tom's Foods Inc. unit in the United States and the Rowntree Snack Foods Ltd.


Costly Federal Fix for Local Tolls
LEAD: Hard facts now prove the folly of a Federal law that ordered one-way tolls on the bridge over New York harbor.
Local tolls are none of Congress's business, and the consequences were predictable -lost revenues, clogged traffic and polluted air.


Bureau Provides List Of Magazine Ad Pages
LEAD: The Publishers Information Bureau, a sister organization of the Magazine Publishers of America, has released its annual list of its members along with the ad page count and estimated ad revenues for 1987.


BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
478,775,000
374,571,000
Net inc
50,826,000
38,496,000
Share earns
.34
.26
Shares outst
150,235,000
148,804,000
Share earnings and shares outstanding have been adjusted to reflect the 2-for-1 split of the company's stock that was distributed April 24, 1987, to stockholders of record on March 31, 1987.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Candidate's Foibles
LEAD: The American electorate may still be divided over the extent to which a politician's personal foibles should be considered in judging his fitness to hold office.
But in the Soviet Union a vote has been taken on the subject.


'87 Gas Use Up in West
LEAD: Europe and North America used 3.7 percent more natural gas last year than in 1986, the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe reported today.
The increase was higher in Europe, at 4.8 percent, than in North America, where the United States and Canada each registered a 2 percent gain.
Natural gas production in Europe, the United States and Canada rose 2.1 percent.


For the Adventurous
LEAD: IT really is a nightmare.
You wake up in a shower stall in a dilapidated building, your head throbbing, your right hand caked with dried blood that is apparently not your own, and a pain under your left forearm where someone may have injected you with - something.
As if that weren't enough, you haven't the faintest idea who you are.


Court Blocks Florida Execution in Cause Celebre
LEAD: The United States Supreme Court today blocked the execution of a Florida prisoner whose innocence has been proclaimed by opponents of capital punishment in this country and abraod.


NUMERICA FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUMERICA FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b3,282,000
c1,261,000
Per share
-
.28
Yr net loss
b985,000
c6,938,000
Per share
-
1.63
b-After a pre-tax charge of $7.6 million associated with the company's Florida-based banking subsidiary, Numerica Financial Services Inc.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Adler &amp; Shaykin Inc. said it accepted for payment about 7.8 million shares, or about 92 percent, of the outstanding common stock of Wherehouse Entertainment Inc., Torrance, Calif., at $14 a share in cash.


Colleen Moore, Star of 'Flapper' Films, Dies at 85
LEAD: Colleen Moore, the star of the silent screen who personified the ''flapper'' of the 1920's, died of cancer yesterday at her ranch near Paso Robles, Calif.
She was 85 years old.
Miss Moore appeared in about 100 films beginning in 1917 and ending with one of her comparatively few talking pictures, ''The Scarlet Letter,'' in 1937.


Mecham-Recall Forces Have Names to Spare
LEAD: State officials today certified that more than 300,000 Arizonans had signed petitions demanding Gov.
Evan Mecham's recall.
The Governor will be told officially Tuesday that he has five days to resign or agree to run in an election to recall him from office.


DIAMOND SHAMROCK R &amp; M INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAMOND SHAMROCK R &amp; M INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
467,200,000
372,700,000
Net inc
b3,300,000
c16,800,000
Share earns
.14
-
Yr rev
1,740,800,000
1,637,300,000
Net inc
b1,600,000
c64,800,000
Share earns
.07
-


ARMSTRONG WORLD INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMSTRONG WORLD INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
605,000,000
496,400,000
Net inc
33,500,000
25,900,000
Share earns
.72
.54
Yr sales
2,365,000,000
1,920,300,000
Net inc
150,400,000
122,400,000
Share earns
3.18
2.54


Can Scholarship Plan Stem the Dropout Rate?
LEAD: Is the promise of money to attend college enough to keep students from becoming high school dropouts?
And if so, will it also be enough to spur them to aim for college?


After Opening at Majestic, the Gala at the Beacon
LEAD: Last night, the Majestic wasn't the only theater to have the logo of ''The Phantom of the Opera'' on its marquee.
The mask also appeared at the Beacon Theater for the show's opening night party given by Cameron Mackintosh and the Really Useful Theater Company, the producers.


Thaw on Black Ties
LEAD: The Soviet Union's aversion to Black-tie events here appears to be crumbling, Washington socialites report.


Drexel Sees No Quick Resolution
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., the investment house that for more than a year has been the subject of two extensive Federal investigations, said yesterday that it did not expect any issues arising from those investigations to be resolved for several months.


Back to High School
LEAD: Emory Bellard, who coached football teams at Texas A&amp;M and Mississippi State - some of them ranked among the nation's top 20 - from 1972 to 1985, was named head coach yesterday at Westfield High School in Spring, Tex., a suburb of Houston.
While at Texas A&amp;M, Bellard compiled a 48-27 record that included three bowl appearances.


Our Prankster G-Men
LEAD: The latest F.B.I. horror story is about the pranks white agents in Omaha played on Donald Rochon, the only black agent in the office.


Shultz to Meet 2 Prominent Palestinians on Unrest
LEAD: The State Department announced today that Secretary of State George P. Shultz had agreed to meet Wednesday with two leading Palestinians, one from East Jerusalem and the other from the Gaza Strip, to hear firsthand accounts of the recent clashes between Arab demonstrators and Israeli troops.


AMERICAN EXPRESS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN EXPRESS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,283,300,000
4,060,600,000
Net loss
104,000,000
c282,000,000
Share earns
-
.63
Shares outst
425,545,000
438,559,000
Yr rev
16,141,300,000
14,580,700,000
Net inc
b533,300,000
d1,255,500,000
Share earns
1.20
2.79
Shares outst
432,394,000
445,581,000


City Ballet Invites 2 Bolshoi Dancers
LEAD: The New York City Ballet has invited Andris Liepa and Nina Ananiashvili, two young stars of the Bolshoi Ballet, to perform with the company several times toward the end of its current season.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Candy Maldonado, one of three San Francisco Giants who filed for salary abritration, signed a two-year contract with the club worth $1.65 million.
The outfielder made $415,000 last season.
The Giants also added Phil Garner, who split last season between Houston and Los Angeles before becoming a free agent.


In Ballet, Second Home Helps Budget
LEAD: Two homes may be better than one, at least where ballet companies are concerned.
Several American companies now call two cities home, and people involved in these projects have explained in recent interviews how such ventures work.


Abrams Office to Investigate Attack on Black Teen-Ager
LEAD: Governor Cuomo ordered Attorney General Robert Abrams today to act as a special prosecutor in the case of a 16-year-old black girl who was found in Dutchess County two months ago, with ''KKK'' and ''Nigger'' written across her body.


MARINE MIDLAND BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARINE MIDLAND BANKS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
198,800,000
b38,200,000
Yr net loss
408,800,000
b144,900,000
b-Net income  The loss reflected several factors, notably a previously announced $400 million special provision for loan losses, made in the second quarter of 1987, plus an additional $200 million special provision made in the fourth quarter of 1987.


Koch, Lobbying Albany, Lectures the Legislators
LEAD: In characteristically confrontational style, Mayor Koch attacked New York City's state legislators today as he issued a plea for more state aid to the city.


DIME SAVINGS BANK OF NEW YORK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIME SAVINGS BANK OF NEW YORK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b26,222,000
31,863,000
Per share
1.15
1.42
Yr net inc
113,604,000
130,612,000
Per share
5.03
-
b-Included a tax credit of $835,000 and $5.1 million in pre-tax gains from the sale of Dime-originated loans.


WHITE HOUSE SEEKS $36 MILLION IN AID FOR THE CONTRAS
LEAD: The White House will ask Congress for $36.25 million in aid for the Nicaraguan rebels over the next several months, including $3.6 million to buy weapons, senior Administration officials said today.


Calcium Tablets Are Not All Created Equal
LEAD: IT may come as a shock to those who have been diligently taking calcium pills to find that they may be wasting their money.


WARNER-LAMBERT COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARNER-LAMBERT COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
909,655,000
812,588,000
Net inc
66,282,000
56,479,000
Share earns
.95
.79
Yr sales
3,484,726,000
3,102,918,000
Net inc
295,846,000
b303,484,000
Share earns
4.15
4.18


Rare Victory By Nicaragua On Airdrops
LEAD: When a ball of fire lit up the night sky over the Cerro de Lomas mountains Saturday, the Sandinista Government had every reason to be pleased.
Its forces had shot down a contra resupply plane, a rare event in the seven-year-old Nicaraguan war.


DELUXE CHECK PRINTERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELUXE CHECK PRINTERS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
245,493,046
224,298,313
Net inc
b42,638,457
34,112,908
Share earns
.50
.40
Yr sales
948,010,118
866,829,404
Net inc
b148,512,414
121,109,026
Share earns
1.74
1.42


Coffeyville, Kan.
LEAD: ON a farm 20 miles east of Coffeyville in southeastern Kansas, the Eck family is reviving the tradition of sorghum making.
Once a staple, this dark golden syrup used to be the heartland's answer to Vermont maple syrup.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Makeba Returns


UNION EXPLORATION PARTNERS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION EXPLORATION PARTNERS LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
171,200,000
147,400,000
Net inc
27,000,000
43,800,000
Share earns
.11
.19
Yr rev
684,300,000
635,500,000
Net inc
207,000,000
176,400,000
Share earns
.86
.77


Israel Responds
LEAD: President Chaim Herzog challenged American Jewish critics of Palestinian policies to suggest an alternative.
Page A10. (AP)


GREAT WESTERN FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT WESTERN FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
14,297,000
60,007,000
Share earns
.11
.50
Yr net inc
210,074,000
288,951,000
Share earns
1.67
2.61
The company said a series of non- recurring events substantially reduced 1987 earnings, including the write-off of the company's $49 million investment in the FSLIC secondary reserve, a one-time higher federal tax rate and an after-tax loss on the sale of the company's insurance and leasing subsidiaries.


PENN CENTRAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENN CENTRAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
415,200,000
508,300,000
Net loss
8,700,000
cd78,600,000
Share earns
-
1.99
Yr sales
1,421,400,000
1,938,800,000
Net inc
b36,200,000
d154,200,000
Share earns
.93
3.85


C.P.A. Role Under Study
LEAD: Congress will turn its attention again today to the system under which certified public accountants act as watchdogs over publicly held companies.


If Pupils Ran Schools: Suggestions For Ponies, Gifts and Better Food
LEAD: ''If I were principal,'' wrote Raymond Diaz, a third grader at Public School 146 in East Harlem, ''I would care for my children.
I would give them karati lessons.
In this way, they could fight in a civilized way in the gym.''


Florida Considering Locking Up Some Carriers of the AIDS Virus
LEAD: Florida is considering establishing special lockup wards for AIDS virus carriers who persist in endangering others despite counseling and warnings.


WETTERAU INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WETTERAU INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
1,000,000,000
993,600,000
Net inc
11,800,000
10,700,000
Share earns
.50
.45
9mo sales
3,000,000,000
2,900,000,000
Net inc
29,800,000
27,500,000
Share earns
1.23
1.10


Defenders Offer Compromise
LEAD: The San Diego Yacht Club has proposed a compromise in an effort to avoid an America's Cup regatta this summer.


Forgiveness for Parents
LEAD: To The Living Section:





Boeing Updates 2 Jets In a Shift of Strategy
LEAD: The Boeing Company introduced new versions of its popular 737 and 747 jet airliners today that are expected to produce the bulk of its sales and earnings through the end of the century.


Sematech Gets Chip Processes
LEAD: In an unusual sharing of proprietary technology, the International Business Machines Corporation and the American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday, as expected, that they would turn over the processes for making two chips to an industry consortium that is trying to revive the domestic semiconductor industry's competitiveness.


TW SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TW SERVICES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,648,000
cd17,163,000
Per share
.12
-
Yr net inc
b47,168,000
c15,683,000
Per share
.97
.27
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $9,292,000 from the early retirement of debt.


Corrections
LEAD: The Advertising column in Business Day on Monday misidentified the advertising agency for the Parker Pen Company.
It is Lowe Tucker Metcalf.


South Africa's Loss
LEAD: Anthony Bloom, perhaps the most outspoken foe of apartheid in the South African business community, is moving to England.
Mr.
Bloom, the 49-year-old chairman of a food processing conglomerate, says he is leaving for ''business, personal and family'' reasons.
But it's no secret that the man who accused his Government of ''thuggery and authoritarianism'' in the last election has been deeply depressed by the drift of white South


REGINA CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REGINA CO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
49,536,000
33,629,000
Net inc
2,574,000
1,430,000
Share earns
.28
.16
6mo sales
89,321,000
47,478,000
Net inc
5,200,000
2,768,000
Share earns
.57
.31


American Express Loss
LEAD: The American Express Company yesterday reported a large loss in the fourth quarter and a drop in its 1987 profit, reflecting the effect of October's stock market collapse and the growing debt crisis in developing nations.


QUAKER OATS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUAKER OATS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,228,300,000
1,083,600,000
Net inc
45,500,000
b88,100,000
Share earns
.56
1.13
6mo sales
2,495,400,000
2,043,900,000
Net inc
86,600,000
b121,300,000
Share earns
1.08
1.55


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.79
6.86
5.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.81
5.82
5.48
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.20
6.21
5.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.34
8.26
6.95
30-YR.


C. W. Ranson, 84, Ex-Church Council Head
LEAD: The Rev.
Charles W. Ranson, a former general secretary of the International Missionary Council, a forerunner of the World Council of Churches, died of a heart attack Saturday at his home in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 84 years old and also had a home in Lakeville, Conn.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Belfast, Me.
LEAD: NORTHERN New England is famous for hearty farm breakfasts that begin with porridge and go on through eggs, bacon and muffins to end with doughnuts or pie.


'Chaotic' State Of School Halts Inspection Visit
LEAD: The New York State Education Department said yesterday that its officials had to stop an inspection of a high school on the West Side of Manhattan and leave because conditions at the school were so ''chaotic.''


SOUTHWESTERN BELL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWESTERN BELL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,152,700,000
2,014,700,000
Net inc
246,500,000
221,600,000
Share earns
.82
.74
Yr rev
8,002,600,000
7,902,400,000
Net inc
1,047,100,000
1,022,700,000
Share earns
3.48
3.42


CONSOLIDATED PAPERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED PAPERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
202,216,000
168,125,000
Net inc
32,645,000
19,015,000
Share earns
1.50
.87
Yr sales
742,835,000
653,040,000
Net inc
95,798,000
87,542,000
Share earns
4.40
4.02


Advertising; Ritz Thrift's Long-Lived Commercial
LEAD: IF someone ever decides that commercials can be granted landmark status our first vote would be for that single enduring spot for the Ritz Thrift Shop.


TOKHEIM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOKHEIM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
59,589,000
51,905,000
Net inc
4,891,000
3,228,000
Share earns
.74
.48
Yr sales
192,283,000
157,232,000
Net inc
b11,177,000
5,664,000
Share earns
1.68
.85


CHARTER MEDICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHARTER MEDICAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
289,739,000
222,758,000
Net inc
b11,196,000
c9,995,000
Share earns
.36
.32
b-Includes a non-tax-deductible charge of $2,653,000 related to a proposed leveraged buyout and an after- tax charge of $993,000 related to the settlement of a lawsuit.


Chairwoman Named for Fresh Air Fund
LEAD: The Fresh Air Fund has announced the election of Mrs.
Donald E. Newhouse, a board member for five years, as chairwoman.
Mrs.
Newhouse is also a trustee of the New York Public Library, the Vivian Beaumont Theater, Temple Emanu-El and the National Dance Institute.


Freeway Overpass Collapses
LEAD: A freeway overpass collapsed at rush hour Monday evening, blocking traffic for about five hours, the police said.
Debris from the collapse of the Harbor Freeway bride caused a huge traffic jam about 10 miles south of downtown Los Angeles but no injuries were reported, Officer Charlotte Foley of the California Highway Patrol said.


Man to Lead Irish Parade
LEAD: When New York's Irish stage their annual march up Fifth Avenue on St.
Patrick's Day, the parade will be led by a man - for the 226th consecutive time.


CHEVRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEVRON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,300,000,000
5,800,000,000
Net inc
220,000,000
b86,000,000
Share earns
.64
-
Yr rev
29,100,000,000
27,100,000,000
Net inc
1,007,000,000
715,000,000
Share earns
2.94
2.09


A New Nicaraguan Bill
LEAD: New 100,000 cordoba notes, worth about $5, were put into circula-tion today.
Guillermo Vega, treasurer of the Nicaraguan central bank, said the bills were sent Monday to offices of the country's banks.


DUKE POWER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DUKE POWER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
898,769,000
842,959,000
Net inc
92,740,000
92,077,000
Share earns
.78
.77
Yr rev
3,705,784,000
3,400,933,000
Net inc
500,198,000
467,834,000
Share earns
4.40
4.04


Stage: Robert Moresco's 'Half Deserted Streets'
LEAD: SET on the mean streets of Hell's Kitchen, Robert Moresco's ''Half Deserted Streets'' belongs to a ''kitchen sink'' school of drama that has become so familiar it is almost incapable of delivering any surprises.
Among many other ingredients from the past, this version of the recipe calls for a smidgen of ''Dead End,'' a teaspoon of ''On the Waterfont,'' a dollop of ''Cuba and His Teddy Bear,'' and a dash of ''A View From the Bridge.


Los Angeles Harbor Unit Issue
LEAD: The Los Angeles Harbor Depart-ment if offering $138.8 million of tax-exempt revenue bonds with a maxi-mum yield of 7.60 percent for an issue due in 2018 through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Brothers.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 27, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-10


Houston Discovers the Diner
LEAD: Diners, the old-fashioned stainless-steel and tile kind, don't blend with the landscape here as they do on the Jersey Shore or the roadsides of Long Island.
That's probably because, until recently, there were no diners to speak of in Houston.
But if restaurateurs here missed out on the diner business the first time around, they seem determined to cash in now that diners are the nostalgic rage.


Cotton and Soybeans Drop; Crude Oil Is Slightly Higher
LEAD: Cotton futures prices plunged nearly 2 cents a pound yesterday in a selloff that accelerated after the price for March delivery broke through a level last seen in mid-December, analysts said.


Carteret Bancorp's Merger Agreement
LEAD: Home Group Inc. said that, despite its merger agreement with Carteret Bancorp, it would allow the Delaware-based savings and loan holding company to look for a new merger partner until mid-February.


Why the Fairness Doctrine Should Be Restored
LEAD: To the Editor:


From Here On, Reagan May Have More Power Outside U.S.
LEAD: While President Reagan retains enormous influence in foreign affairs, his ability to control the domestic agenda has diminished considerably as he begins his final year in office, analysts in the White House and on Capitol Hill said today.


State of Union: Bewitched by Pageant
LEAD: When the British rebuilt the bomb-damaged House of Commons after World War II, Winston Churchill insisted that it contain many fewer seats than members.
This was to guarantee standing-room-only crowds for major events, just to impart an appropriate sense of drama.


Paradise Valley Journal; Town Hires Robot to Curb Speeders
LEAD: Howard Schwartz, a Maricopa County deputy attorney, was driving his Corvette along a cactus-lined street of this Phoenix suburb recently when he saw a burst of light.
A few days later he received a notice in the mail from the City of Paradise Valley charging him with speeding and summoning him to traffic court.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Jets 3, Capitals 2: Dale Hawerchuk and Iain Duncan scored second-period goals to lift Winnipeg to victory at Landover, Md. last night.
Hawerchuck snapped a 1-1 tie with an unassisted goal at 10:04 of the period.
Duncan made it 3-1 when he knocked in a rebound from out of the air for his 14th goal of the season six minutes later.(AP)


WASHINGTON WATER POWER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON WATER POWER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
118,501,000
101,056,000
Net inc
25,025,000
bc16,798,000
Share earns
.93
-
Yr rev
398,509,000
389,866,000
Net inc
68,114,000
c32,040,000
Share earns
2.31
.67


Reader's Digest Buys Magazine
LEAD: Reader's Digest Association Inc. announced that it had bought 50 Plus, a monthly magazine with a circulation of 500,000, from the Whitney Communications Company.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Earlier this month, Reader's Digest acquired The Family Handyman, and in December 1986 it bought Travel-Holiday, its first purchase of another


FREEPORT-MCMORAN RESOURCE PARTERS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FREEPORT-MCMORAN RESOURCE PARTERS LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
272,773,000
117,719,000
Net inc
42,877,000
24,303,000
Share earns
.62
.40
Shares outst
69,507,000
60,602,000
Yr rev
893,306,000
216,619,000
Net inc
126,976,000
42,925,000
Share earns
1.93
.71
Shares outst
65,829,000
60,295,000


A Winning Black Doll
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Death Toll at Least 34 in Mexico Mine Fire
LEAD: Thirty-four miners were killed in a fire in a coal mine in northern Mexico and 10 others are still trapped about 400 feet underground, a local official said today.


PHELPS DODGE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHELPS DODGE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
506,100,000
206,200,000
Net inc
b105,400,000
c10,800,000
Share earns
3.30
.28
Shares outst
30,800,000
27,200,000
Yr rev
1,611,700,000
845,900,000
Net inc
b205,700,000
c61,400,000
Share earns
6.48
1.79
Shares outst
29,600,000
27,200,000


April Retirement Is Set For Chairman of Centel
LEAD: Robert P. Reuss, one of the telephone executives who moved early and fast to diversify at the onset of deregulation, is retiring as chairman of the Centel Corporation, effective April 1.


Ward Seeks Aid Of Educators In Recruitment
LEAD: New York City Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward asked college officials yesterday to join him in a new drive to recruit college-educated people who might never have thought of police work as a career.


Afternoon Program Keeps Bronx Students in School
LEAD: Three years ago, the dropout rate at Theodore Roosevelt High School in the Bronx was climbing dramatically.
With 26 percent of its 3,400 students quitting school, the administration decided it had to change its approach.


U S Sprint to Cut Its Rates by 4.1%
LEAD: The U S Sprint Communications Company, based in Kansas City, Mo., said it would lower its interstate long-distance rates an average of 4.1 percent on March 1, more than matching reductions by its two main competitors.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the nation's long-distance leader, dropped its rates an average 3.5 percent on Jan.


CALMAT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALMAT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
148,564,000
165,715,000
Net inc
15,468,000
12,804,000
Share earns
.50
.42
Yr rev
658,945,000
619,045,000
Net inc
78,072,000
44,100,000
Share earns
2.53
1.44


UNITED STATES SURGICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED STATES SURGICAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
67,545,000
53,731,000
Net inc
5,041,000
b4,579,000
Share earns
.42
.36
Shares outst
11,899,000
12,556,000
Yr sales
252,171,000
206,254,000
Net inc
20,126,000
b18,741,000
Share earns
1.63
1.48
Shares outst
12,317,000
12,688,000


FIREMAN'S FUND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIREMAN'S FUND CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
35,000,000
80,000,000
Share earns
.59
1.21
Yr net inc
b362,000,000
228,000,000
Share earns
5.71
3.45
b-Includes a gain of $61,596,000 on pension plan termination.


VULCAN MATERIALS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VULCAN MATERIALS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
246,345,000
197,680,000
Net inc
b27,399,000
c15,612,000
Share earns
2.60
1.45
Yr sales
923,256,000
801,809,000
Net inc
b116,230,000
93,217,000
Share earns
10.94
8.40


Bush Camp Feels Galvanized After Showdown With Rather
LEAD: Vice President Bush's dramatic on-the-air shouting match with Dan Rather of CBS News won Mr.
Bush a flood of praise from conservatives yesterday while his aides argued that it showed he was tough and would help his Presidential bid.


For Jews in One U.S. Town, Israel Is Anguish and Hope
LEAD: ''I feel guilty talking about this, because in my opinion the only people with a right to speak out are there, in Israel,'' Kenneth Hoffman said. ''But systematically beating up Arabs -this is not the idea of the Israeli army, a Jewish army.''


Smooth Flow on Golden Gate
LEAD: A mass traffic tieup that was predicted on the Golden Gate Bridge Monday failed to materialize as commuters used ferries and automobile pools and stayed late in the office in an effort to avoid delays that were expected to be caused by a strike of bus drivers.
The morning rush hour was marked by a peaceful demonstration at the bridge by representatives of the 300 bus drivers of the Golden Gate Transit District.


DALLAS ANGUISHED BY KILLING OF OFFICER
LEAD: They came to pay tribute to John Glenn Chase, an idealistic young police officer who was was shot to death Saturday by a homeless man as a crowd watched him plead for his life.


EUROPEAN AMERICAN BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EUROPEAN AMERICAN BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
136,700,000
b5,800,000
Yr net loss
110,500,000
b21,100,000
b-Net income  The losses for the latest periods resulted from a charge to earnings of $140 million comprising a special provision of $128 million for possible loan losses related to loans to lesser developed countries and a writeoff of an equity investment in an affiliated company.


Letter on Wedtech Bid Described at Nofziger Trial WASHINGTON, Jan. 26 (AP) -
LEAD: A letter about the Wedtech Corporation's proposed military contract was drafted for Lyn C. Nofziger's signature and delivered to a senior White House aide, a witness testified today at the trial of the former Presidential adviser on charges of violating the ethics law.


Lessons
LEAD: Joe Clark won't go away.
The contentious principal of Eastside High School, one of education's more arresting figures, weekly has something to say.
But each time he raises his bullhorn to his mouth and calls for discipline, each time he expels another ''hoodlum'' or ''miscreant,'' as he calls those he adds to this city's flotsam, Joe


ORANGE &amp; ROCKLAND UTILITIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORANGE &amp; ROCKLAND UTILITIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
111,050,998
118,779,045
Net inc
7,266,829
7,341,839
Share earns
.50
.50
Yr rev
451,317,580
474,663,958
Net inc
40,904,284
40,984,517
Share earns
2.93
2.91


Reading Test May Get an F
LEAD: Officials of a federally financed student testing program that bills itself as ''the nation's report card'' are concerned that the program and not the pupils failed on the latest round of reading examinations.


A Tough Stance by the Planning Chief
LEAD: With their recent refusal to approve the way Cityspire was built, Sylvia Deutsch and her colleagues on the New York City Planning Commission filled the popular imagination with visions of workers wielding chain saws to shave 11 feet off that mid-Manhattan skyscraper.


INDEPENDENCE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDEPENDENCE BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
7,000,000
6,600,000
Per share
.72
.70
Yr net inc
29,908,000
24,824,000
Per share
3.12
2.66


Soviet Panels Reviewing Treaty
LEAD: The Soviet Union plans an extensive public examination of the treaty eliminating land-based intermediate-range missiles and may amend the pact before it is formally ratified, Soviet officials said today.


Duguay Goes to Minors
LEAD: Ron Duguay, who has spent 11 seasons with three teams in the National Hockey League, will finally get to play in the minor leagues.
The lower back ailment that has kept Duguay, 30, from playing with the Rangers for the last two weeks has improved and yesterday the team sent the forward to the Colorado farm club in the International Hockey League for conditioning.


What Makes Senators' Sons Run?
LEAD: In America, they say, anybody can grow up to be President.
They also say that the apple seldom falls far from the tree.
In combination, the adages have a currency now because of a little-noticed though historically interesting coincidence: Three of the current crop of candidates for President are sons of United States


Colleen Moore, Ultimate Flapper Of the Silent Screen, Is Dead at 87
LEAD: Colleen Moore, the star of the silent screen who personified the flapper her ranch near Paso Robles, Calif.
She was 87 years old.


ALLEGHENY POWER SYSTEM reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEGHENY POWER SYSTEM (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
530,831,000
414,449,000
Net inc
46,378,000
49,042,000
Share earns
.90
.97
Shares outst
51,330,630
50,737,953
Yr rev
1,981,242,000
1,704,093,000
Net inc
206,989,000
203,746,000
Share earns
4.05
4.03
Shares outst
51,091,980
50,499,412


Problems With the Marquis Theater
LEAD: It is not modesty that compels the chorus dancers in ''Me and My Girl'' to wear body stockings under their costumes.
It's that sometimes they can see their breath onstage and backstage at the Marquis Theater.
And if they could, they'd hold their noses as they twirl, because of the stench that rises from precisely where, nobody knows.


U.S. Officials Say Haiti Election Will Not Lead to Aid Resumption
LEAD: The election of Leslie F. Manigat as Haiti's President will not affect the cutoff of most United States aid to that country, Administration officials say.


ASHLAND OIL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASHLAND OIL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,934,743,000
1,497,270,000
Net inc
b71,068,000
27,231,000
Share earns
2.50
.83
Shares outst
28,474,000
32,774,000
b-Includes a $31,066,000 gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change for income taxes.


Stage: 'Phantom of the Opera'
LEAD: IT may be possible to have a terrible time at ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' but you'll have to work at it.
Only a terminal prig would let the avalanche of pre-opening publicity poison his enjoyment of this show, which usually wants nothing more than to shower the audience with fantasy and fun, and which often succeeds, at any price.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Carlyle Group, Washington, an investment firm, said it would increase its offer for Chi-Chi's Inc. stock from $9 cash to $9 cash plus 1/25th of a share of preferred stock.


MINNESOTA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MINNESOTA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
107,100,000
96,600,000
Net inc
11,400,000
14,100,000
Share earns
.37
.45
Yr rev
426,100,000
395,500,000
Net inc
70,000,000
82,600,000
Share earns
2.34
2.77


BRUNO'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRUNO'S INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
358,625,000
301,957,000
Net inc
10,735,000
8,247,000
Share earns
.14
.10
6mo sales
657,744,000
558,298,000
Net inc
20,433,000
15,230,000
Share earns
.26
.19


Merrimack Hoping for Independent Bid
LEAD: College hockey's Division I championship tournament will expand this season from eight to 12 teams, and at least one of the invitations will go to an independent.
Merrimack hopes it will be the one.


Bonds Drop After 4-Session Rise
LEAD: Treasury bond prices declined nearly a point yesterday as traders and investors waited for more information about the economy and the Treasury's announcement today on its borrowing needs.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Marilyn Fisher, director of broadcast services, has been promoted to senior vice president at Lowe Marschalk.


FREEPORT-MCMORAN GOLD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FREEPORT-MCMORAN GOLD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
30,189,000
22,547,000
Net inc
14,410,000
5,291,000
Share earns
.35
.13
Yr rev
101,332,000
69,195,000
Net inc
34,479,000
13,687,000
Share earns
.84
.34


Music: Irving Berlin Salute
LEAD: IT has often been said that of all the great American songwriters in this century, not one had his finger more firmly on the pulse of popular taste than Irving Berlin.
The truth behind that legend was amusingly demonstrated early in the opening program of the 92d Street Y's Lyrics and Lyricists series.


MINNESOTA MINING &amp; MANUFACURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MINNESOTA MINING &amp; MANUFACURING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,375,000,000
2,112,000,000
Net inc
b216,000,000
185,000,000
Share earns
.95
.81
Yr sales
9,429,000,000
8,602,000,000
Net inc
b918,000,000
779,000,000
Share earns
4.02
3.40


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 27, 1988
LEAD:  Markets


Life in the 30's
LEAD: MY friend's voice was as plaintive as a bird's song at night. ''Do you know what I really want to do?'' she asked.


Airplanes Lead Surge In Orders for Durables
LEAD: Orders for big-ticket durable goods, bolstered by demand for aircraft, shot up 6.7 percent in December, the largest increase in 15 months, the Commerce Department reported today.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: Advances; Junk Food That's Lean And Healthy?
LEAD: THE strategic thinkers at food companies have long coveted the potentially enormous markets that would be created if a low-cholesterol, low-calorie fat substitute could be developed for use in such things as ice cream, french fries, chocolate doughnuts and potato chips.


Navajos Suing U.S. to Block Arizona Relocation of 6,000
LEAD: Representatives of 45 Navajo Indians filed a lawsuit today against the Federal Government to block the relocation of approximately 6,000 Navajos from part of a reservation in northern Arizona.


BABBITT REVIEWING IOWA DEAL
LEAD: Bruce Babbitt's Presidential campaign said Monday that it would send $10,000 to the Iowa Democratic Party after questions were raised about whether the campaign broke the law in the way it obtained a list of caucus participants from the party.


Canadian Imperial
LEAD: The Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce said it had agreed in principle to acquire 60 percent of the Wood Gundy Inc. securities firm for $110 million (Canadian), or about $86 million (United States).
The bank said a minimum of 75 percent of that amount would be paid in Canadian Imperial stock, with the balance in cash.


At Age 200, Australia Makes Merry
LEAD: Hundreds of boats filled the sparkling harbor, fighter aircraft roared overhead and huge crowds packed the rocky shoreline today to celebrate the landing here 200 years ago of the English convicts who were Australia's first white settlers.


In Boston, Pilgrims' Food (With a Touch of Paris)
LEAD: MOST serious students of the American culinary scene still think of New England cooking - the boiled dinners, codfish cakes and baked beans - as quaint at best, and as heavy, tasteless and overcooked at worst.
Even many Bostonians don't have a high opinion of the food with which they are inextricably linked.


And in This Corner . . .
LEAD: Negotiations for a Mike Tyson-Michael Spinks fight have taken a new turn.
Shelly Finkel, a fight manager and close friend of Tyson's co-manager, Jim Jacobs, has entered the acrimonious negotiations in an attempt to smooth out the differences between the Tyson and Spinks camps.
Talks broke off over the weekend in Atlantic City, ostensibly because of differences on the money to be paid to the fighters.


Chevron Posts a Profit; Amoco Earnings Soar
LEAD: The Chevron Corporation yesterday reported a fourth-quarter profit, in contrast to a loss a year earlier.
The Amoco Corporation said its quarterly earnings more than doubled for the period.


Advertising; M&amp;M Mars Account to 2 Agencies
LEAD: M&amp;M Mars Inc., whose account melted in the hands of the Leo Burnett Company, Chicago, in December, has decided to give the business to Backer Spielvogel Bates in New York and D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis and New York.


TRINOVA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRINOVA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
461,580,000
369,994,000
Net inc
21,202,000
b9,534,000
Share earns
.62
.28
Yr sales
1,681,670,000
1,447,292,000
Net inc
75,123,000
b122,564,000
Share earns
2.20
3.48


Wickes Lumber Buyer Still Sought
LEAD: The Wickes Companies said a management group that had tried to buy its lumber business had been unable to arrange financing.
Instead, the company said it had turned over to its investment banker the names of several parties that had expressed interest in buying the unit.


Contemporary Music Group To Give Composers Grants
LEAD: Meet the Composer, a New York organization devoted to contemporary music, has announced a new three-year commissioning program.
With a budget of nearly $1 million, it is billed as ''the largest and most diverse commissioning program in the world,'' in the words of the organization's news release.


Laser Industry's Image Problem
LEAD: WHEN the Candela Laser Corporation wants to demonstrate the pinpoint accuracy and sensitivity of its medical lasers, it shows potential customers that the laser can chip the shell off an egg without breaking the membrane underneath.


SOUTHERN NEW ENGLAND TELEOMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN NEW ENGLAND TELEOMMUNICATIONS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
389,300,000
365,000,000
Net inc
36,200,000
34,800,000
Share earns
1.17
1.15
Yr rev
1,480,800,000
1,433,100,000
Net inc
139,700,000
139,200,000
Share earns
4.54
4.46


Tale of an Amigo, a Horse and a Video
LEAD: Vance Johnson might have become the news media darling of Super Bowl XXII today with his carrot-colored flat-top, his fine smile, and his charming ways.
But is he going to play Sunday?


Citicorp Rates Dip
LEAD: Interest rates fell at Citicorp's regular weekly auction of commercial paper.
The bank holding company sold $50 million of 91-day paper at an average rate of 6.7916 percent, down from 6.82 percent last week.
It also sold $50 million of 182-day paper at an average rate of 6.879 percent, down from 6.93 percent.


PRIMERICA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIMERICA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,161,400,000
871,100,000
Net inc
b20,900,000
c64,600,000
Share earns
.31
1.09
Yr rev
3,761,800,000
2,886,900,000
Net inc
b198,600,000
c229,700,000
Share earns
3.35
3.82


May 1 Move By Schmertz
LEAD: Herbert Schmertz, the Mobil Corporation's combative public relations director, will leave the oil company May 1 to start his own firm and work for Senator Bob Dole's Presidential campaign, Mobil said yesterday, confirming reports of such a move.


FREEPORT-MCMORAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FREEPORT-MCMORAN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
457,191,000
241,385,000
Net inc
58,646,000
20,985,000
Share earns
.75
.31
Yr rev
1,514,417,000
856,563,000
Net inc
248,751,000
25,695,000
Share earns
3.38
.38


Guessing Game
LEAD: Forecasting population trends can be a tricky business, but the General Accounting Office has taken the leap by predicting that legal immigration into the United States will jump from 546,000 in 1986 to 605,000 in 1990.


TYSON FOODS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TYSON FOODS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
437,745,000
427,740,000
Net inc
17,801,000
15,525,000
Share earns
.28
.24


Healing on Wheels: Treating Welfare Children
LEAD: Dr.
Irwin Redlener whispered first in one ear and then in the other: ''What's your name?
Where do you live?''


ROHM &amp; HAAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROHM &amp; HAAS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
531,900,000
468,600,000
Net inc
36,700,000
29,600,000
Share earns
.55
.43
Yr sales
2,203,200,000
2,066,900,000
Net inc
195,500,000
138,300,000
Share earns
2.85
2.01


MERCK &amp; CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCK &amp; CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,394,400,000
1,149,100,000
Net inc
232,400,000
171,800,000
Share earns
1.75
1.26
Shares outst
133,400,000
136,600,000
Yr sales
5,061,300,000
4,128,900,000
Net inc
906,400,000
675,700,000
Share earns
6.68
4.85


Advertising; Siperstein's Agency
LEAD: Keyes Martin Gaby Linnett, Springfield, N.J., has been named agency for Siperstein's of Jersey City, a chain of 14 paint and wall covering stores.
The ad budget is $1.5 million.
The former agency was Gregory, Malara &amp; Jacoby.


Sandinistas to Permit New Radio News Programs
LEAD: The Sandinista Government announced tonight that it was authorizing new radio news programs, including several that were suspended under a state of emergency six years ago.


Concert: Jazz and Classics Of Early in the Century
LEAD: THIS year's Focus festival of contemporary music at the Juilliard School is devoted to ''Crosscurrents: Classical Music and the American Popular Tradition.'' Joel Sachs, the organizer, has always been good at programming, but his titles and subtitles are getting out of hand.


BORDEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BORDEN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,804,200,000
1,356,355,000
Net inc
81,316,000
68,796,000
Share earns
1.10
.93
Yr sales
6,514,422,000
5,002,097,000
Net inc
267,056,000
223,312,000
Share earns
3.62
3.00


Summit Treaty Spurs Bonn to Play the Field for Detente and Disarmament
LEAD: The West Germans seemed to be busy on every diplomatic front at once last week.


Report Shows 12% Rise in Anti-Semitic Incidents
LEAD: Anti-Semitic incidents in the United States increased 12 percent in 1987, reversing a five-year downward trend, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith reported yesterday.


German-Speaking Alliance Is but a Myth
LEAD: To the Editor:


G.E.-Martin Marietta Satellite Deal
LEAD: The Martin Marietta Corporation, announcing what is by far the largest contract yet for the nascent commercial space-launching business, said today that it had agreed to launch 15 communications satellites for the General Electric Company's Astro-Space division.


Region Takes On Mantle of Winter Paradise
LEAD: A letter carrier making his rounds yesterday in Teaneck, N.J., after a wet overnight snowfall clung to every branch and wire, creating rare winter vistas, while also causing the usual headaches.
Today is expected to be partly sunny and very cold, with a high temperature between 16 and 22 degrees. (NYT/Edward


Advertising; New York Life Spots' Super Bowl Premiere
LEAD: A new TV campaign for New York Life will make its debut during the Super Bowl coverage on ABC-TV Sunday and the company plans to use it again later during the Winter Olympics and on ''Sunday Morning'' on CBS.


Panel Investigates Poughkeepsie Election Spending
LEAD: Holding its first hearings designed to expose political and governmental scandals, the New York State Commission on Government Integrity today heard witnesses describe how up to $776,967 was funneled through various Republican committees and Democratic and Republican political consultants to influence an election and win approval of a shopping mall in


Market Restraints Can Curb Some High Rollers
LEAD: To the Editor:


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Security Council  Meets at 11:30 A.M. on the situation in occupied territories.
General Assembly  PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR SPECIAL SESSION OF ASSEMBLY DEVOTED TO DISARMAMENT - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M  COMMITTEE ON DRAFTING CONVENTION AGAINST RECRUITMENT, USE, FINANCING AND TRAINING OF MERCENARIES - 10:30 A.M.


I.B.M. Introduces Computer Device
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation introduced a new communications controller that allows mainframe computers to share information with personal computers on a local area network and to send data over telephone lines, both at significantly faster speeds.


TV Review; Zeffirelli's Lavish 'Turandot' at the Met Opera
LEAD: NOW it can be seen by those not lucky enough to get into the theater.
The Franco Zeffirelli production of Puccini's ''Turandot,'' ridiculed by many critics but cheered by audiences who made it one of New York's hottest tickets, is being telecast at 8 o'clock this evening on Channel 13.
Inasmuch as none of this season's broadcasts will be live, the name of the public-television series has been quietly changed from ''Live at the Met'' to ''The Metropolitan Opera Presents.


HEART ATTACK RISK FOUND TO BE CUT BY TAKING ASPIRIN
LEAD: A major nationwide study shows that a single aspirin tablet every other day can sharply reduce a man's risk of heart attack and death from heart attack.


Donations for Neediest Replace Snacks Gifts
LEAD: Every year over the holidays, Karen and Richard LeFrak of Manhattan used to send gift-wrapped jams, pretzels, caramel popcorn or other tasty snacks to their friends.


Anti-Discrimination Measure Taken Up on the Senate Floor
LEAD: The Senate began debate today on an anti-discrimination bill that was described by its backers as one of the most significant pieces of civil rights legislation to come before Congress in several years.


Reagan Agenda: Taking New Tack
LEAD: The Reagan Administration took office in 1981 with three goals for education: abolishing the newly formed Department of Education, obtaining a constitutional amendment to permit organized prayer in public schools and obtaining legislation to offer tuition tax credits to parents of pupils in private and parochial schools.


About New York; Scotland's Poet Hailed With Kilt And Tex-Mex
LEAD: Monday, as snowflakes fat as Easter chicks flew out of the evening sky, an old fellow in need of a restorative popped into a place on West 12th Street just in time to catch the act of a man in a kilt who caressed a bagpipe and blew the bar away. ''It seems to come earlier every year,'' the serious drinker said, ordering his own brand of antifreeze.


The Promise of Liberty Scholarships
LEAD: One intriguing proposal by Governor Cuomo of New York for the Decade of the Child is Liberty Scholarships.
Combined with existing grants, they would guarantee four years of funding for poor high school graduates admitted to a college or university in New York; 25,000 students a year might qualify.


Yale and Two Unions Reach A Tentative Contract Accord
LEAD: Yale University and its two unions announced agreement today on a tentative contract, apparently ending the threat of a strike.


STRATUS COMPUTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STRATUS COMPUTER INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
55,168,000
35,354,000
Net inc
6,543,000
3,697,000
Share earns
.33
.19
Yr sales
184,150,000
124,559,000
Net inc
19,395,000
13,519,000
Share earns
.97
.70


Cummings, Cooper Fined
LEAD: Seven members of the Knicks and eight Los Angeles Lakers were fined a total of $16,750 yesterday by Rod Thorn, the National Basketball Association's vice president of operations, as a result of last Friday's fourth-quarter fight during the Lakers' 113-112 home victory.


SUN CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUN CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,610,000,000
2,250,000,000
Net inc
b83,000,000
c70,000,000
Share earns
.77
.64
Yr rev
9,820,000,000
10,560,000,000
Net inc
348,000,000
385,000,000
Share earns
3.21
3.54


Leadership and Racism
LEAD: To The Living Section:


SAN DIEGO GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAN DIEGO GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
530,192,000
408,938,000
Net inc
49,959,000
51,074,000
Share earns
.84
.83
Yr rev
1,904,228,000
1,634,211,000
Net inc
196,803,000
213,196,000
Share earns
3.28
3.42


Economic Scene; The Geopolitics Of the Budget
LEAD: IN his final State of the Union Message, President Reagan attacked the huge budget deficits that are likely to go down as his most disturbing economic legacy.
The gross Federal debt has risen from $1 trillion at the end of the 1981 fiscal year to what will total $2.587 trillion by the end of the current fiscal year, according to the estimates of the Office of Management and


Polenta: The Cornmeal Mush With a Little Italian Accent
LEAD: A PERSON could be forgiven for thinking that polenta, the Italian version of cornmeal mush, has just become a hot new item for American food lovers.
A person would be wrong.


OFFENSIVE LINES ARE READY TO SPRING
LEAD: Before this season was half over, the Washington Redskins' offensive line had been chopped up by injuries.
By the time the strike had ended, the Denver Broncos were trying to replace two offensive-line starters lost to knee injuries.


SAFECO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAFECO CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
655,377,000
676,146,000
Net inc
b38,833,000
c48,272,000
Share earns
.58
.72
Yr rev
2,725,182,000
2,598,643,000
Net inc
b253,010,000
c228,687,000
Share earns
3.75
3.39


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article yesterday about the Actors Studio misidentified the organization of which Ellen Burstyn, the studio's artistic director, was president from 1982-85.
It was Actors' Equity Association.


Singer Rejects Lower Award In His Verdict Against NBC
LEAD: Wayne Newton has rejected a reduced $5.3 million award in his libel suit against NBC, clearing the way for a new trial to determine how much the network must pay the singer, his lawyer said Monday.


Staring at Monsters
LEAD: In a world that changes faster than the eye blinks, it is reassuring to hear from Tass, the Soviet news agency, that there's an abominable snowman, or yeti, living near the Afghanistan border.
This one paid several evening visits to the camp of four researchers from Kiev, stared at them for awhile, then disappeared into a handy thicket.


PREMARK INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PREMARK INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
621,900,000
549,400,000
Net inc
b26,600,000
c95,500,000
Share earns
.77
-
Yr sales
2,197,300,000
1,959,000,000
Net inc
71,500,000
c98,300,000
Share earns
2.08
-


Investor Donates $10 Million to Mt. Sinai
LEAD: Henry R. Kravis, a New York financial investor, has given $10 million to the Mount Sinai Medical Center to establish a women's and children's center to provide medical, psychological and social services.


Enhances Democracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''The October crash was a crisis that nearly became a disaster.
We will probably never know how close we came to the disaster.''  - Charles A. Bowsher, Comptroller General.  [ A1:2. ]


Fordham Defeats Columbia
LEAD: In the previous five meetings, each Fordham-Columbia matchup was decided in the final 30 seconds.
Four times, the schools were separated by 2 points or less, and once they went into overtime.


Federated Sues in Ohio To Block Campeau Bid
LEAD: Federated Department Stores, in its first countermove against a hostile takeover offer, filed suit yesterday in Columbus, Ohio, seeking to block the Campeau Corporation's tender offer.


Anthony Courtney, 79; Entrapped by K.G.B.
LEAD: Anthony T. Courtney, a former intelligence chief whose political career was ruined by scandal when the K.G.B. released photographs of him with a Soviet tour guide in a Moscow hotel, died Sunday afer a short illness, his family said.
He was 79 years old.


Iowa to Keep Its Caucuses
LEAD: The leader of the Iowa House of Representatives today rejected a proposal to replace the state's precinct caucuses with a primary election.
The caucuses, to be held Feb. 8, are the first major nominating contest in the 1988 Presidential race.


'Piffling Niceties'
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Upheaval Benefits Villanova
LEAD: With no clear-cut favorite and with everybody beating everybody else, the Big East Conference this season is being described as topsy-turvy.


About Real Estate; A Market Overhaul for Lower East Side
LEAD: For generations the Lower East Side of Manhattan has been both a settlement community for successive waves of immigrant families and a bustling market for bargain-hunting shoppers.


VARIAN ASSOCIATES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VARIAN ASSOCIATES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Sales
265,000,000
214,900,000
Net loss
b17,600,000
c7,900,000
Share earns
-
.37
b-Includes restructuring charges of $22.8 million for a cost reduction effort that will result in consolidation of two divisions and discontinuation of a product line in the semiconductor equipment group, as well as other actions being undertaken as part of a company-wide cost reduction effort.


G.A.O. Says Computer Jams Added to Stock Panic
LEAD: Repeated breakdowns of computerized trading systems on the New York Stock Exchange aggravated the selling panic on Oct. 19 and were far more extensive than previously known, according to a report released today by the General Accounting Office.


PHILIPS INDUSTRIES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILIPS INDUSTRIES LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
159,828,000
141,012,000
Net inc
8,206,000
b5,400,000
Share earns
.29
.19
9mo sales
591,941,000
440,784,000
Net inc
35,391,000
b25,479,000
Share earns
1.24
.90


Bridge: Has the Hideous Hog Made A Return as the Club Expert?
LEAD: For the thousands of enthusiasts around the world who feared that the death of Victor Mollo last year meant the end of his Griffins Club and the Hideous Hog, there is a small silver lining.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article yesterday about legislative action in Albany inaccurately described an education bill passed on Monday by the New York State Assembly.
The bill makes several revisions in elections to New York City community school boards, including a prohibition on board membership by employees of the school system.


Vietnam to Return Remains
LEAD: Vietnam intends to turn over to the United States the remains of five Americans missing in the Vietnam War and has information about 18 other missing Americans, the State Department said today.
The department spokesman, Charles E. Redman, said Vietnam made its pledge in a three-day meeting of Vietnamese Government representatives and United States experts that ended Monday in Hanoi.


Alternate-Side Parking Suspended in Snowy Weather for Safety
LEAD: To the Editor:


U S WEST INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*U S WEST INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,163,900,000
2,084,500,000
Net inc
255,000,000
205,900,000
Share earns
1.35
1.08
Yr rev
8,455,300,000
8,308,400,000
Net inc
1,005,500,000
924,300,000
Share earns
5.31
4.86


FEDERAL PAPER BOARD CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL PAPER BOARD CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
317,259,000
307,228,000
Net inc
25,131,000
cd1,450,000
Share earns
1.20
-
Yr sales
1,025,727,000
948,560,000
Net inc
b65,763,000
d18,410,000
Share earns
3.27
.84


Study Finds Barrage of Sex on TV
LEAD: Americans are bombarded by sexual messages on network television but are hardly ever reminded of the results of sex, according to a study conducted for the Planned Parenthood Federation of America and made public yesterday.


U.S. Indicts Rockwell On Billing
LEAD: A Federal indictment unsealed here today charged the Rockwell International Corporation with double-billing the Air Force for $450,000 on contracts to build a navigational satellite system in 1982.


PEOPLES WESTCHESTER SAVNGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES WESTCHESTER SAVNGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,879,000
c7,115,000
Per share
1.56
1.41
Yr net inc
b21,751,000
c19,896,000
Per share
4.30
3.94
b-After extraordinary tax credits of $3,225,000 for the quarter and $9,181,000 for the year.


Trial Opens in an Author's Libel Suit Against ABC
LEAD: An author's libel case against the ABC began yesterday with opening statements about a television documentary on ''the McCarthy era of the 1950's.''


Ungaro's Sexiest, Lagerfeld's Quietest
LEAD: Emanuel Ungaro introduced the shortest, tightest and most colorful sexy dresses of his career this morning at the Grand Hotel here.
He was rewarded with excited shrieks and screams of approval after the show, as he walked down the runway, which was lined with models wearing his flower-strewn, audacious styles.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: OVER the years I have often been asked if I find it odd that certain dishes combine poultry and other meats with seafood, and my answer is always in the absolute negative.
To the best of my knowledge, the blending of meats with seafood occurs in almost all cultures, East and West.


When One Ambush Meets Another
LEAD: On the air, the dramatic television confrontation between Vice President Bush and the CBS News anchor Dan Rather seemed a spontaneous and unexpected collision of tempers.
But the event that sent the television world into an uproar was, in fact, a result of weeks of backstage political moves and countermoves, with CBS News and the


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
American Express Co.
[104,000,000)
-
Borden Inc.
81,300,000
+18.2
Chevron Corp.
220,000,000
*-
Merck &amp; Co.
232,400,000
+35.3
Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg.
216,000,000
+16.8
Northern Telecom Inc.
140,000,000
+5.9
Pittston Company
(144,100,000)
-
Premark International Inc.


Tennis Dispute Is Unresolved
LEAD: The decision by the International Tennis Federation not to require players to play in South Africa did not resolve the issue but only inflamed emotions, said an adviser to the African nations that oppose professional tennis's continued recognition of South Africa.


PITTSTON COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PITTSTON COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
133,229,000
132,490,000
Net loss
b144,056,000
c3,020,000
Share earns
-
.08
Yr sales
521,199,000
542,894,000
Net loss
b133,050,000
c10,016,000
Share earns
-
.27


SANFORD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANFORD CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
22,900,000
20,900,000
Net inc
4,600,000
2,800,000
Share earns
.68
.41
Yr sales
83,800,000
75,100,000
Net inc
13,100,000
7,000,000
Share earns
1.92
1.03


Who Was Unfair on the Air?
LEAD: Who set up whom in the now infamous CBS Evening News shootout between Vice President Bush and Dan Rather Monday night?
Did the anchorman unfairly surprise the Republican front-runner with hostile questions about the Iran-contra scandal?
Or did Mr.
Bush, looking for ways to show that he's no wimp, walk in eager to show muscle and show up the media?


Hynes Sees No Charges For Holtzman
LEAD: A special New York State prosecutor said yesterday that there were no grounds to bring criminal charges against Brooklyn District Attorney Elizabeth Holtzman or any of her prosecutors concerning a dispute over whether a complainant was mistreated at a sexual misconduct trial.


STANDARD PACIFIC LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD PACIFIC LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
127,362,947
111,605,467
Net inc
b12,300,498
8,462,767
Share earns
.45
.36
Yr rev
356,943,219
310,608,258
Net inc
b43,789,812
25,747,842
Share earns
1.62
1.11


NORTHERN TELECOM LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHERN TELECOM LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,300,000,000
1,300,000,000
Net inc
140,000,000
132,200,000
Share earns
.57
.54
Yr rev
4,900,000,000
4,400,000,000
Net inc
347,200,000
313,200,000
Share earns
1.39
1.23


FEDDERS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDDERS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
29,585,000
19,941,000
Net inc
b3,354,000
c1,941,000
Share earns
.19
.15
Shares outst
17,876,000
13,324,000
Yr sales
128,659,000
94,429,000
Net inc
13,982,000
c8,419,000
Share earns
.89
.64


Lorenzo J. Greene, 88, Black History Scholar
LEAD: Lorenzo J. Greene, a retired professor at Lincoln University professor who was an authority on the history of blacks in America, died Sunday.
He was 88.


MERCHANTS BANK OF NEW YORK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCHANTS BANK OF NEW YORK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,224,856
2,167,132
Per share
1.68
1.64
Yr net inc
9,235,759
8,376,732
Per share
6.98
6.33


USX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,200,000,000
2,800,000,000
Net loss
14,000,000
1,415,000,000
Yr rev
14,800,000,000
14,900,000,000
Net inc
219,000,000
b1,833,000,000
Share earns
.54
-
b-Net loss


Crazy Eddie Tells Of Investigation
LEAD: Crazy Eddie Inc. disclosed today that members of its former management were under investigation for possible violations of Federal securities laws, including those prohibiting insider trading.


Doing Something Right in the Gulf
LEAD: Is it possible, just possible, that the Administration has done something right in the Middle East for a change?


The Dan &amp; George Show
LEAD: Xerxes, King of Persia, thought he could trap the Greek fleet off Salamis.
The Greeks, directed by Themistocles, shrewdly fostered that Persian belief, and then sprang a trap of their own, concentrating their forces to ambush the attackers.


Martell Shifts Support To Grand Met's Offer
LEAD: Directors of Martell &amp; Compagnie, the renowned 273-year-old cognac house, announced today that they would support a takeover offer made by Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., the British hotel and spirits group.


William Larkin, 67, Lawyer and Politician William Larkin, 67, Lawyer and Politician
LEAD: William F. Larkin, a lawyer and former member of the New York State Assembly, died of lung cancer Sunday at Cabrini Hospice of Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Israeli Asks U.S. Critics, What Else Can We Do?
LEAD: President Chaim Herzog challenged American Jewish critics today to suggest an alternative to Israel's tough policies against Palestinian protests.


Advertising; Gulfshore Publishing Names Chief Executive
LEAD: G. Robert Griswold, McGraw-Hill 25-year man and former publisher of Architectural Digest, will be moving to Naples, Fla., to become president and chief executive of the Gulfshore Publishing Company.


A Solvent That May Solve an Ozone Problem
LEAD: As part of the manufacturing process, electronics companies clean circuit boards with solvents that contain chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's, which are implicated in the depletion of ozone in the upper atmosphere.
Now, a small chemical company in Fernandina Beach, Fla., has developed a circuit board solvent based on natural substances, particularly the chemical terpene, that meets electronics manufacturers' solvent requirements and could replace C


WEYERHAEUSER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEYERHAEUSER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,783,490,000
1,450,596,000
Net inc
129,400,000
96,074,000
Share earns
.91
.70
Yr rev
6,989,829,000
5,652,029,000
Net inc
446,623,000
276,685,000
Share earns
3.18
1.91


Xtra Plans to Sell Container Business
LEAD: The Xtra Corporation said it would sell its marine cargo container operations in two separate transactions worth a total of about $180 million.
The larger acquisition is by the Itel Corporation of Chicago, which will pay $130 million for 80,000 steel containers and leases on some of the containers.


2 Cargo Companies Accused of Illegal Flights
LEAD: Two overnight cargo-delivery companies, involved in four fatal plane crashes in the last five years, were accused by the Federal Government yesterday of operating thousands of illegal cargo flights since 1983.


Hollings Defends His Sponsorship Of Legislation Affecting Murdoch
LEAD: Senator Ernest F. Hollings took to the floor of the Senate today to defend his role in passing legislation that could force Rupert Murdoch to sell The New York Post, insisting that he had not tried to sneak it past his Senate colleagues or the public.


Ulster Police Trial Dropped by Britain
LEAD: The British Government has announced that it will not prosecute Northern Ireland police officers who interfered with an investigation of shootings by the police.
Ireland warned today that the move would undermine security cooperation with Britain.


A Correction on the Budget
LEAD: Yesterday's editorial on the 1988 budget erred in faulting Senator Domenici of New Mexico for a $50,000 appropriation to aid New Mexico's wildflower business.
The sponsor was Senator Bingaman, also of New Mexico.


OHIO CASUALTY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OHIO CASUALTY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b13,310,000
cd21,513,000
Per share
-
.95
Yr net inc
b78,553,000
d102,714,000
Per share
3.48
4.54
b-Includes after investment losses of $38,197,000 and $18,666,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Profits Up Slightly at 'Baby Bells'
LEAD: Three telecommunications companies - U S West Inc., the Southwestern Bell Corporation and the Bell Atlantic Corporation - yesterday reported only slightly improved results for the fourth quarter of 1987 and for the year.


Travers J. Bell Jr., 46, Founder Of Only Black Firm on Exchange
LEAD: Travers J. Bell Jr., the founder and owner of the only black-owned member firm of the New York Stock Exchange, died Monday, apparently from a heart attack, at his home in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old.


BLOCK DRUG CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLOCK DRUG CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
84,835,000
72,989,000
Net inc
9,662,000
8,203,000
Share earns
.58
.50
9mo sales
262,982,000
230,626,000
Net inc
28,020,000
24,290,000
Share earns
1.69
1.47


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A chart yesterday with an article on a national political poll misidentified a co-sponsor.
It was a New York Times/CBS News Poll.


FREEPORT-MCMORAN ENERGY &amp; PARTNERS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FREEPORT-MCMORAN ENERGY &amp; PARTNERS LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
48,879,000
34,089,000
Net inc
7,243,000
2,410,000
Share earns
.09
.04
Yr rev
147,919,000
142,718,000
Net inc
13,508,000
b306,520,000
Share earns
.21
-


Nutrition Doesn't Sell
LEAD: To The Living Section:


F.B.I. Asked to Check Contributions to Hart
LEAD: United States Attorney Robert Bonner says he has asked the Federal Bureau of Investigation to look into allegations of improper contributions by a producer of home videotapes to Gary Hart's Presidential campaigns.


METS SIGN HOWARD JOHNSON
LEAD: The Mets avoided an arbitration contest yesterday when they agreed to pay Howard Johnson more than twice his 1987 salary for this year.


BAUSCH &amp; LOMB INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAUSCH &amp; LOMB INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
210,685,000
184,714,000
Net inc
25,231,000
22,124,000
Share earns
.84
.73
Yr sales
840,337,000
698,867,000
Net inc
85,340,000
74,695,000
Share earns
2.81
2.47


One More Time: The Reagan Hymn
LEAD: If ours were a parliamentary system, the Reagan Government would have fallen 14 months ago.
When the Democrats recaptured the Senate in 1986, it reflected a surprising loss of confidence.
Then, almost immediately, came the Iran-contra bombshells.
President Reagan's popularity sank like a stone, from 67 percent to 46 percent in a month, and it's barely more than that today.


Morgan Stanley Net Drops 46%
LEAD: In a reflection of last fall's turbulent financial conditions, the Morgan Stanley Group Inc. said yesterday that its fourth-quarter net income dropped 46 percent.


Books of The Times
LEAD:  THE BOOK AND THE BROTHERHOOD.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: The Question and Answer column in Science Times on Tuesday incorrectly described Dr.
J.
E.
Jelinek's explanation of hair loss after high fevers, pregnancy, anesthesia and other conditions.
Dr.
Jelinek said hair loss results when many more hairs than normal enter a resting phase.


Excess of Centralization Stands in India's Way
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dance: The Limon Company
LEAD: THE Limon Dance Company opened a two-week season last night with a beautifully danced performance of ''There Is a Time,'' truly one of the classics that Jose Limon contributed to the modern-dance heritage.


Wine Talk
LEAD: IN front of me as I write is a small menu card, about the size of a postcard, dated Oct. 4, 1973.


COMMONWEALTH ENERGY SYSEM reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMONWEALTH ENERGY SYSEM (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
172,893,000
158,122,000
Net inc
9,755,000
10,847,000
Share earns
.99
1.09
Yr rev
660,443,000
612,940,000
Net inc
32,354,000
41,173,000
Share earns
3.20
4.12


Error at Delta: Some Fly Free
LEAD: A Delta Air Lines computer mistakenly gave about 700 people free and reduced-price plane trips this month, and the carrier will honor the commitments, a Delta spokesman, Bill Berry, said today.


Officers Save Child Dropped From Window
LEAD: Three officers who, along with other emergency workers, caught 9-month-old Joseph Harvey in a sheet after he had been thrown from a second-floor window by his mother.
From left are Ronald Tavares, Fred Herndon and Alick Herman.
The mother, Cynthia Harvey, 28, will be charged with attempted second-degree murder.


17 Times an All-Star
LEAD: For the 17th time in his 19-year career, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar will be in the National Basketball Association All-Star Game.
The 7-foot-2-inch Los Angeles Laker center was one of seven players selected in a vote by the 12 Western Conference coaches to augment the five starters chosen in a vote by the fans for the game on Feb.


Gibbs Sends Spies in Motion
LEAD: To his players' amusement and the consternation of would-be spies, Coach Joe Gibbs has ordered the Redskins to switch uniform numbers every day while practicing for Super Bowl XXII.


Carpenter Dropped As Devils' Coach
LEAD: The Devils changed coaches today in an attempt to motivate a team that has been playing without inspiration while losing its last five games.


SHEARSON LEHMAN BROTHERS HOLDNGS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHEARSON LEHMAN BROTHERS HOLDNGS CO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,250,000,000
1,316,500,000
Net loss
95,000,000
b106,000,000
Yr rev
5,121,900,000
4,591,400,000
Net inc
101,200,000
341,300,000
Share earns
1.00
-


5.5% Drop in Uncovered Nasdaq Short Sales
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the over-the-counter market's short interest position - the number of shares sold short and not yet covered in the month ended Jan. 15 - fell by 10.4 million shares, or 5.5 percent, to 178.4 million shares.


COMPUTER SCIENCES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER SCIENCES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Revenue
287,343,000
257,489,000
Net inc
10,311,000
7,588,000
Share earns
.65
.48
9mo rev
843,217,000
740,915,000
Net inc
29,665,000
21,408,000
Share earns
1.86
1.40


CONSOLIDATED EDISON CO OF NY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED EDISON CO OF NY INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,191,201,000
1,184,795,000
Net inc
61,107,000
112,176,000
Share earns
.47
.87
Shares outst
113,930,000
118,505,000
Yr rev
5,094,418,000
5,197,736,000
Net inc
550,114,000
546,407,000
Share earns
4.42
4.26
Shares outst
116,016,000
119,264,000


DETROIT EDISON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DETROIT EDISON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
672,863,000
690,990,000
Net inc
87,978,000
88,142,000
Share earns
.60
.60
Yr rev
2,856,731,000
2,869,284,000
Net inc
476,734,000
378,292,000
Share earns
3.25
2.58


VALLEY NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VALLEY NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
27,161,000
b22,743,000
Per share
-
1.16
Yr net loss
44,359,000
b89,345,000
Per share
-
4.55
b-Net income  The company noted that the losses in the latest periods resulted from special provisions for credit losses.





Texas Bank Alters Plan To Thwart Shareholder
LEAD: The First City Bancorporation of Texas said today that it had altered the legal structure of its proposed $1.5 billion Federal bailout plan to prevent a disgruntled shareholder from blocking the transaction.


AMOSKEAG BANK SHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMOSKEAG BANK SHARES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
15,900,000
b4,000,000
Per share
-
.36
Yr net inc
1,900,000
23,500,000
Per share
.17
2.09
b-Net income  The latest periods included securities losses of $30.7 million for the quarter and $23.8 million for the year.


For the New Era, a Song of Truth From the Grave
LEAD: Vladimir Vysotsky, the singer who growled in an impassioned voice the bottled-up loves and resentments of a silent generation here, was adopted posthumously this week as the official bard of the Gorbachev era.


USX Reports a Loss of $14 Million
LEAD: The USX Corporation today reported a fourth-quarter loss of $14 million, a reflection of weakness in crude oil prices.


High Court Ruling Is Sought on Special Prosecutor
LEAD: A special prosecutor said in court papers made public today that she would urge the Supreme Court to quickly overturn a Federal appellate decision Friday that struck down the Federal law on special prosecutors.


MORGAN STANLEY GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORGAN STANLEY GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
718,271,000
628,958,000
Net inc
b31,364,000
58,212,000
Share earns
1.16
2.31
Yr rev
3,147,909,000
2,463,484,000
Net inc
230,944,000
201,250,000
Share earns
8.99
8.42


Ex-Head of Bar Group Fatally Shoots Himself
LEAD: A former president of the Westchester County Bar Association, stricken with cancer and a heart condition, shot and killed himself Monday while on the telephone with his doctor, the authorities said.


Dollar Edges Downward While Gold Finishes Mixed
LEAD: The dollar edged lower yesterday against most key currencies in directionless trading after rising overseas.


Bacon the Old-Fashioned Way
LEAD: IF you think of bacon as sliced strips of meat sealed in plastic, sample some of the varieties sold in the German and Hungarian butcher shops along Second Avenue on the Upper East Side.


Jackson Assists In Homecoming
LEAD: The Knicks were at home last night, so they won.
The Nets were on the road, so they lost.


Japan Expected to Keep Its Auto Export Quotas
LEAD: Japan's Government is close to a decision to keep its quotas on automobile exports to the United States at the level it has maintained since 1985.


BELL ATLANTIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELL ATLANTIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,603,300,000
2,602,700,000
Net inc
285,000,000
271,900,000
Share earns
1.44
1.37
Yr rev
10,298,400,000
9,920,800,000
Net inc
1,240,400,000
1,167,100,000
Share earns
6.24
5.85


BRUSH WELLMAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRUSH WELLMAN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
86,000,000
63,000,000
Net inc
8,500,000
6,200,000
Share earns
.45
.33
Yr sales
308,000,000
241,000,000
Net inc
26,200,000
22,700,000
Share earns
1.38
1.20


LAST WORD ON TIPS, TORTE AND FOCACCIA
LEAD: THIS is one of those occasional columns devoted directly to what is on readers' minds, usually expressed in questions.
If the questions are of general interest, and if the pile of letters is getting too high, it's time to compile a column that provides the answers.
Not all the answers are satisfactory, but we do our best.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Contractor Is Indicted


CERTAINTEED CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CERTAINTEED CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
291,712,000
268,610,000
Net inc
12,549,000
c10,720,000
Share earns
.66
.57
Yr sales
1,158,366,000
1,114,242,000
Net inc
b61,382,000
57,274,000
Share earns
3.23
3.02


JERRICO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JERRICO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1987
1986
Revenue
158,772,000
143,704,000
Net inc
b5,226,000
5,191,000
Share earns
.27
.25
Shares outst
19,543,000
21,017,000
6mo rev
317,872,000
296,926,000
Net inc
b12,229,000
c12,599,000
Share earns
.62
.60
Shares outst
19,820,000
21,129,000


Poachers Lurk at Hutton's Door
LEAD: In 1981, when Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company bought Dean Witter Reynolds, other brokerage firms gleefully lured away some of the firm's finest talent.


Food Notes
LEAD:  How Much Juice?


TELERATE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELERATE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
97,200,000
66,900,000
Net inc
23,300,000
12,900,000
Share earns
.25
.14
Shares outst
94,757,000
89,263,000
Yr rev
335,800,000
232,300,000
Net inc
75,200,000
43,200,000
Share earns
.79
.49
Shares outst
94,667,000
89,076,000


Coca-Cola Unit Selling 2 Issues
LEAD: Columbia Pictures Industries, a subsidiary of the Coca-Cola Company, is offering $575 million of debt securities in two parts through underwriters led by Allen &amp; Company.


Butch Sits One Out
LEAD: ONE of the best basketball coaches in the business missed a game for the first time in his 1,173-game career last Saturday.
We always assumed that behind the cigar smoke and the foghorn voice beat a heart that was mechanically flawless.
Not true.


New Chief at Pan Am Takes Control Quickly
LEAD: Last year was not an easy one for Thomas G. Plaskett, the new chairman, chief executive and president of the Pan Am Corporation.


Revere Copper
LEAD: The board of Revere Copper and Brass Inc. announced that the company would be offered for sale.
Revere Copper's businesses include Revere Ware Inc., which manufactures home cookware and related items.
The board gave no reason for the sale in its brief announcement.
It said Mor-gan Stanley &amp; Company had been re-tained to act as its financial adivsor.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: DEAR DIARY:


Lutheran Minister Prodding U.S. Catholics to Lead Christian Revitalization
LEAD: What is a Lutheran minister doing injecting himself into controversies within the Roman Catholic Church?


New York City Is Seeking Underwriters' Bond Ideas
LEAD: New York City, which sells more bonds than any other local government in the country, asked securities dealers yesterday for proposals to manage the city's financings.


CINCINNATI GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINCINNATI GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
344,828,000
332,758,000
Net loss
b50,989,000
c29,929,000
Share earns
-
.66
Yr rev
1,357,381,000
1,403,478,000
Net inc
b110,207,000
150,324,000
Share earns
2.42
3.38


Salvador Releasing 3 in Killing of 6 Americans
LEAD: A military appeals court has ruled that three suspects charged in the 1985 killings of six Americans should be freed under a Government amnesty, officials said today.


Helms Criticizes Arms Negotiators On Issue of Warhead Destruction
LEAD: Senator Jesse Helms, the conservative North Carolina Republican, stepped up his attacks on the new missile treaty today by assailing American negotiators for concluding an accord that does not require destruction of missile warheads.


PHILADELPHIA ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILADELPHIA ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
737,540,000
743,458,000
Net inc
122,697,000
105,426,000
Share earns
.51
.43
Yr rev
3,181,464,000
3,090,869,000
Net inc
542,396,000
276,537,000
Share earns
2.33
1.01


Legislative Slowness
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Wins Order on 2 Companies
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday temporarily prohibited two overnight cargo-delivery companies from conducting air-cargo flights.
The Government says the airlines were involved in four fatal crashes in the last five years.


HUGE INVENTORIES MAR GROWTH RATE OF 4.2% FOR G.N.P.
LEAD: The nation's economy grew at a 4.2 percent annual rate in the final quarter of 1987, the Commerce Department reported today.
But because of a sharp contraction in consumer spending, most of the increase piled up as unsold inventory.


UNIVERSITY BANK &amp; TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSITY BANK &amp; TRUST
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
462,000
608,000
Per share
.12
.16
Yr net inc
2,065,000
2,063,000
Per share
.56
.67
Shares outst
3,713,000
3,089,000
The per share amounts are adjusted to reflect a 3-for-2 stock split paid in January 1988.


New Post of President Is Filled at Vestron
LEAD: Austin O. Furst Jr., 45 years old, has turned to Strauss Zelnick, who is 30, to help him manage Vestron Inc., the video company that has turned to movie producing.


MURPHY OIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MURPHY OIL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
402,788,000
321,690,000
Net loss
b61,062,000
c207,734,000
Yr rev
1,531,881,000
1,369,817,000
Net loss
43,045,000
194,750,000
b-Includes a $61,096,000 loss provision for a subsidiary's obligations to banks under letters of credit.


Colombian Chief Signs An Antiterrorist Decree
LEAD: President Virgilio Barco Vargas signed an emergency antiterrorist decree today, strengthening security forces and offering rewards to informers to counter rising violence by drug traffickers and left-wing rebels.


Searching for Roots In Ethnic Handcrafts
LEAD: ''AT one point,'' Risha Meledandri recalled, ''I had to make a choice: To manage an African percussion group or do this.''


SAY INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAY INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 29
1987
1986
Sales
5,150,000
7,108,000
Net loss
276,000
b762,000
Share earns
-
.20
6mo sales
9,834,000
12,552,000
Net loss
141,000
b1,422,000
Share earns
-
.37
b-Net income and includes a loss from discontinued operations of $85,000 and $214,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Guarding the Environmentment
LEAD: When Barber B. Conable took over the World Bank 18 months ago, he pledged to devote more of the bank's attention and resources to the environmental consequences of economic development in the third world.
Among his promises was the creation of a new position of Director of the Environment for the bank.


DOW JONES &amp; CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOW JONES &amp; CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
417,214,000
311,985,000
Net inc
50,345,000
c46,498,000
Share earns
.52
.48
Yr rev
1,314,443,000
1,134,867,000
Net inc
b203,018,000
d183,362,000
Share earns
2.10
1.89


BSD BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BSD BANCORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
633,000
54,000
Per share
.18
.02
Yr net inc
2,188,000
129,000
Per share
.63
.04


Currents; Design for Astronauts' Memorial
LEAD: IN honor of the 14 astronauts who have died in the space program, and in celebration of the mysteries of space exploration, a remarkable mechanized black-granite memorial is to be erected at the visitors' center at the Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Fla., in 1990.


Soviet Rights Aides Get A New Word: Dissident
LEAD: The official Soviet Human Rights Commission found itself playing unwilling host to one of the country's leading dissidents today at an unusual and volatile meeting with Western human-rights advocates.


Perverse Pains on Capital Gains
LEAD: Federal tax reform was a triumph for President Reagan but already he's trying to tear it apart.
Suddenly, he says he wants to revive special treatment for capital gains.


Music: Marimba Quartet
LEAD: THE Manhattan Marimba Quartet, formed in 1979, has dedicated itself to demonstrating the potential of their chosen instrument to play chamber music of a textural complexity comparable to that made by wind and bowed instruments.
In an era when many ''serious'' musicians in this country are busily integrating non-European polyrhythms and percussive textures into concert music, the group, which includes William Trigg, Kory Grossman, Bill Ruyle and James


IRAN TALKS FAIL, GULF ARABS ASSERT
LEAD: Talks between Iran and Arab nations of the Persian Gulf on easing regional tensions have been blocked by Teheran's evasiveness and its insistence that its war with Iraq is not negotiable, officials in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait say.


Viacom Will Auction 'Cosby' Rerun Spots
LEAD: Viacom Enterprises has a package of 1,820 thirty-second commercial units that will run during reruns of ''The Cosby Show'' on 162 television stations.
The units will be auctioned through a closed bidding process to begin Feb. 8.


FINANCIAL CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FINANCIAL CORP OF AMERICA (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b224,600,000
d23,100,000
Share earns
-
.56
Yr net loss
c467,963,000
d95,369,000
Share earns
-
2.25
b-Reflects an addition of $235.5 million to reserves for losses on loans and real estate and a gain of $20,044,000 from the sale of premises; also reflects $3,617,000 of net pre-tax gains from the sale of mortgage-backed securities and loans and $12,000 of net gains from the sale of investments.


BANCOKLAHOMA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANCOKLAHOMA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
3,952,000
b247,000
Yr net loss
35,513,000
139,354,000
b-Net income  Preferred dividend requirements exceeded net income in the year-ago period.
The bank holding company took in the latest fourth quarter a $17.1 million provision for loan losses.


PARIS BUSINESS FORMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARIS BUSINESS FORMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,347,000
7,799,000
Net inc
b399,000
444,000
Share earns
.10
.11
b-Includes a writedown of unrealized securities losses of $198,000.


CARDINAL'S VIEWS CITED IN BOYCOTT
LEAD: Several prominent American rabbis refused to attend a meeting yesterday with Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger, the close adviser to Pope John Paul II, because of what one rabbi called ''the publicly declared views of Cardinal Ratzinger denying the ongoing validity of Judaism.''


Seabrook Utility's Solvency At Stake as Rate Plea Fails
LEAD: The Public Service Company of New Hampshire was looking today for new ways to avoid bankruptcy after the State Supreme Court denied it an emergency rate increase.


OSHKOSH TRUCK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OSHKOSH TRUCK CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,726,000
5,762,000
Share earns
.52
.64
b-Includes a gain from an accounting change of $1,725,000.


Currents; The Incredible Shrinking Televisions
LEAD: THE trend toward miniaturized television sets continues.
In 1987, the Electronics Industry Association estimated that more than 140,000 color sets five inches wide or less would be sold to dealers, increasing this year to more than 220,000.


Change of Coaches
LEAD: The Giants have dismissed Pat Hodgson, their receivers' coach for nine years.
They announced yesterday they had replaced him with Tom Coughlin, who coached the Green Bay Packers' receivers the last two seasons.
Coach Bill Parcells met with his assistants on Monday and told them all would be retained except Hodgson.


National City in Accord To Add First Kentucky
LEAD: The National City Corporation of Cleveland, the second-largest bank holding company in Ohio, announced yesterday that it had reached agreement to acquire the First Kentucky National Corporation of Louisville, the largest banking company in that state.


ASARCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASARCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
429,914,000
254,908,000
Net inc
b70,261,000
d28,227,000
Share earns
1.61
.77
Yr sales
1,355,224,000
1,056,538,000
Net inc
c279,337,000
e9,140,000
Share earns
7.34
-


What Is Needed to Promote Mideast Peace; Hear the Palestinians
LEAD: To the Editor:


TV Review; 'Voices and Visions' Of 13 Poets
LEAD: THE theory goes that television, in thrall to the visual image, is a spoiler of words.


H.J. Schonfield, 81, Author and Editor Of Books on Religion
LEAD: Hugh J. Schonfield, author of ''The Passover Plot'' and many other books about religion and the Bible, died Tuesday in London.
He was 81 years old.


Shift Likely at Shearson
LEAD: Peter Solomon, a vice chairman of Shearson Lehman Brothers, is likely to give up his duties as co-head of the firm's investment banking division to focus on its merchant banking activities.


20 Soviet Scientists Visiting Nuclear Test Site in Nevada
LEAD: Twenty Soviet scientists are studying the American nuclear testing program at the Nevada Test Site as part of a scientific exchange.


Net at Mobil and Shell Soared in 4th Quarter
LEAD: Aided by production and exploration gains, the Mobil Corporation, the nation's second-largest oil refiner, yesterday reported a 91.6 percent rise in its fourth-quarter net income.


Currents; Homely Windows
LEAD: SOME architects design teapots and candlesticks, too.
In May, 11 architects, 10 of whom design for Swid Powell, the housewares company, will design window displays for Bergdorf Goodman that will show fashions and home products.


BARD CH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARD CH INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
167,515,000
144,912,000
Net inc
16,432,000
13,508,000
Share earns
.57
.46
Yr sales
641,258,000
547,994,000
Net inc
62,250,000
51,194,000
Share earns
2.14
1.72


RESULTS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Celtics 106, Bullets 100: Larry Bird scored a season-high 49 points, including four consecutive free throws down the stretch, and the Celtics posted their 10th consecutive Boston Garden victory last night.
Parish scored 26 points and Kevin McHale 21 as the Celtics ended Washington's four-game winning streak.


RULE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RULE INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
8,059,000
8,317,000
Net inc
215,000
239,000
Share earns
.09
.10


Help for Murdoch Is Blocked in Senate
LEAD: The Senate today defeated a measure that could have helped Rupert Murdoch retain control of The New York Post even though he also owns a television station in New York City.


Can We Ever Truly Americanize Japan?
LEAD: To the Editor:


STANFORD TELECOMMUNICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANFORD TELECOMMUNICAIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,070,000
14,729,000
Net inc
689,000
813,000
Share earns
.15
.18
9mo rev
41,116,000
39,874,000
Net loss
268,000
b1,617,000
Share earns
-
.36


Report of Bias in F.B.I. Leaves Reagan 'Upset
LEAD: President Reagan is ''very upset'' about reports of discrimination against a black agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and he has asked F.B.I.
Director William S. Sessions to investigate, the White House said today.


UNGERMANN-BASS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNGERMANN-BASS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
38,290,000
32,344,000
Net inc
b297,000
1,956,000
Share earns
.15
.11
Yr rev
143,817,000
108,747,000
Net inc
b6,909,000
18,000
Share earns
.38
-


24% of U.S. Children Live With Just One Parent
LEAD: Nearly a quarter of all American children now live with just one parent, and the Census Bureau estimates that more than half will, at some time before they reach adulthood, live in single-parent households.


A.L. Williams Sets Tie With Primerica
LEAD: The Primerica Corporation and the A. L. Williams Corporation said they had entered negotiations to create a new public company that will be known by the same name as the latter, A. L. Williams.


Currents; Variations on the Comfort Theme
LEAD: ''I DO not personally see my work as having moved from the harder concept to a softer feel,'' said Rei Kawakubo, the Tokyo-based fashion and furniture designer.
But her newest collection of furniture, which combines aluminum with linden, a pale blond wood, is far less severe.


Challenger Insists on '88 For America's Cup Bid
LEAD: Michael Fay, the New Zealand challenger for the America's Cup, has rejected an offer from the San Diego Yacht Club to postpone the cup match this summer until 1990 if the club agrees to discard its plans to build a multihulled defender.


Impeachment Panel In Arizona Requests Mecham Testimony
LEAD: Gov.
Evan Mecham was asked today to testify next week before the select committee of the state's House of Representative that is studying whether he should be impeached.


STOCKTON SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STOCKTON SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,574,581
1,591,638
Per share
.39
.39
Yr net inc
8,706,374
9,145,36
Per share
2.17
2.63
Shares outst
4,021,204
3,470,821


Metro Matters; Corporate Flight: Role Playing Offers Insights
LEAD: Should Apex of America shift its corporate headquarters and 15,000 employees to another city?


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Abie Grossfeld of Southern Connecticut State University has been named head coach of the United States men's gymnastics team for the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, South Korea.
It will be the second time in succession and the third time over all that Grossfeld will coach the team.
Grossfeld, who competed in the Olympics in 1956 in Melbourne and in 1960 at Rome, was chosen by the United States Gymnastics Federation and the United States Olympic Committee's executive board.


John F. Gummere, 86, Quaker Headmaster
LEAD: John F. Gummere, a leading Quaker educator who was a founder of the National Association of Independent Schools, died of heart failure Tuesday in Philadelphia.
He was 86 years old.


Paris Journal; Waiting for Raymond (What's the Rush?) Barre
LEAD: He has been waiting in the wings for seven years and now, like the tortoise in the fable of La Fontaine, he has started to lumber.
Raymond Barre's quandary as he embarks on his official presidential campaign is that he is not only plodding against a hare but could also face another tortoise in the shape of President Francois


PUBLIC SERVICE CO OF COLOADO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUBLIC SERVICE CO OF COLOADO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
420,200,000
425,672,000
Net inc
b35,217,000
c39,464,000
Share earns
.61
.68
Yr rev
1,657,435,000
1,657,863,000
Net inc
b173,268,000
c22,428,000
Share earns
3.05
.13


Moving of Office Fought By Business Volunteers
LEAD: For the last two decades, the Executive Volunteer Corps, a group of retired Manhattan executives, has helped thousands of aspiring entrepreneurs form businesses or save existing ones from bankruptcy.
But last month the 21 members of the corps resigned in anger after their sponsor, a New York City agency, refused to renew the lease on the group's midtown headquarters.


Joseph M. Lowry, Executive, 79
LEAD: Joseph M. Lowry, who retired as senior vice president of the Ethyl Corporation in 1973, died Monday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Richmond, Va., after a long illness.
He was 79 years old and lived in Goochland, a Richmond suburb.


PENNSYLVANIA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNSYLVANIA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
554,043,000
545,674,000
Net inc
76,790,000
76,905,000
Share earns
.84
.82
Yr rev
2,088,759,000
2,188,925,000
Net inc
302,461,000
300,108,000
Share earns
3.32
3.10


Broken Children, a Truth of Nicaragua's War
LEAD: Inside the Fernando Velez Paiz Hospital in Managua, one follows the screams to find the ward where wounded and maimed children are attended.


TECUMSEH PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TECUMSEH PRODUCTS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
234,223,000
173,125,000
Net inc
17,983,000
10,956,000
Share earns
3.29
2.00
Yr sales
951,199,000
821,122,000
Net inc
71,599,000
50,715,000
Share earns
13.09
9.27


John Prip's Diverse Silver Designs
LEAD: IT is surprising that all the work in a new exhibition at the American Craft Museum comes from one silversmith, John Prip.
There is enough variety in this show of silver and pewter, which opens tomorrow, for an atelier full of craftsmen.


Hospitals' Medicare Profits Drop; Decline May Curb Access to Care
LEAD: Profits earned by hospitals for the treatment of Medicare patients declined significantly in 1986-87, the Department of Health and Human Services reported today.


PACER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACER CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,480,004
2,155,777
Net inc
b533,871
c495,704
Share earns
.25
.24
9mo rev
6,696,599
5,138,172
Net inc
b1,233,651
c888,597
Share earns
.58
.44
b-Includes a tax benefit of $185,700 and $446,700 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


MARINE CORP-ILLINOIS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARINE CORP-ILLINOIS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,537,000
1,645,000
Per share
.25
.27
Yr net inc
6,871,000
6,141,000
Per share
1.14
1.06
The per share earnings reflect the initial public offering of 534,750 common shares in March 1986, as well as 2-for-1 stock splits in January and June 1986.


5-Year Notes Set By Mobil Canada
LEAD: Mobil Oil Canada Ltd., a unit of the Mobil Corporation, is offering $500 million of 8 3/8 percent noncallable notes due in 1993, at a price of 99.92, to yield 8.393 percent, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


CENTEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
386,847,000
363,863,000
Net inc
b50,563,000
c4,509,000
Share earns
1.16
.10
Yr rev
1,475,797,000
1,369,912,000
Net inc
b157,074,000
c109,002,000
Share earns
3.59
2.58


SELVAC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SELVAC CORP
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,370,442
684,573
Net inc
254,367
97,025
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
10,274,264
9,631,334
6mo rev
2,714,290
1,320,324
Net inc
528,502
119,761
Share earns
.04
.02
Shares outst
10,261,598
9,626,000


BETHLEHEM STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BETHLEHEM STEEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,210,000,000
1,020,000,000
Net inc
71,500,000
34,200,000
Share earns
1.07
.55
Yr sales
4,620,500,000
4,332,900,000
Net inc
174,300,000
b152,700,000
Share earns
2.77
-


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about a man who pleaded guilty in a 1986 Brooklyn slaying included an incorrect plea description from the Brooklyn District Attorney's office.
The defendant, Frank Casavilla, pleaded guilty to second-degree murder, which carries a maximum sentence of life in prison.


The Sound of Politics in Iowa Town
LEAD: It was three degrees below zero at 10 o'clock Monday morning, the wind was knifing in from the north at 30 miles an hour, snow was piled around the old gold-domed bandstand, and the plate glass windows of Gale Stapp's Purity Drug Store were coated with ice.


Nofziger Trial Hears of Pressure for Wedtech
LEAD: A former senior White House official testified today that he had told Pentagon and Reagan Administration officials that ''foot-dragging'' would not be tolerated on the Wedtech Corporation's bid for a military contract.


Advertising; POP Radio Is a Hit With Retailers
LEAD: THERE is pop radio and there is POP Radio.
The former you snag from the airwaves; the latter snags you in the aisles.


MARSH &amp; MCLELLAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARSH &amp; MCLELLAN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
514,300,000
444,700,000
Net inc
52,600,000
49,300,000
Share earns
.71
.67
Yr rev
2,147,100,000
1,804,100,000
Net inc
302,100,000
243,200,000
Share earns
4.06
3.30


SCOTT PAPER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCOTT PAPER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
1,101,200,000
986,400,000
Net inc
b67,500,000
c52,900,000
Share earns
1.77
1.40
Shares outst
38,100,000
37,800,000
Yr sales
4,122,000,000
3,437,000,000
Net inc
b233,800,000
c186,500,000
Share earns
6.11
4.96
Shares outst
38,200,000
37,500,000


Edelman Makes Offer To Foster Wheeler
LEAD: Asher B. Edelman, the New York investor, has asked the management of the Foster Wheeler Corporation to discuss creating a recapitalization plan or, as an alternative, to accept a buyout for $16.50 a share, the New Jersey-based engineering and construction company said today.


Bigotry and the F.B.I.'s Answers
LEAD: If Donald Rochon's experience typifies that of blacks in the F.B.I., then the new Director, William Sessions, has a catastrophe on his hands.
Even if it's atypical Mr.
Sessions has a problem, because the handling of the Rochon case has sent all the wrong signals to his agents and to the public about the F.B.I.


Who's Antonio? Koch's Calendar Unravels Puzzle
LEAD: Who is Antonio?


PROFIT SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Amerada Hess Corp.
[79,600,000)
-
Asarco Inc.
70,300,000
+149.3
Baker Hughes Inc.
33,100,000
*-
Baxter Travenol Labs Inc.
98,000,000
+60.7
Bethlehem Steel Corp.
71,500,000
+109.1
Commodore International
27,700,000
+27.1
Cooper Industries
56,400,000
+18.7
Dow Jones &amp; Co.


LOUISIANA LAND &amp; EXPLORAION CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOUISIANA LAND &amp; EXPLORAION CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
224,900,000
206,500,000
Net inc
7,100,000
b45,600,000
Share earns
.23
-
Yr rev
828,400,000
826,500,000
Net inc
24,800,000
b20,600,000
Share earns
.80
-


U.S. HOMES TO GET A BOOKLET ON AIDS
LEAD: The United States Government plans to mail an informational brochure about AIDS to all American households later this year, a senior Reagan Adminstration official said today.


U.S. to Request Bail Revocation For Gene Gotti
LEAD: A Federal prosecutor said yesterday that he would ask to have Gene Gotti put in prison and kept there while awaiting the outcome of his new trial on racketeering and drug charges.


If the Design Is Offbeat, the Book Is, Too
LEAD: Aficionados of popular culture may first have noticed the rather unusual book jackets: the bowling ball with three die-cut holes, for instance, or the lush expanse of plastic grass on the cover of ''Miniature Golf'' by John Margolies.


N.B.A. East All-Stars
LEAD: Patrick Ewing, the Knick center, was among 7 players selected yesterday by 11 Eastern Conference coaches as reserves in the National Basketball Association All-Star Game on Feb. 7 in Chicago.
It was the second time in his three seasons that the 7-foot Ewing was named to the team.
Of the other six players chosen, Danny Ainge of the Boston Celtics and Glenn (Doc) Rivers of the Atlanta Hawks, both guards, and Brad Daugherty, the Cleveland Cavalier center, were named for the first time.


9-Year-Old Vandal Spends 5 Days in Jail
LEAD: A 9-year-old boy has finished five days in the county jail after pleading guilty in a vandalism case.


NEWELL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWELL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
260,126,000
105,469,000
Net inc
13,460,000
7,406,000
Share earns
.95
.63
Yr sales
719,687,000
401,357,000
Net inc
37,222,000
24,009,000
Share earns
2.75
2.17


BAKER HUGHES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAKER HUGHES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
546,300,000
462,792,000
Net inc
33,100,000
b7,701,000
Share earns
.27
-
b-Net loss  The latest first quarter results included a gain of $95 million from the settlement of the Smith International Inc.


Strike Tactic Is Discounted By New Air Controller Union
LEAD: Leaders of an air traffic controllers union formed after President Reagan broke a 1981 walkout pledged at their first meeting today to deal with grievances legally, and discounted the possibility that the new union would ever strike.


Chrysler Sets Plant Closing In Wisconsin
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said today that it would close its assembly plant in Kenosha, Wis., putting 5,500 of the 6,500 employees there out of work.


AMP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
633,000,000
506,314,000
Net inc
70,000,000
46,307,000
Share earns
.65
.43
Yr sales
2,318,000,000
1,933,055,000
Net inc
250,000,000
164,345,000
Share earns
2.31
1.52


SQUARE D CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SQUARE D CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
379,580,000
348,461,000
Net inc
b19,350,000
25,988,000
Share earns
.70
.90
Yr sales
1,484,221,000
1,403,472,000
Net inc
b110,001,000
98,928,000
Share earns
3.82
3.42


Critic's Notebook; The Lobbying for Literary Prizes
LEAD: THE tribute to Toni Morrison by 48 black writers in last Sunday's New York Times Book Review does not come right out and charge that Ms.
Morrison has been denied a major literary prize because of her race, but the implication is inescapable.
An accompanying letter by two of the signatories, June Jordan and Houston A.


Vance and Rogers Press for Arms Treaty
LEAD: Two former Secretaries of State, one a Republican and one a Democrat, warned the Senate today that failure to approve a new treaty eliminating medium- and shorter-range missiles would have ''devastating'' consequences for the United States and its NATO partners.


Death Row Appeals Assailed
LEAD: Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist called on the nation's courts today to limit last-minute appeals filed by death row inmates.


Psychedelic-Art Show Is Reflection of Its Era
LEAD: The exuberant one-quarter- to one-half-inch squares will almost certainly never fall into the category of art.
But as cultural artifacts, the graphics currently on display at the Psychedelic Solution Gallery in Manhattan are moody evocations of their era - images of floating half-moons, flying saucers, astrological symbols, or Mickey Mouse wearing his sorcerer's cap from ''Fantasia.


No Way Out?
LEAD: The reports come in day after day: Israeli soldiers going into houses in the occupied territories, pulling people out, beating them with rifle butts and two-by-fours, breaking their bones. ''Often the victims were quiet residents,'' the newspaper Haaretz said, ''not suspected in violent or illegal activity.


PROCTER &amp; GAMBLE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROCTER &amp; GAMBLE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,840,000,000
4,260,000,000
Net inc
261,000,000
190,000,000
Share earns
1.52
1.11
6mo sales
9,500,000,000
8,600,000,000
Net inc
617,000,000
463,000,000
Share earns
3.61
2.72


INSIDE
LEAD:  Judge Kennedy Advances


Nathan Zuber, Rabbi, 84
LEAD: Rabbi Nathan Zuber, a Talmudic scholar and the spiritual leader of Beth David Synagogue in Roselle, N.J., for several decades, died of heart failure Saturday at Elizabeth (N.J.) General Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Roselle.


NEWMONT GOLD CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWMONT GOLD CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
72,559,000
51,534,000
Net inc
23,863,000
14,255,000
Share earns
.32
.14
Shares outst
104,875,000
99,500,000
Yr sales
265,479,000
174,502,000
Net inc
85,833,000
40,598,000
Share earns
.83
.42
Shares outst
103,531,000
97,000,000


NATIONAL BANC OF COMMERCE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL BANC OF COMMERCE
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,051,000
910,000
Per share
.43
.41
Yr net inc
4,065,000
3,686,000
Per share
1.66
1.81
The prior year per share figures are restated to reflect the acquisition of Chemical Bank of South Charleston in January 1987.


Coe Prepares
LEAD: Sebastian Coe, the only man to win the 1,500-meter run two times in the Olympic Games (in 1980 and in 1984), has a third consecutive triumph in that event as his goal as he begins preparation for the Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea.
The 31-year-old Briton has not run competitively since last May because of problems with an Achilles' tendon.


Nicotine Gum a Boon That the Experts Say Should Be Used More
LEAD: More than four years after it was approved by the Food and Drug Administration for sale as a prescription drug, nicotine gum's effectiveness in helping people quit smoking has been well established in clinical trials.


ROLLINS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROLLINS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
81,052,715
75,933,054
Net inc
3,159,317
2,608,293
Share earns
.14
.11
6mo rev
174,958,776
157,708,606
Net inc
8,918,330
6,700,610
Share earns
.38
.29


SHELL OIL COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHELL OIL COMPANY
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,145,000,000
4,515,000,000
Net inc
436,000,000
254,000,000
Yr rev
22,373,000,000
18,222,000,000
Net inc
1,230,000,000
883,000,000


FRANKLIN RESOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRANKLIN RESOURCES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
49,200,000
49,300,000
Net inc
16,000,000
13,300,000
Share earns
.60
.50


ALLIED BANKSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIED BANKSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
914,000
503,000
Per share
.22
.15
Yr net inc
4,011,000
2,743,000
Per share
1.01
.83


Washington Talk: Briefing; Pinch-Hitter for Trump
LEAD: Donald J. Trump turned them down, and the Democrats have found a less controversial host for their gala fund-raising dinner in Washington on March 16: former House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.
Mr.
Trump, a Republican who has made contributions to Democratic candidates, rejected efforts last year by House Speaker Jim Wright to persuade him to accept the invitation.


DELMARVA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELMARVA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
165,126,000
133,737,000
Net inc
7,444,000
14,383,000
Share earns
.13
.28
Yr rev
712,479,000
714,863,000
Net inc
82,145,000
96,123,000
Share earns
1.65
1.94


COMMUNITY SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMUNITY SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,411,000
b1,364,000
Per share
.31
.30
Yr net inc
4,864,000
b4,233,000
Per share
1.07
-
b-Included $1,649,000 of extraordinary credits.
The per share earnings for the 1986 year because the company was not public for the entire year.


Frenetic Pace in 'Serious Money'
LEAD: When ''Serious Money'' opened downtown at the Public Theater in December, its British cast had had months of practice in working up the play's frenetic speed, quick changes and complex logistics.
With each actor playing multiple characters, most of the rapid-fire dialogue overlapping, and the play's subject the complicated antics of the world's financial markets, ''Serious


PRESIDENT PRESSES CONTRA AID PLAN
LEAD: President Reagan began an intensive Administration lobbying effort today to win more than $36.25 million in aid for the Nicaraguan rebels.
But he provoked some lawmakers by apparently rejecting suggestions that Congress play a role in deciding whether to release $3.6 million in military aid that would be held in escrow.


Topics of The Times; Colombia Fights Back
LEAD: The powerful drug mafia that profits from Colombia's huge cocaine trade declared war on the nation's Government Monday when it gunned down Attorney General Carlos Hoyos.
A day later, President Virgilio Barco picked up the gauntlet.
Challenging guerrillas as well as drug lords, he sent troops into the streets, created new police and judicial positions and closed legal loopholes.


NALCO CHEMICAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NALCO CHEMICAL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
230,689,000
189,039,000
Net inc
22,046,000
16,090,000
Share earns
.56
.41
Yr sales
841,876,000
736,074,000
Net inc
80,254,000
63,672,000
Share earns
2.03
1.62


Washington Talk: Working Profile; Don Wilson; Keeper of Vast Archives Is a Believer in Brevity
LEAD: When Don Wilson was a freshman in graduate school, the future historian and archivist was stunned to receive a D-plus on his first midterm examination in European history.
He had earned straight A's in his undergraduate studies and had filled two blue books answering the questions in the examination.


Jackson to Pass the Plate at Churches Sunday
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson plans to collect contributions for his Presidential campaign on Sunday from churchgoers around the country, an idea that has aroused concern that it might violate Federal tax law.


SANDWICH CHEF INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANDWICH CHEF INC
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
7,761,818
7,366,172
Net loss
b74,478
873,536
6mo sales
15,637,042
14,860,681
Net inc
b2,333
c815,459
b-Includes a $1.3 million pretax provision for estimated losses on the disposal of assets up for sale.


Notes on the Soviet Union; Once More Unto the Breach! Ink-Stained Warriors Rush the Citadel Anew
LEAD: Sometimes it seems there is a collective instinct here that tells the unorthodox economists, the muckraking journalists, the anti-Stalinist writers and other warriors of glasnost when it is time to gather for another storming of the barricades.
Now is such a time.


ENDING PARTY, WORKERS HELP THE NEEDIEST Ending Party, Worker Help The Neediest  Recorded yesterday... $10,326.00  Previously recorded... $3,351,672.98  Total... 3,361,998.98
LEAD: For the third year, Jerry Fields Associates of Manhattan sent a contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund instead of spending the money on an office party.


MORGAN PRODUCTS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORGAN PRODUCTS LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
94,745,000
100,772,000
Net inc
4,182,000
2,520,000
Share earns
.50
.32
Yr sales
417,167,000
383,735,000
Net inc
16,194,000
10,076,000
Share earns
2.00
1.30





An Opening for Democracy in Panama
LEAD: Chances grow for Panama to be rid of its corrupt strongman and move toward democracy, without much more pain.
The Reagan Administration rightly seems to understand that the present military Government undermines rather than underpins Panama's stability.
Even Gen.
Manuel Noriega, the Panamanian dictator, seemed a few weeks ago to realize that he had to go.


Soviet Scraps a New Atomic Plant In Face of Protest Over Chernobyl
LEAD: The Soviet authorities have abandoned construction of a nuclear power plant near the Black Sea in the face of public opposition generated by the 1986 accident at the Chernobyl atomic power station, a Soviet newspaper reported today.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Municipal Assistance Corporation yesterday offered nearly $134.5 million of refunding bonds, with yields ranging from 6.75 percent in 1998 to 7 5/8 percent in 2008, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


LOUISIANA-PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOUISIANA-PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
478,100,000
382,200,000
Net inc
31,300,000
16,800,000
Share earns
.82
.44
Yr sales
1,921,600,000
1,506,200,000
Net inc
125,000,000
64,900,000
Share earns
3.27
1.71


Lower Demand for Copper Pushes Contracts Below $1
LEAD: The price for March delivery of copper settled below $1 a pound yesterday for the first time in nearly two months, as the commodities market continued to reflect slackening demand for the metal.


MANITOWOC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANITOWOC CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
36,700,000
46,800,000
Net inc
2,200,000
b2,800,000
Share earns
.20
-
6mo rev
80,800,000
110,700,000
Net inc
4,100,000
c1,900,000
Share earns
.37
.17


Corrections
LEAD: The ''Paradise Valley Journal'' article yesterday, about a device that measures highway speed and photographs violators, misidentified the headquarters community of Traffic Monitoring Technologies, which holds American rights to the device.
It is in Friendswood, Tex.


Quilts: New Esthetic, New Craftsmen, New Collectors
LEAD: SINCE the early days of the Republic the American spirit has served as a powerful tonic for the age-old craft of quilting.
Here more than anywhere else in the world quilting has flourished, inspired by homespun innovation.
Today that innovation is propelling quilt making into new territory.Contemporary quilt makers are transforming the craft.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.48
6.78
6.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.81
5.47
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.08
6.20
5.43
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.15
8.34
6.93
30-YR.


BROOKLYN UNION GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROOKLYN UNION GAS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
268,895,000
279,608,000
Net inc
25,799,000
25,771,000
Share earns
1.08
1.11
Shares outst
22,835,000
22,124,000


Corrections
LEAD: The Home Improvement column in The Home Section last Thursday misidentified a substance used in patching wallboard.
The substance - less effective than joint compound for the perimeter of a large patch - is not putty but spackling putty.


Bush Says He Lacked Details of Arms-for-Hostages Plan at Critical Meeting in Israel
LEAD: Vice President Bush said today that at a critical meeting in Israel before the American decision was made to sell arms to Iran, he did not have enough information to realize he was discussing a swap of arms for hostages.


M. David Henkle, Lawyer, 79
LEAD: M. David Henkle, a lawyer and former assistant vice president of Prentice-Hall Inc., the publishing company, died Tuesday at his home in Teaneck, N.J.
He was 79 years old.


F.B.I. PAPERS SHOW WIDE SURVEILLANCE OF REAGAN CRITICS
LEAD: Documents made public today show that the Federal Bureau of Investigation conducted extensive surveillance of hundreds of American citizens and groups opposed to the Reagan Administration's policies in Central America.


Music: 'Schubertiad' Begins Its 10-Year Run
LEAD: IN the dear, dead days beyond recall, we are told, families used to gather on winter evenings with the intention of reading the Bible from start to finish, each member taking a turn at a chapter or two.
There was something of the same devotional attitude - as well as an endearingly loony optimism - in the ''Schubertiade'' project that got under way on Tuesday evening at the 92d Street Y.


Security Pacific To Sell Mortgages
LEAD: Security Pacific National Bank filed a registration statement yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission for the sale of up to $1 billion of mortgage-backed securities.


CABOT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CABOT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
386,745,000
346,650,000
Net inc
b15,400,000
18,808,000
Share earns
.57
.67
b-After a charge of $816,000 from refinancing of long-term debt.


Nabisco Ending Sponsorship in '90
LEAD: Nabisco Brands Inc. announced yesterday that it would continue sponsoring the men's Grand Prix tennis circuit for the next two years, but would phase out sponsorship in 1990.


Global Flu Risk Seen in Asia Fish Farms
LEAD: The growth of fish farming in Asia may increase the risk of worldwide epidemics of influenza, two scientists suggest in the journal Nature.


Net Rises 8.2% At Dow Jones
LEAD: Despite a decline in advertising linage at The Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones &amp; Company said yesterday that its net income in the fourth quarter rose 8.2 percent, to $50.3 million, or 52 cents a share, from $46.5 million, or 48 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenues climbed to $417.2 million from $311.99 million.


More Fund Fees Tied To Results, Not Assets
LEAD: After paying out hundreds of millions of dollars a year to money mangers whose results have been mediocre on average, corporate pension fund executives are turning the tables.


TRANSTECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSTECHNOLOGY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
53,253,000
54,742,000
Net inc
3,255,000
3,470,000
Share earns
.62
.75
9mo rev
143,314,000
146,232,000
Net inc
7,262,000
6,036,000
Share earns
1.36
1.31


Snuff Merger Hits Snag
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission said today that it would ask a court to bar the American Maize-Products Company temporarily from going ahead with its planned $36.5 million acquisition of the dry snuff assets of the United States Tobacco Company.
The F.T.C. said the merger ''could substantially reduce competition.


STEEL TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STEEL TECHNOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
19,704,000
16,536,000
Net inc
1,152,000
866,000
Share earns
.25
.18


PRICOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRICOR INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,954,658
1,281,925
Net loss
359,523
552,573
9mo rev
6,570,490
2,100,932
Net loss
1,037,923
1,149,773


MOUNTAIN CLIMBING ON SKIS
LEAD: BECAUSE it's there has always been an acceptable reason to climb a mountain, as it was for Tony Goodwin when he conquered Mount Greylock on cross-country skis in the early 1970's.


HEALTH: PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: You may be quietly watching the weather report on television when suddenly you see double.
But before the forecast is finished, your normal vision has returned.


Yields Are A Bit Lower
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were mostly down for the week ended yesterday, as evidence pointing toward slower economic growth and lower interest rates in the coming months continued to mount.


High-Tech Exports Case
LEAD: French officials said today that five entrepreneurs from southern France had been charged with espionage for illegally selling sophisticated communications equipment to the Soviet Union.


NEWMONT MINING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWMONT MINING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
143,466,000
114,348,000
Net inc
b4,961,000
c42,423,000
Share earns
.07
-
Yr sales
514,044,000
380,781,000
Net inc
b341,848,000
d74,219,000
Share earns
5.32
1.22


Rates Fall To Lowest Since July
LEAD: Bond prices rose sharply yesterday and interest rates fell to their lowest level since July as signs accumulated that the economy is heading for a period of much slower growth.


Changes Seen At I.B.M.
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation will announce major organizational changes today, people in the computer industry said.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about Secretary of State George P. Shultz's plans to meet with two Palestinians misidentified a speaker for an event to be held on Saturday at Congregation B'nai Jeshurun in Manhattan.
Along with Mordechai Bar-On, a leftist member of the Israeli Parliament, the scheduled speaker is Tahseen Basheer, a former Egyptian Ambassador to Canada.


VERMONT FINANCIAL SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERMONT FINANCIAL SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,037,000
1,288,000
Per share
.72
.53
Yr net inc
6,438,000
5,053,000
Per share
2.30
2.21


In San Antonio, Home Restoration Is Everyone's Business
LEAD: BARBARA HUNTER, all but bursting with civic pride, is giving an unofficial tour of restored homes in this historic town.
It is an account she recites often in her role as spokeswoman for the San Antonio Conservation Society.
But this time it is interrupted, briefly.


German Finance Official to Visit U.S.
LEAD: With the dollar stable and their disputes of last fall apparently settled for now, Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d and the West German Finance Minister, Gerhard Stoltenberg, will meet here next week to discuss trade, third-world debt and closer international coordination of economic policies.


New President at Bell
LEAD: W. Marshall May, 57 years old, has become president of Bell &amp; Partners, a four-year-old marketing services and sales promotion firm.
He started in the business with Batten, Barton, Durstine &amp; Osborn in 1960, but soon moved away from the general agency business.
He had his own company, Merchandising and Promotion Associates, which he sold to Comart-Aniforms Associates.


Super Bowl Notebook; Nattiel Will Start In Place of Johnson
LEAD: Coach Dan Reeves of the Denver Broncos decided today that Ricky Nattiel, rather than the ailing Vance Johnson, would start at wide receiver in Super Bowl XXII on Sunday against the Washington Redskins.
Reeves left no doubt that Johnson would play.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: THE things that children find funny tell us a great deal about their level of development and what is on their minds.
There is a connection between the 2-year-old who bursts into a fit of giggles upon hearing the nonbursts into a fit of giggles upon hearing the nonsense phrase ''bottle, battle, bittle'' and the young adolescent who laughs at the ''naughtiness'' of a joke about sex.


Chief Acts to Expand At North Side Savings
LEAD: Thomas M. O'Brien, president and chief executive of the North Side Savings Bank, a relatively small institution in the Bronx, did something that none of his predecessors did: he went out and acquired another bank.


SCHULT HOMES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCHULT HOMES CORP
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
27,140,000
29,496,000
Net loss
b1,894,000
c342,000
Share earns
-
.14
6mo sales
57,964,000
57,587,000
Net loss
b1,662,000
c616,000
Share earns
-
.25


ONE VALLEY BANCORP-W. VA.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONE VALLEY BANCORP-W. VA.
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,268,000
2,991,000
Per share
.54
.50
Yr net inc
13,507,000
12,432,000
Per share
2.25
2.09
The per share earnings reflect a 50 percent stock dividend paid in November.


Nutrasweet Reports Fat Substitute
LEAD: The Nutrasweet Company, which makes the artificial sweetener aspartame, announced yesterday, as expected, that it had developed a low-calorie, cholesterol-free substitute for fat that is derived from proteins in such sources as milk and egg whites.


PRUDENTIAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRUDENTIAL BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
797,869
b684,342
Per share
.76
.66
Yr net inc
2,875,139
b2,235,929
Per share
2.76
2.16
b-After an extraordinary expense of $159,571 for the quarter and year from prepayment penalties on borrowings.


RCM TECHNOLOGIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RCM TECHNOLOGIES INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,895,214
3,806,513
Net inc
86,348
b76,903
Share earns
.01
-
Yr rev
17,188,417
17,259,203
Net inc
91,774
b139,684
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Clarinet: Hakan Rosengren
LEAD: HAKAN ROSENGREN, a first-rate Swedish clarinetist who recently won the Concert Artist Guild's international competition, was presented in his prize recital Tuesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.


HOWARD BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOWARD BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,688,189
1,339,585
Per share
.81
.64
Yr net inc
6,091,469
5,373,902
Per share
2.91
2.62
The per share earnings restated to reflect 4 percent stock dividend paid in October.


CHESAPEAKE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHESAPEAKE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
165,791,000
149,853,000
Net inc
b15,151,000
7,069,000
Share earns
.74
.35
Yr sales
675,713,000
599,770,000
Net inc
c30,153,000
13,738,000
Share earns
1.47
.68


SEALRIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEALRIGHT CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
36,100,000
27,500,000
Net inc
1,500,000
1,600,000
Share earns
.21
.22
Yr sales
157,900,000
121,400,000
Net inc
11,200,000
6,500,000
Share earns
1.52
.91


German Abducted in Beirut As Bonn Tries Conciliation
LEAD: A day after a Government official acknowledged that the threat to West German hostages in Lebanon had influenced Bonn's decision not to extradite a hijacking suspect sought by Washington, another German was reportedly seized today.


BAXTER TRAVENOL LABORATOIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAXTER TRAVENOL LABORATOIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,647,000,000
1,481,000,000
Net inc
b98,000,000
c61,000,000
Share earns
.34
.20
Shares outst
240,000,000
236,000,000
Yr sales
6,223,000,000
5,700,000,000
Net inc
b331,000,000
d455,000,000
Share earns
1.14
1.61
Shares outst
238,000,000
268,000,000


People
LEAD: *
Stanley H. Katz, Charles Taney, Laurel Cutler, Paul Lucy, Jon Adams, Robert T. Hirsch, Edward S. Littleford and Joseph W. Ostrow have been appointed to the newly formed board of FCB/Leber Katz Partners, of which Mr.
Katz is chairman.


MDU RESOURCES GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MDU RESOURCES GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
86,462,000
97,417,000
Net inc
9,521,000
10,372,000
Share earns
.50
.53
Yr rev
325,546,000
363,515,000
Net inc
27,895,000
37,883,000
Share earns
1.46
1.90


Surprise Bid for American Standard
LEAD: The stock of American Standard Inc. advanced nearly $21 a share yesterday in heavy trading, closing at $58.875, after the Black &amp; Decker Corporation made a surprise $56-a-share tender offer for the big producer of plumbing fixtures, air-conditioning units and transportation products.


Procter &amp; Gamble Profit
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the giant consumer products concern, yesterday reported a 37 percent increase in its second-quarter profit.
The company attributed the rise in large part to lowered tax rates.
Procter &amp; Gamble said that its earnings for the three months ended Dec. 31 totaled $261 million, or $1.52 a share, up from $190 million, or $1.11 a share, in the period a year ago.


STRYKER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STRYKER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,975,000
2,378,000
Share earns
.19
.15
Yr net inc
12,725,000
10,113,000
Share earns
.82
.66


NORTHERN STATES POWER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHERN STATES POWER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
428,900,000
421,100,000
Net inc
28,800,000
40,300,000
Share earns
.39
.59
Yr rev
1,177,000,000
1,781,600,000
Net inc
204,900,000
193,300,000
Share earns
3.01
3.09


Fed Proposal on Capital
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board asked the banking community today to comment on a proposal to tie the required levels of a bank's capital to the riskiness of its assets.


Attack Puts Quiet Hudson Area in Civil-Rights Fight
LEAD: Tawana Brawley sat at the table, hunched over a bowl of cold cereal and a stack of letters.
Her mother, Glenda, answered phone calls from ministers, reporters and the curious concerning the reported attack on her daughter here two months ago.


At Disney, Playful Architecture Is Very Serious Business
LEAD: WHETHER to put statues of Dumbo in the atrium, Pluto in the pediments and Grumpy, Sleepy, Sneezy, Doc and Dopey along trellised colonnades: those were the questions that faced Walt Disney executives and the architect Michael Graves in the design of a new convention kingdom being unveiled today at the Epcot Center in Orlando,


Woman Held in Attack On Patient in Hospital
LEAD: A 40-year-old Manhattan woman was arrested at Beth Israel Hospital yesterday after a nurse caught her trying to cut a pneumonia patient's breathing tube, the police said.


Mab Moltke Dies at 78; Ex-Publicity Executive
LEAD: Mab Wilson Moltke, a former advertising and publicity executive in New York, died Jan. 1 at her home in Blackrock, County Dublin, after a long illness.
She was 78 years old and had moved to Ireland in 1970.


Battling Obscurity, Babbitt Leads With Chin
LEAD: When Bruce Babbitt got off a plane at La Guardia Airport in New York the other day, tired and hoarse from campaigning in Iowa and New Hampshire, he looked around for the driver who was taking him to his next appearance.


Texaco Increases Estimate Of 1987 Loss to $4.9 Billion
LEAD: Texaco Inc. said today that it would report a loss of more than $4.9 billion for 1987 as a result of its restructuring and the settlement of its legal dispute with the Pennzoil Company.


DEFENDANT GUILTY IN BOMB SMUGGLING
LEAD: One of three Lebanese-born Canadian citizens accused of smuggling a bomb into the United States has pleaded guilty in Federal District Court here to two charges in connection with the incident.


SUNCOAST SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNCOAST SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
287,146
232,247
Per share
.15
.18
6mo net inc
520,311
335,590
Per share
.30
.26
Shares outst
1,740,000
1,295,000


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, JANUARY 28, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Engineer to Get Award For Warning on Shuttle
LEAD: An engineer who warned that it was dangerous to launch the space shuttle Challenger in cold weather only hours before the craft exploded has been named a winner of the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award from the American Association for the Advancement of Science.


The Real Target
LEAD: Opponents of the treaty eliminating shorter- and medium-range nuclear missiles really have a more important target in mind - the pact being negotiated by Moscow and the Reagan Administration to reduce superpower nuclear arsenals by 50 percent across the board.


Old-Style Roses Are Tough as Well as Sweet
LEAD: SINCE the first hybrid tea roses were bred early in this century, they have loomed ever larger in the consciousness of the American gardener as well as in the commercial horticultural economy.
They appear early every spring in huge numbers at almost every neighborhood garden center, as familiar a sight as bales of peat moss or bags of fertilizer.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Bid for Singer Extended
LEAD: The investor Paul A. Bilzerian has extended his $50-a-share offer for the Singer Company until next Monday amid talks with Singer's banks about the company's credit status after the $1.06 billion proposed takeover.
He also said Tuesday that almost 15.7 million of the 21.1 million shares had been tendered.


Ballcarriers Are Playing Modest Role
LEAD: The position has produced some of the most memorable moments in 21 years of super Sundays.
The power of Franco Harris.
The force of Larry Csonka.
The relentlessness of John Riggins.
The suddenness of Marcus Allen.
The adventures of William Perry.





Regret, No Rancor as Carpenter Departs
LEAD: A day after his dismissal as coach of the Devils, Doug Carpenter said it was inevitable that he would be blamed for the team's recent slide, but added that the team was on the right road.


New York's Home Health-Care System Facing a Labor Crisis
LEAD: New York's home health-care system, because of low pay and difficult working conditions, is having problems attracting and keeping workers, according to health and labor experts and officials of agencies that provide the care.


Senate Panel Approves Judge Kennedy
LEAD: The Senate Judiciary Committee voted unanimously today to recommend confirmation of Judge Anthony M. Kennedy to the Supreme Court.
The vote by the full Senate is likely to come next week, enabling Judge Kennedy to take his seat well in advance of the Court's return from its recess on Feb. 22.


Currents; 'Swaying' Palm Trees Need No Breezes
LEAD: THE sheet-metal palm trees that seem to lean with the wind at the Pink Cadillac Cafe in Los Angeles are witty and useful, too.


W. Hawkins Ferry, Patron of Arts And Architecture Historian,
LEAD: W. Hawkins Ferry, an architectural historian and a well-known collector and patron of 20th-century art, died of cardiac arrest yesterday at his home in Grosse Pointe Shores, a suburb of Detroit.
He was 74 years old, and had for some time suffered from a neurological disorder.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Avery Inc., New Brunswick, N.J., said its board had agreed to sell the company's Uniroyal Chemical subsidiary.


Syracuse Triumphs With Late Spurt
LEAD: The Syracuse Orangemen mastered tonight what might be their biggest problem.
In last season's national championship final, they shot poorly from the free-throw line and lost to Indiana.
They shot 50.7 percent from the line during their first six Big East Conference games this season, and lost three.


It's Lights, Camera, Recess for Crew At Studio in Ozone Park Junior High
LEAD: Since completing her solo, around-the-world voyage Nov. 7, Tania Aebi has appeared on television about 15 times, the usual network news and talk programs -''ABC News Night Line,'' David Letterman, etc., - and at stations in Washington, Philadelphia, Seattle, Toronto and elsewhere.


Cabinetry Worth Fixing
LEAD: WHAT do you do if the gooseneck ornament of your English clock snaps off during a move?
Or if a piece of inlay disappears from your game table?
Perhaps you want to remove those cherubs from the Victorian headboard you inherited.


NORFOLK SOUTHERN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORFOLK SOUTHERN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,059,700,000
1,009,500,000
Net inc
173,700,000
144,200,000
Share earns
.92
.72
Yr rev
4,112,800,000
4,076,400,000
Net inc
b172,400,000
518,700,000
Share earns
.91
2.74


Washington Talk: Briefing; Acting Acting Director
LEAD: James L. Blum is now the highest ranking official of the Congressional Budget Office and he views management there with a little self-deprecation. ''We are sort of withering away at the top,'' said Mr.
Blum.





30-Year Bonds Yield 9.42% At Financing Corporation
LEAD: The Financing Corporation yesterday offered $650 million of 9.40 percent 30-year bonds at a price of 99.24, to yield 9.42 percent.


Topics of The Times; Renovated Rhythms
LEAD: Gentrification means new sights: gleaming restaurants, cookie stores, video shops and repaved sidewalks.
But there's more than meets the eye to the changes that turn neglected neighborhoods into fashionable places to live.
Some are heard, not seen.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly


Carlos Rangel, Author, Dies in Venezuela at 58
LEAD: Carlos Rangel, an author and journalist and one of Latin America's most articulate conservative intellectuals, has died at age 58.


Savings Unit Posts Big loss
LEAD: The Financial Corporation of America, the parent of the nation's largest savings and loan institution, said today that it had lost $224.6 million in the fourth quarter after adding $235.5 million to its reserves for bad loans.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Old Idea Flies Again
LEAD: It was evident enough in the State of the Union Message that at the White House, these are times for reheating old ideas, and the Council of Economic Advisers will soon join in with a ringing defense of airline deregulation.


Music: Neikrug Concerto By Cleveland Orchestra
LEAD: THE Cleveland Orchestra opened a six-concert series in the New York area Tuesday night at Carnegie Hall (four of the concerts will be there, tonight's will be at Avery Fisher Hall, and the sixth at C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University, in Greenvale).
There were only two pieces on this first program, a blockbuster preceded by a shorter New York premiere.


The Art in Ordinary African Objects
LEAD: ''Suppose you had a slightly mad and creative gas station attendant,'' Susan Vogel said the other day. ''Now suppose he had a huge pile of spare tires, and he said, 'I could make something with those,' and he threw them into a big pile.
Is it a work of art?
If the same pile of tires is shown in front of the Whitney Museum, does it then become art?


Daily Aspirin and Strokes
LEAD: Aspirin appears to decrease the risk of one kind of stroke but may increase the risk of another, a finding that troubles experts.


Principals' Accord to Extend Probation Period to 5 Years
LEAD: The Board of Education and the principals' union announced a tentative three-year contract yesterday that extends the probationary period for all school supervisors, to five years from three.


RYLAND GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RYLAND GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
201,214,000
186,541,000
Net inc
b4,834,000
7,259,000
Share earns
.37
.56
Yr rev
847,932,000
666,205,000
Net inc
b31,169,000
26,051,000
Share earns
2.46
2.02


Rangers Acquire Nilan
LEAD: The Rangers, who have been bringing up the rear of the Patrick Division pack, will be packing some extra offensive punch when they travel to Philadelphia to take on the front-running Flyers tonight.
In a deal with Montreal announced last night, the Rangers acquired Chris Nilan, a right wing who has scored 7 goals and 5 assists in 50 games with the Canadiens this season.


ARMTEK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMTEK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
311,279,000
257,276,000
Net inc
5,812,000
4,002,000
Share earns
.59
.41
The year-ago first quarter results include operations of businesses acquired from Dayco Corp.


Ex-Bakery Art Center In Florida
LEAD: Twin silos are still attached to the former bakery, but now it is an unusual arts complex coated in bold coral and thriving north of downtown Miami in an area to be redeveloped.


Sale by United Technologies
LEAD: The United Technologies Corporation has reached a definitive agreement to sell domestic operations of its Essex Group Inc. to investors who include members of Essex management and a leveraged equity fund operated by the Morgan Stanley Group Inc., the companies announced today.


Kentucky Routed by Vanderbilt, 83-66
LEAD: Scott Draud scored 22 points, 18 on 3-point goals, to lead Vanderbilt to an 83-66 Southeastern Conference upset victory over Kentucky tonight.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.My split-level apartment is on the top floor.
Some minor roof leaks left little water spots here and there, but in January dark spots appeared over every nail in the ceiling and deep down in each wall.
Since it is unlikely there is a major leak from one ceiling to another one at a different level, what could cause these dark spots and what steps must be taken before repainting?


PLAYBOY ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLAYBOY ENTERPRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
45,283,000
41,815,000
Net inc
b3,293,000
c2,381,000
Share earns
.36
.25
6mo sales
84,057,000
82,137,000
Net sales
b5,033,000
c2,930,000
Share earns
.54
.31


IPALCO ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IPALCO ENTERPRISES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
136,729,000
133,603,000
Net inc
16,267,000
64,561,000
Share earns
.43
1.72
Yr rev
553,749,000
512,446,000
Net inc
89,335,000
122,723,000
Share earns
2.38
3.27


HIBERNIA SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HIBERNIA SAVINGS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
259,499
577,895
Per share
.32
.72
Yr net inc
1,281,595
1,063,125
Per share
1.60
-
the company went public Sept. 5, 1986.


TENEMENT DEMOLITION PLAN ENDED
LEAD: The Koch administration has temporarily shelved its plan to demolish a historic, but derelict, apartment house in Brooklyn.
Instead, it has offered what amounts to a challenge grant to encourage preservation of the city-owned building.


INGERSOLL-RAND CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INGERSOLL-RAND CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
743,100,000
768,400,000
Net inc
43,600,000
c34,400,000
Share earns
.82
.66
Yr sales
2,647,900,000
2,799,500,000
Net inc
b117,700,000
c94,000,000
Share earns
2.17
1.79


Budget Deficit Jumps by 25%
LEAD: The Federal Government ran up a $23.9 billion budget deficit in December as the amount of red ink in the first three months of the 1988 fiscal year soared by almost 25 percent above the level last year, the Treasury Department said today.


Radar Detectors Are Beneficial and Protected
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ferdinand Is Voted Horse of The Year
LEAD: Ferdinand, who won the world's richest horse race by the length of his nose last November, won thoroughbred racing's highest honor yesterday by as narrow a margin.


O'SULLIVAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*O'SULLIVAN CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
44,246,000
40,348,000
Net inc
3,567,000
908,000
Share earns
.34
.09
Yr sales
179,702,000
164,492,000
Net inc
12,150,000
9,080,000
Share earns
1.15
.86


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


ALLTEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLTEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
148,113,000
141,185,000
Net inc
b34,542,000
c3,570,000
Share earns
1.03
-
Yr rev
576,156,000
545,545,000
Net inc
104,352,000
55,764,000
Share earns
3.07
1.63


SQUIBB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SQUIBB CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
592,600,000
513,300,000
Net inc
84,600,000
b189,700,000
Share earns
.81
1.77
Yr sales
2,156,500,000
1,784,600,000
Net inc
358,400,000
b396,300,000
Share earns
3.42
3.68


Rock Stars of West Plan Anti-Drug Soviet Tour
LEAD: Several Western rock stars, including David Bowie, George Harrison and Julian Lennon, have said they are to take part in a series of concerts in Moscow to campaign against drug abuse, the Moscow Communist youth daily, Moskovsky Komsomolets, reported.


Bridge: An Australian Tournament To Be a Bicentennial Event
LEAD: Bridge is not being overlooked in the wide-ranging activities Australians are undertaking during their bicentennial year.


SILICON VALLEY GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILICON VALLEY GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
13,142,000
7,383,000
Net inc
1,526,000
737,000
Share earns
.15
.08


EXCEL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXCEL BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,148,060
b3,498,184
Per share
.31
.50
Yr net inc
10,923,349
b9,880,517
Per share
1.55
-
b-After a dividend of $814,000 for the quarter and year from Massachusetts Mutual Savings Central Fund.


Marriage Of Fashion And Art by Saint Laurent
LEAD: Clothes that will stun the crowds in museum exhibitions in the future were paraded by Yves Saint Laurent's models today.
In a dazzling collection paying homage to the Cubists, the designer mixed art and fashion in a way that celebrated both fields.


PHOTO CONTROL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHOTO CONTROL CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,753,214
3,235,681
Net inc
83,520
b41,581
Share earns
.06
-
6mo sales
7,115,302
6,636,344
Net inc
116,516
125,250
Share earns
.08
.09
b-Net loss


GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,402,700,000
2,378,000,000
Net inc
95,300,000
b326,100,000
Share earns
2.27
-
Yr sales
9,344,000,000
8,892,000,000
Net inc
437,300,000
b52,500,000
Share earns
10.26
-


Kemper Switches Shop
LEAD: Bayer Bess Vanderwarker &amp; Flynn of Chicago has become agency for the property and casualty insurance companies of the Kemper Corporation in Long Grove, Ill.
The agency puts the budget between $4 million and $5 million.
The account had been with J. Walter Thompson, Chicago, for 15 years.


PHILIP MORRIS COS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILIP MORRIS COS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,064,000,000
6,553,000,000
Net inc
478,000,000
371,000,000
Share earns
2.02
1.56
Shares outst
237,000,000
238,000,000
Yr rev
27,695,000,000
25,409,000,000
Net inc
1,842,000,000
1,478,000,000
Share earns
7.75
6.20
Shares outst
238,000,000
239,000,000


Some Gray Hairs and a Bare Foot
LEAD: HE'S only 27 years old, but atop Ali Haji-Sheikh's stylish black mop, occasional long gray hairs betray his burden.
At a quick glance, the Washington Redskins' kicker appears to have sprouted one for each of the 35 field-goal attempts he has missed in his five seasons.
As he awaits a Super Bowl XXII duel with Rich Karlis, the Denver Broncos' barefooted kicker, the Sheikh has missed five of his last eight attempts.


Restoring Fanciful British Pavilions
LEAD: In 1721, the poet Alexander Pope helped his friend Lord Bathurst design Alfred's Hall, a curious little castle for the garden of Cirencester Park, Bathurst's estate in Cirencester, Gloucestershire.
With ivy-covered turrets and stained-glass windows, it resembled a Gothic ruin and promptly set a fashion for similar fanciful structures in large English gardens.


NOXELL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOXELL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
116,771,000
110,896,000
Net inc
10,431,000
8,951,000
Share earns
.26
.23
Yr rev
493,795,000
442,169,000
Net inc
43,579,000
37,101,000
Share earns
1.08
.93


KEY CENTURION BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEY CENTURION BANCSHARES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,030,000
4,037,000
Per share
.58
.58
Shares outst
8,649,000
6,869,000
Yr net inc
18,050,000
15,810,000
Per share
2.18
2.39
Shares outst
8,649,000
6,869,000


Calendar: Pottery Classes for Youngsters
LEAD:  Children's Crafts


MICROPOLIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICROPOLIS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
80,354,000
51,788,000
Net inc
7,185,000
5,142,000
Share earns
.63
.46
Yr sales
288,256,000
213,135,000
Net inc
27,240,000
18,250,000
Share earns
2.40
1.72
Shares outst
11,335,000
10,585,000


North Stars Score Twice in Final 4:26
LEAD: Herb Brooks, the Minnesota coach, hadn't expected to have anything to beam about after this game.
For the longest time, his players trailed the Islanders by a 1-0 margin, but then, with half of the final period elapsed, it was the North Stars who skated dangerously close to the New York goal, tied the game, and then won it in the final second left on the clock.


Steel Output Up in U.S.
LEAD: Steel production in the United States rose to 1.866 million tons in the week ended Saturday, up four-tenths of a percent from 1.859 million tons in the previous week, the American Iron and Steel Institute has reported.
The industry's output amounted to 86.9 percent of capacity for the week, compared with 86.6 percent in the previous week.


Medical Guardians; Aspirin Report Illustrates the Control of New England Journal on Data Flow
LEAD: For weeks the results of a major new study on aspirin's ability to prevent heart disease were known by many scientists, government officials, business leaders and journalists.


WELDS DEFECTIVE IN RUPTURED TANK
LEAD: The Ashland Oil Company tank that ruptured and spilled more than a million gallons of diesel fuel into the Monongahela River contained defective welds that were reported to the company more than a year before, according to documents made available today.


City of Yonkers Votes to Back Housing Order
LEAD: After a raucous five-and-a-half hour meeting in which they were branded liars, wimps and masters of deceit by their former supporters, Yonkers City Council members voted 5 to 2 early this morning to begin building low-income housing in predominantly white neighborhoods.


Talking Deals; Advisers' Conflict In Merger Battles
LEAD: IN the wake of the recent spate of takeover battles, investment bankers, company directors and the courts are grappling with a controversy over loyalty between investment banking firms and their clients.


Bus Kills a Boy in Rockland
LEAD: A boy was killed this morning when he was struck by a school bus in this Rockland County community, the police said.
The boy, identified as Pincus Zisholtz of 11 Yale Drive, believed to be about 4 years old, was struck about 8:30 A.M., the police said.
They said the bus driver, David Ben-Zikry, 30, of Maple Avenue in Monsey.


Games Help Calgary Solve Hard Times
LEAD: The times were heady here, back at the dawn of the decade.
Oil prices were up.
Agricultural markets were strong.
Unemployment was virtually nonexistent.
New glassy buildings were creating a skyline.
So many people were moving here that city leaders were discouraging others from coming.


A Stealth Deal For Northrop
LEAD: The Northrop Corporation said it has been awarded a $2 billion contract for work on the advanced Stealth bomber, an unusual announcement that implied to analysts that full-scale production had begun.


BEMIS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEMIS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
241,658,000
228,852,000
Net inc
10,194,000
8,262,000
Share earns
.75
.60
Yr sales
929,995,000
864,670,000
Net inc
31,965,000
25,631,000
Share earns
2.35
1.85


Mubarak, in U.S., Seeks Peace Efforts
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt was reported today to have appealed to Secretary of State George P. Shultz to step up American peace efforts in the Middle East during this time of clashes between Palestinian Arabs and Israeli troops.


COMMODORE INTERNATIONAL LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMODORE INTERNATIONAL LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b27,700,000
c21,800,000
Share earns
.87
.68
6mo rev
455,600,000
446,800,000
Net inc
b34,000,000
c25,500,000
Share earns
1.07
.80
b-After tax credits of $7 million for the quarter and 6 months.


Reuters USA Account
LEAD: Doyle Graf Mabley has become agency for the Reuters USA Media Group, which sells the British news agency's services to newspapers, broadcasters and magazines.
The billings could go as high as $1 million.
The previous agency was Poppe Tyson.


West German Cancels 'Siegfried' Appearance
LEAD: Peter Hofmann, the West German tenor scheduled to sing the title role in the Metropolitan Opera's new production of Wagner's ''Siegfried,'' has withdrawn because of a bronchial infection, the company announced yesterday.


Judge Rejects Secord Plea
LEAD: A Federal judge refused today to bar the special Iran-contra prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, from seeking to indict Richard V. Secord while an appeals court decides whether he should be allowed to defend himself before the Iran-contra grand jury.
Judge Aubrey E. Robinson Jr. of United States District Court denied the emergency motion by Mr.


NATIONAL PIZZA CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL PIZZA CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1987
1986
Sales
30,321,000
24,174,000
Net inc
2,143,000
1,620,000
Share earns
.23
.19
Shares outst
9,292,895
8,477,746
9mo sales
89,241,000
69,057,000
Net inc
b6,119,000
5,467,000
Share earns
.70
.65
Shares outst
8,783,103
8,392,105


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Angelica Corp., St.
Louis, a maker of institutional uniforms and career apparel, named Lawrence J. Young president, chief operating officer and a director, succeeding Earl F. Neely, who previously announced he would take an early retirement.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JANUARY 28, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-9


MOBIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOBIL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,662,000,000
12,498,000,000
Net inc
b389,000,000
d203,000,000
Share earns
.95
.50
Yr rev
56,446,000,000
49,865,000,000
Net inc
c1,264,000,000
d1,407,000,000
Share earns
3.08
3.45


SUN ENERGY PARTNERS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUN ENERGY PARTNERS LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
444,000,000
367,000,000
Net inc
b74,000,000
c4,000,000
Share earns
.24
-
Yr rev
1,577,000,000
1,613,000,000
Net inc
b161,000,000
10,000,000
Share earns
.53
.03


MARSH SUPERMARKETS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARSH SUPERMARKETS (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
196,845,000
183,145,000
Net inc
1,888,000
1,459,000
Share earns
.37
.29
9mo sales
642,477,000
594,692,000
Net inc
6,586,000
5,343,000
Share earns
1.29
1.06


What Is Needed to Promote Mideast Peace
LEAD: To the Editor:


Houston Journal; Inescapable Pitches That Ring Up Profits
LEAD: Life here has never quite been quite the same since the fateful evening in early 1983 when Jim McIngvale rented time in a local television studio, pulled a stack of greenbacks from his back pocket and jumped in the air for the camera shouting in a manic, fast-forward voice, ''Gallery Furniture will SAAVE YOUUU MONEY!


HARMAN INTERNATIONAL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARMAN INTERNATIONAL INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
120,275,000
83,366,000
Net inc
3,584,000
2,278,000
Share earns
.42
.31
Shares outst
8,498,276
7,343,760
6mo sales
219,051,000
150,417,000
Net inc
6,118,000
3,973,000
Share earns
.72
.57
Shares outst
8,474,300
6,953,845


ADVERTISING;
LEAD: Paramount Home Video is once again announcing plans to spend $10 million on advertising.
That's good for business, because local video-rental outlets will order more copies if they believe the new issues will receive heavy advertising support.


WISCONSIN ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WISCONSIN ENERGY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
356,421,000
368,378,000
Net inc
39,864,000
36,619,000
Share earns
.60
.55
Yr rev
1,364,570,000
1,411,143,000
Net inc
169,538,000
157,742,000
Share earns
2.55
2.37


COOPER INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COOPER INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,008,800,000
842,500,000
Net inc
56,400,000
47,500,000
Share earns
1.12
.97
Yr rev
3,585,800,000
3,433,300,000
Net inc
173,800,000
147,700,000
Share earns
3.47
3.04


FAMILY MUTUAL SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAMILY MUTUAL SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,415,000
c1,476,000
Per share
.38
-
Yr net inc
5,114,000
4,890,000
Per share
1.37
-
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $533,000 from a joint venture investment.


RIBI IMMUNOCHEM RESEARCH reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RIBI IMMUNOCHEM RESEARCH (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
113,742
112,316
Net loss
597,723
14,880
Yr sales
475,773
474,502
Net loss
1,086,325
b54,596
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


STANDEX INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDEX INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
114,952,000
108,913,000
Net inc
5,067,000
4,691,000
Share earns
.42
.38
6mo sales
217,707,000
206,226,000
Net inc
8,969,000
8,360,000
Share earns
.74
.68


X-Rated Computer Displays
LEAD: The personal computer your child got for Christmas may be more educational than you think.
Animated pictures of nudes, sex-related messages and files of dirty jokes are accessible to computers that have modems, devices that enable them to reach other computers by telephone.


Market Place; The Stock Impact Of Aspirin Report
LEAD: THE news announcement yesterday that an aspirin every other day may sharply reduce the risk of heart attacks in men is expected to have a far bigger impact on American consumers than investors.
The aspirin market is dominated by the Bristol-Myers Company, the American Home Products Corporation, and the Sterling Drug


AMERADA HESS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERADA HESS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,274,601,000
923,476,000
Net loss
79,568,000
b78,063,000
Share earns
-
.93
Yr rev
4,784,589,000
4,062,255,000
Net inc
229,860,000
c182,570,000
Share earns
2.73
-


Chef Sues in Attack by Goose
LEAD: A chef who says he was attacked by a goose at the restaurant where he worked is suing the restaurant for $1 million.
Richard Braue, a former chef at the Villa Victor in Syosset, said he was standing by a pond on the restaurant's property in June 1985 when he was charged by a Canada goose.
While trying to avoid the bird, he fell and broke his back, he said.


Azinger's First Defense
LEAD: Paul Azinger, who lost any chance to win the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic last Sunday after taking five putts on one green, will be defending the first championship of his career when the Phoenix Open begins Thursday at the Tournament Players Club of Scottsdale.
Azinger went on to win two more tournaments last year, finished second in the British Open and ended the year No.


Irving Protecting Its Pension Fund
LEAD: The board of directors of the Irving Bank Corporation has moved to make the assets of its employee pension plan invulnerable in the face of a hostile $1.08 million takeover offer by the Bank of New York Company.
Under amendments to the plans approved by Irving's board on Jan. 19, the bank's surplus pension assets ''can only be used to provide for existing medical and life insurance benefits of retirees and employees eligible to retire within five years of the change of control,'' acccording to company documents filed with the Securities and Exchange


Tom J. Maloney, 83; Published Magazines
LEAD: Tom Maloney, retired editor and publisher of U.S.
Camera Annual, died of a heart attack Jan. 18 at his home in Cranbury, N.J.
He was 83 years old.


Steel Shutters In West Bank: New Defiance
LEAD: Hefting their crowbars and their rifles in what is a now a daily ritual, the Israeli soldiers moved from store to store this morning, ordering the owners to open up their steel shutters or, if the owners were not around, breaking the locks.


RUDDICK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RUDDICK CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
257,232,000
234,154,000
Net inc
3,900,000
2,700,000
Share earns
.40
.29


Childhood Regained, on Film
LEAD: ''The movie camera is very close to the eye of a child,'' John Boorman said last week, as the British writer and director of ''Hope and Glory'' was heading off to collect several awards from the Los Angeles Film Critics Association, including one for best picture of the year.
Last Saturday, his gently humorous autobiographical film about a young boy's coming of age during World War II also won a Golden Globe Award.


STRIDE RITE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STRIDE RITE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
86,204,000
67,076,000
Net inc
4,914,000
3,703,000
Share earns
.33
.24
Yr sales
333,733,000
283,457,000
Net inc
24,121,000
17,014,000
Share earns
1.60
1.12


Coast Guard Seeks More Money to Avert Cutbacks
LEAD: The Coast Guard began a campaign yesterday to rally public support behind its effort to fill a $100 million shortage in its 1988 budget, a gap that officials said would ''allow more drugs into this country.''


Sandinistas Feel Sting Of an Unshackled Press
LEAD: The opposition newspaper, La Prensa, has published articles recently saying that Nicaragua is in the midst of a ''wave of repression'' that includes the use of jails ''dreadful enough to recall Treblinka and other Nazi concentration camps.''


Score of 'Phantom': How Good Is It?
LEAD: What is the music of Andrew Lloyd Webber's ''Phantom of the Opera'' worth?
Some composers and performers for whom songfulness is serious business are responding this week.


Rallying Cry: Remember Last Time
LEAD: They are calling it the Deja Vu Super Bowl.


NASA Delays Flight of Shuttle Until August
LEAD: The space agency announced today that it had delayed by two months, until Aug. 4, its target date for launching the next space shuttle.
The delay was caused primarily by problems with the solid-fuel booster rockets, the agency said.


Dollar Is Broadly Lower; G.N.P. Data Called a Factor
LEAD: The dollar declined against nearly all major currencies yesterday, reflecting disappointment in a key Government report on economic growth.


Apartments Planned for the Homeless
LEAD: A partnership of government and education, religion and banking has developed a $7 million plan to create 101 apartment units for homeless young families and the elderly in a handsome old building on the Upper West Side.


U.S. Patient Found With 2d Variety of AIDS Virus
LEAD: For the first time, a patient diagnosed with AIDS while in the United States has been found to be infected with a second variety of AIDS virus that was previously found mainly in West Africa.


Vancouver Symphony, In Debt, Ends Activities
LEAD: The Vancouver Symphony Orchestra, Canada's third largest, suspended operations after Tuesday night's concert because of poor attendance and a debt of nearly $1.5 million.


Clean Up New York With a New Handbill Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


Philip Morris Profits Rise
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings rose 28.8 percent, on a 7.8 percent gain in revenues.


ROSS COSMETICS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROSS COSMETICS
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
3,551,211
2,365,760
Net inc
b208,470
b285,971
Share earns
.07
.13
Shares outst
2,795,879
2,227,564
b-Includes a tax credit of $62,130 for the latest quarter, compared with $145,163 a year ago.


CYPRUS MINERALS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CYPRUS MINERALS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
232,300,000
193,900,000
Net inc
10,100,000
4,100,000
Share earns
.39
.16
Yr rev
797,500,000
810,800,000
Net inc
26,200,000
21,100,000
Share earns
1.02
.81


Many Nursing Homes Are Overlooking Needs Of Younger Patients
LEAD: Amid all the recent concern about conditions in the nation's nursing homes, the problems faced by one group have been overlooked, experts say.
Younger patients, some of them disabled since birth and others cut down suddenly by accident or stroke, make up a small but significant share of the residents of the nation's nursing homes.


WM WRIGLEY JR CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WM WRIGLEY JR CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
184,367,000
165,080,000
Net inc
12,890,000
9,881,000
Share earns
.64
.47
Yr sales
781,059,000
698,982,000
Net inc
70,145,000
53,818,000
Share earns
3.37
2.55


HOME GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
673,700,000
574,100,000
Net inc
b8,000,000
c1,200,000
Share earns
.23
.03
Shares outst
34,300,000
37,200,000
Yr rev
2,500,000,000
2,200,000,000
Net inc
b172,200,000
c178,700,000
Share earns
4.82
4.59
Shares outst
35,700,000
38,300,000


What Is Needed to Promote Mideast Peace; Wrong Target
LEAD: To the Editor:


FIRSTCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRSTCORP INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,686,000
1,956,000
Per share
.50
.61
9mo net inc
5,423,000
5,459,000
Per share
1.70
1.67
The latest third quarter included the results of Durham's First Federal Savings and Loan Association.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  RACHEL AND HER CHILDREN.
Homeless Families in America.
By Jonathan Kozol. 261 pages.
Crown. $16.95.





11 HELD AS RIGHTS PROTEST HALTS LA GUARDIA TRAFFIC
LEAD: Eleven people were arrested at La Guardia Airport and scores of departing passengers were delayed yesterday evening when about 60 people protesting racial injustice in New York City blocked traffic lanes outside a terminal building.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Chase Manhattan Bank to Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver for a special assignment from its Credit Card division.


CENTERIOR ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTERIOR ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
412,971,000
470,247,000
Net inc
61,853,000
92,432,000
Share earns
.44
.70
Yr rev
1,945,541,000
1,917,730,000
Net inc
390,888,000
391,893,000
Share earns
2.82
3.04


United Artists Set To Acquire Daniels
LEAD: United Artists Communications Inc. said it intended to merge with a smaller, rival cable television company, Daniels &amp; Associates Inc.
The deal calls for Daniels' shareholders to receive $108 million in cash and $82 million in convertible preferred stock.
The deal will increase United Artists' subscriber-base by 48 percent, to 1.2 million subscribers in 26 states.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Before Chernobyl, to have a nuclear power plant was profitable - and also prestigious.
In addition to providing self-dependency in energy, a nuclear power plant guaranteed increased attention toward the region, including jobs, housing and social and cultural amenities.
But then the entire world started talking about Chernobyl.


School-Tower Plan in Doubt
LEAD: An unusual combination of politics, public perception, mayoral miscalculation and the legacy of the New York corruption scandals has thrown a proposal for an office tower into the center of a battle.


Home Improvement
LEAD: EVERY building using commercial electric power has a safeguard system of circuit breakers or fuses incorporated into the wiring.
If an overload occurs - when, for instance, too many appliances make too large a power demand - these devices automatically interrupt the current, preventing an electrical fire.


Hovering German Train
LEAD: West Germany said today that it would press commercial development of a train that travels without touching the ground.
The Research and Technology Minister, Heinz Riesenhuber, told reporters that the Transrapid train carried passengers at 255.9 miles an hour in a test last week.
Using electromagnets, it moves along an elevated track while remaining about half an inch above the rails.


AMERICAN TELEPHONE &amp; TELERAPH CO INC (AT&amp;T)(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN TELEPHONE &amp; TELERAPH CO INC (AT&amp;T)(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,602,000,000
8,529,000,000
Net inc
498,000,000
bc1,170,000,000
Share earns
.46
-
Yr rev
33,598,000,000
34,087,000,000
Net inc
2,044,000,000
c139,000,000
Share earns
1.88
.05


U.S. Agents Search For Drugs on QE2
LEAD: Drug-sniffing dogs were taken aboard the luxury liner Queen Elizabeth 2 when it docked here today and hundreds of passengers had to wait in line for hours for their luggage to be searched.


Boxing Awards
LEAD: Mike Tyson, the undisputed heavyweight champion, was named Fighter of the Year by the World Boxing Council at its annual awards luncheon in New York yesterday.
The Marvelous Marvin Hagler-Ray Leonard fight of last April 6 was named Fight of the Year and Leonard was awarded a special trophy for winning his third world title.


Negotiating the Arms Treaty: Verification Issue Proved Thorny
LEAD: On Dec. 6, two days before Mikhail S. Gorbachev and President Reagan were to sign a new missile accord in Washington, American and Soviet negotiators were still arguing in Geneva about a key treaty detail.


REVAMPED REDMEN WIN
LEAD: Just when they thought they had it all figured out, the Villanova Wildcats learned a hard lesson in the art of adjustment.
Three weeks ago, after a 69-62 victory over St.
John's at Alumni Hall, most of the Villanova players agreed that they had caught on to the Redmen's system and knew how to stop it.


Following the Account
LEAD: An interesting aspect of the ad agency business is the way certain people follow accounts from agency to agency.
A most stunning example of that is at the Los Angeles office of Batten, Barton, Durstine &amp; Osborn, whose new president and chief executive, Eugene F. Cameron, 42, followed the Apple Computer account in from Chiat/Day.


FIRST SOURCE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST SOURCE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,400,000
1,600,000
Per share
.65
.44
Yr net inc
8,100,000
7,100,000
Per share
2.12
1.97
b-Includes a gain of $995,000 from the unrealized appreciation of an investment portfolio.


SHERWIN-WILLIAMS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHERWIN-WILLIAMS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
408,358,000
350,488,000
Net inc
b19,574,000
c16,699,000
Share earns
.44
.38
Yr sales
1,792,736,000
1,552,931,000
Net inc
b96,577,000
c86,357,000
Share earns
2.15
1.88


CONSOLIDATED RAIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED RAIL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
840,000,000
793,000,000
Net inc
79,000,000
59,000,000
Share earns
1.15
.85
Yr rev
3,247,000,000
3,144,000,000
Net inc
299,000,000
208,000,000
Share earns
4.34
3.01


ART PEOPLE
LEAD:  Landmark by Acclaim?


TEXAS AMERICAN BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS AMERICAN BANCSHARES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b57,710,000
c9,752,000
Yr net loss
b78,000,000
c115,159,000
b-After provision for loan loss of $56.7 million for the quarter and includes a reserve for loan loss of $150.8 million for the year.


Judge Sets Limits On Child Aid Society
LEAD: The Westchester County Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children has been ordered not to say it is a police agency or a state agency and has been forbidden to lock up suspects.


Margeottes/Fertitta Wins Business Week
LEAD: McGraw-Hill's Business Week magazine has assigned its trade advertising to Margeottes/Fertitta &amp; Weiss.
The account, which has a budget of $2 million, was formerly served by the Edwin Bird Willson agency.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a campaign appearance by Vice President Bush misstated the circumstances of a 1986 meeting he had in Israel.
It was held while the United States was selling arms to Iran, not before the sales began.


Restaurants
LEAD: ''ARE there any New Yorkers in this place?'' asked a fellow diner one evening as we sat in the Crystal Room at Tavern on the Green, Manhattan's gastronomic Xanadu where every day is a holiday and the Christmas lights never come down.


NICOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NICOR INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
427,557,000
505,322,000
Net inc
35,240,000
32,436,000
Share earns
1.16
1.05
Yr rev
1,435,530,000
1,806,921,000
Net inc
83,735,000
b183,146,000
Share earns
2.68
6.01


Art Show at Armory
LEAD: ''Art at the Armory,'' an exhibition of paintings, drawings, prints and sculpture from the late 19th century to the present, will continue through Sunday at the Lexington Avenue Armory, at 25th Street.
More than 50 galleries from the United States, Canada and Europe are to exhibit about 1,500 works, among them paintings by Picasso, Matisse, Renoir, Picasso, Dali and O'Keeffe.


Santa Fe Off $1.75 a Share
LEAD: Shares of the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation fell $1.75, to $45.75, yesterday in the wake of Wednesday's announcement that the company would pay stockholders a dividend of $30 a share, or $4.7 billion.
The payout came a week after the Henley Group, which owns nearly 15 percent of Santa Fe, said it was considering a proxy fight.


Gains at Nynex, BellSouth
LEAD: The Nynex Corporation and the BellSouth Corporation yesterday reported modestly higher earnings for the fourth quarter and the full year.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption in Business Day yesterday about a fat substitute developed by the Nutrasweet Company misidentified Norman S. Singer.
Mr.
Singer is Nutrasweet's director of new product development.
The article also misstated the location of the Monsanto Company, which owns Nutrasweet.
It is in St.


THE LAW: AT THE BAR
LEAD: Lawyers are reluctant to ask judges to recuse themselves - to step down from a given case - and it's easy to understand why.
Such motions are rarely granted, and if one is denied, an attorney can find himself before a judge fuming over the implication that he's anything but even-handed and judicious.


Revised Curbs on East-Bloc Trade
LEAD: The United States and its principal allies reportedly agreed today to tighten controls on the export of high-technology goods to Warsaw Pact members while committing themselves to keep shortening the lists of items banned for sale to Communist nations.


Pentagon Asks No New Weapons In Return for Backing Arms Pact
LEAD: In a departure from their practice with previous arms control treaties, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are not demanding compensation in the form of new weapons as a condition for endorsing the new treaty governing missiles in Europe.


ST. PAUL COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ST. PAUL COMPANIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
844,800,000
842,940,000
Net inc
b62,808,000
c67,146,000
Share earns
1.33
1.43
Yr rev
3,365,785,000
3,181,587,000
Net inc
b356,524,000
c217,114,000
Share earns
7.45
4.75


Older People's Group Forces Out Chief
LEAD: The American Association of Retired Persons, the nation's most influential voice on issues affecting the elderly, has forced the resignation of its new executive director amid disagreement over the philosophy and finances of the organization.


U.S. and Egypt Ask 6-Month Israel-Arab Restraint
LEAD: President Reagan and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt agreed today to press for a six-month cooling-off period between Israel and the Palestinians who live on the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Smoker's Death Turns Eyes to Court
LEAD: In a windowless courtroom in this rural county seat that is so small there is no stoplight, squads of lawyers have spent the last month arguing whether smoking caused Nathan Horton's cancer.


Donor to the Neediest Cases Seeks to Aid Victims of Crime
LEAD: An appeal to aid victims of crime was received recently by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


DONNELLEY, R R &amp; SONS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DONNELLEY, R R &amp; SONS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
773,062,000
679,663,000
Net inc
57,208,000
50,099,000
Share earns
.73
.64
Yr sales
2,482,865,000
2,233,511,000
Net inc
b218,196,000
158,268,000
Share earns
2.80
2.03


DOW CHEMICAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOW CHEMICAL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,597,000,000
2,791,000,000
Net inc
b352,000,000
c168,000,000
Share earns
1.85
.87
Yr sales
13,377,000,000
11,113,000,000
Net inc
b1,240,000,000
c732,000,000
Share earns
6.47
3.82


Japan and Apartheid
LEAD: The Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act of 1986 is getting an especially close look these days from staffers of the House Foreign Affairs Committee and members of the Congressional Black Caucus.


Elizabeth S. Kean, 90, Mother of Governor
LEAD: Elizabeth S. Kean, the mother of Governor Kean, died early today at her home in Livingston.
She was 90 years old and had been ill for a month.


Vatican and the AIDS Fight: Amid Worry, Papal Reticence
LEAD: Pope John Paul II, who has spoken out on many sensitive issues of sexual ethics, has not addressed the campaigns under way in many parts of the world to help prevent the spread of AIDS by promoting ''safe sex'' and specifically the use of condoms.


Allies on Night Shift
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shearson Adds Hutton's Name
LEAD: When the rest of Wall Street was consolidating in the late 1970's, E. F. Hutton had boldly advertised itself as a firm that ''after 74 years still has one name.'' No longer.
Shearson Lehman


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JANUARY 29, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Volvo's Loan Plan
LEAD: Volvo Cars of North America said it would offer buyers 10-year car loans, more than double the period that is customary in the industry.
The company said that a survey had indicated that nearly half of its customers intended to keep their cars for at least 10 years.


Bush-Kemp Alliance Passes First Test in Michigan
LEAD: The new alliance between Vice President Bush and Representative Jack F. Kemp has passed its first test, a 12-hour session to settle credentials challenges for the Republican state convention that begins Friday.


MUSIC: VIOLIN AND CELLO DUO
LEAD: ENTHUSIASM - especially when it is supported by two strong techniques - is hard to resist in any musical format.
Laura Hamilton and Lanny Paykin gave us an unusual one on Wednesday night in Merkin Hall - a violin and cello duo augmented only in Beethoven's String Trio in G. Here Michael Ouzounian, Miss Hamilton's colleague in the Metropolitan Opera


Jackson to Skip Debate Among the Democrats
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson abruptly canceled all campaign appearances for Friday afternoon and Saturday and will skip a South Dakota Democratic debate because he needs some rest, a spokeswoman said today.


Investor Sells Stake
LEAD: A member of the investment group Ivanhoe Partners, which sought control of the Newmont Mining Corporation last fall, has withdrawn from the partnership and sold his stake in the New York-based energy and minerals company.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, John M. Harbert 3d, the owner of the Harbert Corporation of Birmingham, Ala., said he had sold 1.6 million Newmont shares for $34 a share.


NEW-MUSIC OFFERINGS FOR ADVENTUROUS EARS
LEAD: IN previous centuries, audiences expected new music; anything older than a decade or two was considered ''ancient'' or in desperate need of modernization, as with Mozart's reorchestration of Handel's ''Messiah.''


Rangers Triumph With Unusual Ease
LEAD: The Rangers were outstanding tonight as they beat the first-place Philadelphia Flyers, 5-2, at the Spectrum and raised for Coach Michel Bergeron and the team's followers the following question:


Doles Team Up for Campaign Blitz Through New Hampshire
LEAD: It was shortly before 9 o'clock Wednesday night, and Senator Bob Dole was winding up his speech before a packed dinner of the town's Chamber of Commerce.
His wife, Elizabeth Hanford Dole, sat beside him.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A table in Business Day yesterday with an article on the gross national product gave an incorrect number for the G.N.P. deflator.
The deflator, a measure of prices throughout the economy adjusted to reflect changes in the composition of the G.N.P., was 2.7 percent in the fourth quarter.


Ballet: Suzanne Farrell Returns, in 'Waltzes'
LEAD: SUZANNE FARRELL made a triumphant return to the New York City Ballet Wednesday night when she swept through George Balanchine's ''Vienna Waltzes'' at the New York State Theater.


Transactions
LEAD: BASEBALL  BOSTON (AL) - Agreed to terms with Spike Owen, shortstop; Brady Anderson, outfielder; Pat Dodson, first baseman; Dan Gabriele, pitcher, and Randy Kutcher, infielder.
CLEVELAND (AL) - Named Paul Olden radio announcer.
LOS ANGELES (NL) - Agreed to terms with Mike Marshall, outfielder, and Ken Howell, pitcher, on one-year contracts.


Allegis Posts Loss; Delta Off
LEAD: Two major airlines reported mixed results for the fourth quarter yesterday with the Allegis Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, reporting a large operating loss that it blamed on severe winter weather while Delta Air Lines Inc, showed an operating gain attributed to higher fares.


A Sonic Mix On the Lower East Side
LEAD: THE Lower East Side has often been treated as a neighborhood producing one sort of music, neatly categorizable and easily stuffed away with the dirty laundry.
But when historians of the Lower East Side reconsider the facts, the 1980's will be thought of as an immensely diverse, fecund era for music.


Federated Board Holds Meeting
LEAD: Directors of Federated Department Stores Inc. met yesterday for a regular meeting in the wake of Monday's $4.2 billion bid for the chain by the Campeau Corporation of Canada.
Federated declined to comment on the meeting, but the company said it would have a response by Feb. 5.


Art: Change of Fortune For Viollet-le-Duc
LEAD: ONE of the more astonishing among recent reversals of accepted opinion is summed up in an exhibition entitled ''Viollet-le-Duc: Architect, Artist, Master of Historic Preservation'' at the Grey Art Gallery.
Until quite lately, there were literally no limits to the unpopularity of Eugene Viollet-le-Duc (1814-1879), the architect who from 1840 onward was in charge of the preservation of historic buildings all over


A Narrow Escape
LEAD: Nella Domenici, daughter of Senator Pete V. Domenici, recently survived a fire in a Manhattan apartment building that claimed five lives.


MCA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
674,406,000
642,387,000
Net inc
21,808,000
17,314,000
Share earns
.30
.23
Yr rev
2,589,623,000
2,438,394,000
Net inc
137,254,000
150,904,000
Share earns
1.82
1.97


I.B.M.'s Two New Vice Chairmen
LEAD:  Jack D. Kuehler


Whose Bloated Staff?
LEAD: Representative Patricia Schroeder has a bone to pick with a Reagan Administration official over the size and role of Congressional staffs.


Horse Racing Notebook; Eclipse Award Election Needs Reform
LEAD: The system for electing thoroughbred racing's Horse of the Year clearly needs revamping - not because Ferdinand won by so narrow a margin when the results were announced Wednesday, but because only one vote kept him from unfairly losing the title.


Cuomo Broke Budget Surplus Agreement, G.O.P. Senators Charge
LEAD: State Senate Republicans said today that the state's budget surplus was almost $300 million higher than Governor Cuomo has estimated.
They accused the Governor of having spent most of the difference on routine state operating expenses instead of putting the money, as agreed, into a special capital fund for roads and housing.


HART CHALLENGES MOTIVES OF CRITICS
LEAD: Gary Hart fought back against his critics today, suggesting that he had become a special target of the press and of his party because ''my candidacy is different and it is the fact of that difference that threatens the defenders of the status quo.''


Slower Spending And Fed's Policy
LEAD: THE American economy grew faster in the final quarter of 1987 than most economists expected.
But since most of the gain was due to an unintended surge of inventories, a sharp slowdown in the economy appears to be in the works.
While it is not yet the general view, some economists think a 1988 recession may have begun.


Waning Days Cast New Glow Over White House
LEAD: Nancy Reagan, sitting in the Capitol Monday night watching her husband deliver his State of the Union Address, was touched by the moment.
This performance, so familiar after six re-runs, was making its final appearance on national television.


INTERLAKE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERLAKE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
222,297,000
183,084,000
Net inc
23,498,000
10,477,000
Share earns
2.04
.91
Yr sales
823,058,000
736,009,000
Net inc
54,372,000
b32,555,000
Share earns
4.69
2.85


Citicorp to Buy Arizona Bank
LEAD: Citicorp announced yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the United Bank of Arizona in Phoenix and merge it into its existing subsidiary in the state, Citibank Arizona.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW WORKING GROUP ON CONTRACT PRACTICES - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SECURITY COUNCIL ON UNITED NATIONS INTERIM FORCE IN LEBANON - 11 A.M.
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR SPECIAL SESSION OF ASSEMBLY DEVOTED TO DISARMAMENT - 11:30 A.M.


Jay Hoggard
LEAD: Jay Hoggard, a vibraphonist, is leading a group tonight through Sunday at the West End Cafe, 2911 Broadway, at 114th Street (666-8750).
Sets begin at 9, 10:30 P.M. and midnight and 1:30 A.M.; there is no fourth set on Sunday.
There is a $6 cover and a $7.50 minimum.
Tonight's first set will be broadcast by WKCR, 89.9 FM.


CORNERSTONE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORNERSTONE FINANCIAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b225,000
377,000
Per share
.11
.27
Shares outst
1,978,000
1,396,000
Yr net inc
b1,856,000
1,949,000
Per share
.96
1.41
Shares outst
1,927,000
1,387,000


BELLSOUTH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELLSOUTH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,167,800,000
2,820,000,000
Net inc
411,500,000
361,100,000
Share earns
.85
.76
Yr rev
12,269,100,000
11,444,100,000
Net inc
1,664,800,000
1,588,700,000
Share earns
3.46
3.38


Poll Finds Even Split on Bush-Rather Battle
LEAD: In the television battle between Vice President Bush and Dan Rather, the CBS News anchor, Americans divided sharply along party lines, with Democrats backing Mr.
Rather and Republicans supporting Mr.
Bush, according to a new poll by the Gallup Organization.


TIME INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIME INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,140,000,000
1,030,000,000
Net inc
52,000,000
c12,000,000
Share earns
.88
.20
Yr rev
4,190,000,000
3,760,000,000
Net inc
b250,000,000
d376,000,000
Share earns
4.18
5.95


The Proper Study Of Economists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Opera Coach Died in His 'House of Worship'
LEAD: Until a few months ago, Bantcho Bantchevsky, the 82-year-old opera coach who plunged to his death at the Metropolitan Opera House last Saturday, was a gregarious man, rich in friendships and surrounded by music.


Bulgaria Parley Is Foretaste Of a Scaling Down of Change
LEAD: The Bulgarian Communist Party, which startled the rest of the Soviet camp last year by moving to change its Government, society and economy, opened a special conference today that signified a sharp scaling down of its initiatives.


Grand Plan for a Park Stalls in Miss Liberty's Shadow
LEAD: A $10 million private marina proposed for prime public waterfront at Liberty State Park has slowed the development of the park and jeopardized the organization managing it.
The 750-acre park has been extolled as potentially one of the grandest in the New York metropolitan region, with the Manhattan skyline and Statue of


Cab-Robbery Suspect Seized
LEAD: A 23-year-old suspect in a series of cab robberies in East Harlem was arrested last night at East 102d Street and Lexington Avenue, the police said.
The suspect, Erick Mourino, of 60 East 102d Street, was charged with one count of robbery.


Norway Joblessness Up
LEAD: Unemployment in Norway, which has one of the lowest levels of joblessness in the West, rose 25 percent in January, to 42,600 from 31,500.
The rate, however, is still at only 2 percent of the working population.


Perles Staying Put
LEAD: Even the possibility of someday earning a fifth Super Bowl ring could not break the loyalty of Coach George Perles to Michigan State University.
So the head coach of the Spartans, who earned about $200,000 for leading Michigan State to its first Rose Bowl victory in 22 years, has turned down an offer to coach the Green Bay Packers for five years for a reported $1.8 million.


ARVIN INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARVIN INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
332,000,000
344,000,000
Net inc
9,500,000
10,600,000
Share earns
.45
.64
Yr sales
1,400,000,000
996,000,000
Net inc
47,600,000
41,200,000
Share earns
2.41
2.46


Jewish Heritage Songs
LEAD: Nico Castel, a tenor with the Metropolitan and New York City Opera companies, will sing ''Songs From the Jewish Heritage,'' Sunday at 7 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
He will be accompanied by Ann Lewin, pianist, and C. J. Everett, percussionist.
The program includes Russian-Jewish and Yiddish songs arranged by Rimsky-Korsakov, Glinka, Mussorgsky and Shostakovich; Sephardic songs and liturgical chants, and pieces by Gounod, Ravel and Castelnuovo-Tedesco.


Icahn Hints at Strategy
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn, the largest shareholder of Texaco Inc., told the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday that he might join with a third party to buy more Texaco stock.


Raymond Williams, British Writer, 66, Dies
LEAD: Raymond Williams, a cultural historian and critic who championed the arts for the working class and taught at Cambridge and Oxford universities, died on Tuesday at his home here.
He was 66 years old.


FAIRHAVEN SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAIRHAVEN SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
215,000
b865,000
Per share
.09
-
Yr net inc
2,153,000
2,529,000
Per share
.93
-
b-Includes a gain of $694,000 from a dividend the company received from the mutual central savings fund of Massachusetts.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: CONSIDERING the sizable demand for vegetarian fare in New York, there are few places around that make an effort to be distinctive in either ambiance or food.
A happy new exception is the Health Pub, a cheerful vegetarian cafe at 371 Second Avenue, at 21st Street.
The two large dining rooms are crisp and tidy, done in soft beige with butcher-block tables.


Vatican Leader Questions Some Bible Scholarship
LEAD: The Vatican's chief keeper of the faith raised some sharp questions Wednesday and yesterday about modern methods of studying the Bible, but at the same time he showed himself to be no friend to biblical fundamentalism.


Theater: 'Hedda Gabler'
LEAD: In his stage directions for ''Hedda Gabler,'' Ibsen calls for the Tesman drawing room to be decorated with bouquets of flowers, in celebration of Hedda's wedding.
For the opening scene of his production at the Hartford Stage Company, Mark Lamos festoons the stage with bouquets, not as a sign of beauty but of the airlessness that is pervasive, of the decay that has already begun to infect the marriage.


Israeli General Describes Charges Of Brutal Beatings as 'Just Stories'
LEAD: A top Israeli general said today that beatings of Palestinian civilians by troops were ''exceptions'' to Government policy and that many of the widespread complaints of brutality were rooted in ''imagination.''


Coca-Cola Unit To Buy Bottlers
LEAD: Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc., the bottling subsidiary created by the Coca-Cola Company in 1986, said it was buying several bottling operations from the large soft-drink manufacturer for $500 million.
Last week, the parent company said it would reorganize its American subsidiary, Coca-Cola U.S.A., to respond to changes in its bottling operations.


Film: 'Mammame,' Tribe of Dancers
LEAD: ''MAMMAME,'' which will be seen in its first New York screenings today and tomorrow at Film Forum 2, is the work of Raul Ruiz, the Chilean expatriate film director, and Jean-Claude Gallotta, the French experimentalist choreographer.
Mr.
Ruiz is a surrealist.
Mr.
Gallotta is a fabulist.
And the surprisingly immediate private worlds of these two enfants terribles of the arts are complementary here.


Gault on Bobsled Squad
LEAD: Willie Gault, the Chicago Bears wide receiver, was named today to the men's bobsled team that will compete for the United States in the Winter Olympics next month at Calgary.


Precedent for Lower Courts: Tyrant or Teacher?
LEAD: To say that judges of lower courts follow precedent has long been a maxim seemingly unworthy of debate in the American legal system.
But that unquestioned belief suddenly lies at the heart of the next round in the battle over the Federal judiciary.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JANUARY 29, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-9, B6


AMERICAN TELEVISION &amp; COMUNICATIONS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN TELEVISION &amp; COMUNICATIONS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
186,904,000
163,730,000
Net inc
13,107,000
3,764,000
Share earns
.12
.03
Yr rev
714,390,000
637,348,000
Net inc
49,472,000
40,374,000
Share earns
.45
.42


DUN &amp; BRADSTREET CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DUN &amp; BRADSTREET CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
905,940,000
825,050,000
Net inc
87,414,000
76,739,000
Share earns
.57
.50
Yr rev
3,359,164,000
3,113,506,000
Net inc
392,999,000
339,990,000
Share earns
2.58
2.23


Computervision-Prime Deal
LEAD: The Computervision Corporation has accepted a $434 million takeover offer from Prime Computer Inc., the two Massachusetts companies announced yesterday.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


An Officer Sues Hasidic Patrol In Assault Case
LEAD: A 49-year-old officer in the New York City housing police filed a $2 million lawsuit yesterday against a Hasidic community patrol in Brooklyn and five of its members, who he said beat him and tried to take his service revolver when he went to the aid of an elderly man they were kicking and pummeling.


Fear of Lending
LEAD: To the Editor:


Seattle Journal; Downtown Epidemic Of Growing Pains
LEAD: On a recent visit to Seattle, the New York humorist Fran Lebowitz was asked what she thought of the city. ''It's cute,'' she replied. ''Why are they tearing it down?''


Art: Works by Richard Artschwager
LEAD: THE Richard Artschwager retrospective, a survey of 25 years of art, looks wonderful installed in the big fourth-floor galleries of the Whitney Museum of American Art, and it also looks fresh and informative.
This is no mean feat for an artist of Mr.
Artschwager's popularity.
Throughout the 1960's, his idiosyncratic, multifaceted work hovered in the vicinity of Pop, Minimalism and Photo-Realism without ever requesting permission to land.


ARCO Purchases 14% Of Britain's Tricentrol
LEAD: ARCO said today that it had acquired an interest of 14.6 percent, or about $43.7 million, in Tricentrol P.L.C., an independent British oil company that is fighting an acquisition offer from Societe Nationale Elf Aquitaine, France's state-owned oil company.


DISNEY, WALT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DISNEY, WALT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
734,564,000
660,906,000
Net inc
100,436,000
b89,831,000
Share earns
.73
.66
b-After net from discontinued operations of $18,047,000.


Dollar Edges Up Slightly In Extremely Light Trading
LEAD: The dollar rose marginally against most of the leading currencies yesterday, but traders said there was very little activity.


BANKRUPTCY FILED BY LEADING UTILITY IN SEABROOK PLANT
LEAD: Beleaguered by the controversy surrounding the Seabrook nuclear power plant, the Public Service Company of New Hampshire filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday, the first major public utility to take that step since the Depression.


REYNOLDS &amp; REYNOLDS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REYNOLDS &amp; REYNOLDS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
138,402,000
128,999,000
Net inc
b11,315,000
4,494,000
Share earns
1.05
.41
b-Includes a gain of $8,522,000 from revaluation of deferred income taxes.


'Password' Says It Won't Pay $58,600 Won by Wanted Man
LEAD: Kerry Ketchem, a contestant on the NBC-TV game show ''Super Password'' who was arrested on mail fraud charges when he came to the production office to claim $58,600 in prize money two weeks ago, will not be paid his winnings, the producer says.


WASHINGTON FEDERAL SAVINGS DC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON FEDERAL SAVINGS DC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b329,000
c2,155,000
Per share
.11
-
6mo inc
b705,000
c2,909,000
Per share
.24
-
b-Includes tax credits of $101,000 for the quarter and $272,000 for the 6 months.


NYNEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NYNEX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,103,400,000
2,956,000,000
Net inc
322,500,000
293,700,000
Share earns
1.59
1.45
Shares outst
203,242,792
202,690,539
Yr rev
12,084,000,000
11,341,500,000
Net inc
1,276,500,000
1,215,300,000
Share earns
6.26
6.01
Shares outst
204,021,113
202,380,184


The 1935 'Mutiny'
LEAD: The 1935 film ''Mutiny on the Bounty,'' with Charles Laughton, Clark Gable and Franchot Tone, will be shown Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Fraunces Tavern Museum, 54 Pearl Street.
This version, directed by Frank Lloyd, features Clark Gable as Fletcher Christian and Charles Laughton as Captain Bligh.
The screening is part of the museum's film series, ''Love, Intrigue and Revolution: 1715-1830.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 415 money market mutual funds increased $1.22 billion, to $274.83 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 113 institutional funds increased $499.1 million, to $80.26 billion.
Assets of the 207 general-purpose funds were up $83.1 million, to $81.24 billion.


Poll Finds Support For Space Shuttle, But Doubts Persist
LEAD: Two-thirds of American adults say the space shuttle program is worth continuing, but as many also expect it not to be ''successful'' by the end of this year, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.


Klaus Fuchs, Physicist Who Gave Atom Secrets to Soviet, Dies at 76
LEAD: Klaus Fuchs, the German-born physicist who was imprisoned in the 1950's in Britain after being convicted of passing nuclear secrets to the Soviet Union, died yesterday, the East German press agency A.D.N. reported.
He was 76 years old.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about Secretary of State George P. Shultz's plans to meet with two Palestinians, and a correction in this space yesterday, misidentified a speaker for an event to be held tomorrow at Congregation B'nai Jeshurun in Manhattan.


PACIFIC INLAND BANCORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFIC INLAND BANCORP
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
201,050
b201,973
Per share
.14
-
b-Net loss.


Corrections
LEAD: The introduction yesterday to the text of the ''basic speech'' of Richard A. Gephardt, Democratic candidate for the Presidency, misstated his title.
He is a Representative from Missouri, not its former Governor.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There are no agreements or disagreements.''  - Jaime Morales Carazo, negotiator for the Nicaraguan rebels.  [ A3:4. ]


Bernstein Rein Gets Blockbuster Account
LEAD: The Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., has assigned its $4 million advertising account to Bernstein Rein in Kansas City, Mo., and its collateral work to Gabe, Tomlin &amp; Giles in Fort Lauderdale.


FIRSTFED FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRSTFED FINANCIAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,637,000
5,209,000
Per share
.51
.73
Yr net inc
15,825,000
16,594,000
Per share
2.21
2.33


SCHERING-PLOUGH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCHERING-PLOUGH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
663,500,000
600,100,000
Net inc
75,200,000
59,900,000
Share earns
.67
.50
Yr sales
2,699,300,000
2,398,700,000
Net inc
316,400,000
265,800,000
Share earns
2.73
2.17
Shares outst
116,100,000
122,500,000


CONTEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
807,046,000
751,739,000
Net loss
93,841,000
b66,863,000
Share earns
-
.86
Yr rev
2,905,489,000
2,846,624,000
Net inc
43,002,000
234,202,000
Share earns
.55
3.02


Prestige's Super Bowl Magazine
LEAD: THIS Sunday 4.5 million newspapers in 13 top markets will be carrying Super Bowl XXII The Official Home Viewer's Guide, a slick standard-sized magazine that if nothing else will certainly be timely.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.71
6.57
6.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.67
5.73
5.49
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.06
6.08
5.47
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.11
8.15
6.94
30-YR.


BEST BUY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEST BUY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
161,399,000
88,628,000
Net inc
1,477,000
3,173,000
Share earns
.18
.39
9mo rev
332,466,000
168,740,000
Net inc
3,288,000
6,125,000
Share earns
.40
.78


WHERE BIRTHS ARE KEPT DOWN AND WOMEN AREN'T
LEAD: For thousands of years, this small coastal area of southern India has fancied itself as a world apart, separated from the rest of the subcontinent by mountains and influenced by spice traders, missionaries and other foreign visitors.


15 Indicted in Drug Profit Plot
LEAD: A former aide in the Nixon Administration and a former Congressman from Illinois are among 15 people indicted in a nationwide investigation into a scheme to hide drug profits, the Government said today.


FIRST AMERICAN SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST AMERICAN SAVINGS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,651,051
1,805,730
Per share
.48
.52
Yr net inc
b6,716,513
6,275,922
Per share
1.95
1.82
b-After a reduction equal to 9 cents per share by the one-time writeoff for the company's contribution to the secondary reserve of the FSLIC.


FILM: FROM GERMANY, 'SINGING THE BLUES IN RED'
LEAD: AT the age of 40, Klaus Drittemann, a writer and performer of protest songs, is given a one-way visa to leave East Germany for the West.
Klaus has been in trouble with the authorities ever since the 1960's.
He's a bristly character and has been a merciless critic of the East German Government for failures to realize its


Perot, in an Article, Takes a Jab at G.M.
LEAD: H. Ross Perot, the Dallas billionaire not known to mince words or turn down a good platform for speaking them, audaciously tells ''How I Would Turn Around G.M.'' in the issue of Fortune magazine that comes out Monday.


Charles Tennant, 33, Zoning-Law Specialist
LEAD: Charles E. Tennant, a lawyer specializing in zoning and land-use issues, died of lymphoma yesterday at New York Hospital, according to a hospital spokesman, Jed Golden.
Mr.
Tennant was 33 years old and lived in Manhattan.


The 'March of Folly' in Further Contra Aid
LEAD: In her classic book ''The March of Folly,'' the historian Barbara Tuchman notes the compulsion of national leaders all through history to behave woodenheadedly - that is, to follow policies contrary to those indicated by good sense and enlightened self-interest.
Calling Philip II of Spain ''the surpassing woodenhead of all sovereigns,'' she observes, ''No experience of the failure of his policy could shake his belief in its essential excellence.


Viking Pact for Burns
LEAD: Mike Lynn, the general manager of the Minnesota Vikings, said yesterday that the Vikings had offered Coach Jerry Burns a two-year contract extension.
Lynn said he expected Burns to agree to the extension to the three-year contract he signed before the 1986 season. ''I don't think it's right for a coach to have one year left,'' Lynn said.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Nueva Generacion


Profit Up 14.1% At McDonald's
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation said today that its profit for the fourth quarter of 1987 rose 14.1 percent over the period a year earlier.


SONAT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SONAT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
346,831,000
428,403,000
Net inc
b19,029,000
c368,914,000
Share earns
.47
-
Yr rev
1,251,594,000
2,173,826,000
Net inc
b105,032,000
c304,300,000
Share earns
2.59
-


Physicians Can't Be Selfless Entrepreneurs
LEAD: To the Editor:


White Plains Police Revise Report of Lawyer's Suicide
LEAD: The police said a former president of the Westchester County Bar Association who killed himself Monday did not fire the fatal shot while on the telephone as they originally reported.


Estimate Board Delays Vote on School Project
LEAD: The New York City Board of Estimate, lacking the votes to approve a Koch administration plan to have private developers renovate a landmark school in exchange for air rights to build a 48-story office tower next door, delayed acting on the plan yesterday.


Bonds Rise Again on Rate Hopes
LEAD: Bond prices continued to rise yesterday as investors and traders remained convinced that slower economic growth in coming months would keep inflation low and bring lower interest rates.


Opening Night Plans For U.S.-Soviet Festival
LEAD: Opening night of Making Music Together, a three-week arts festival to be staged here by American and Soviet performers starting March 11, is to feature Dzhansug Kakhidze, a Soviet conductor, and Maksim Vengerov, a violinist.


'Alto e Basso'
LEAD: ''Alto e Basso,'' a program of music for the lower strings, will be offered Sunday at 3 P.M. at St.
Bartholomew's Church, Park Avenue at 51st Street.
The three musicians - Richard Spencer, violist; Lawrence Zoernig, cellist, and Joseph Russo, bassist - will play works by Rossini, Haydn and Beethoven.


EMPIRE OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMPIRE OF AMERICA (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b108,000
c12,144,000
Yr net inc
d12,749,000
c66,338,000
Per share
.46
4.24
b-After an extraordinary charge of $375,000.
c-Includes extraordinary gains of $2 million for the quarter and $33,807,000 for the year.


Hempstead Churches to Shelter Homeless
LEAD: The leaders of a dozen churches in this Nassau County village said today that they had formed an emergency assistance network for homeless people that would use church buildings as shelters.


American Stars to Stage Film Festival in Russia
LEAD: Several Hollywood stars will travel to Moscow and Leningrad next month to help stage an American film festival.


Pretoria Challenged on Apartheid Foe's Death
LEAD: An anti-apartheid church leader challenged the Pretoria Government today to prove that it had not murdered an 18-year-old anti-apartheid student leader who was found shot dead in Soweto on Monday.


LAFARGE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAFARGE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
317,097,000
244,202,000
Net inc
18,765,000
5,110,000
Share earns
.41
.10
Shares outst
43,638,000
40,021,000
Yr sales
1,221,478,000
963,799,000
Net inc
75,048,000
25,955,000
Share earns
1.65
.58
Shares outst
41,643,000
39,334,000


LIN BROADCASTING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIN BROADCASTING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
67,840,000
57,580,000
Net inc
15,710,000
c29,328,000
Share earns
.29
.52
Yr rev
236,750,000
195,340,000
Net inc
b87,431,000
c66,240,000
Share earns
1.56
1.19


INSIDE
LEAD:  Big Changes at I.B.M.


'The Great Correction'
LEAD: The President's Council of Economic Advisers isn't saying much about its examination of the stock market's drubbing on Oct. 19 that it will discuss in next month's Economic Report of the President for 1988.
It is safe to assume though that it the council sees little need for tight restraints on trading because the chairman, Beryl W.


Ohio Nuclear Plant Bonds Backed by Lease Payments
LEAD: A $646 million bond issue was offered yesterday by the Beaver Valley Power Station Funding Corporation, a specially created company whose debt will be backed by lease payments of the Ohio Edison Company.


Du Pont and Dow Climb
LEAD: E.I du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company and the Dow Chemical Company, the nation's top two chemical concerns, yesterday reported strong earnings for the fourth quarter of 1987 and for the full year.


POLICE OFFICER DIES AS SIEGE ENDS IN POLYGAMISTS' ARREST
LEAD: A burst of gunfire ended a 13-day standoff today between a polygamist clan and the police.
An officer was killed and the group's leader was seriously wounded.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  HISTORIC THEORIES


ALLEGIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEGIS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,101,106,000
1,842,165,000
Net inc
b209,943,000
cd13,592,000
Share earns
3.68
-
Yr rev
8,292,790,000
7,105,141,000
Net inc
b335,117,000
d11,600,000
Share earns
6.02
.25


New Software Game: It Comes From Soviet
LEAD: As computer games go, it is simple and addictive.
Critics say it lacks the guns and explosions and mayhem that appeal to young connoisseurs of American entertainment software, but then, Soviet software is apparently soft-line.


ALLEGHENY LUDLUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEGHENY LUDLUM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Sales
234,586,000
180,995,000
Net inc
10,714,000
-
Share earns
.47
-
Yr sales
866,609,000
732,453,000
Net inc
46,214,000
-
Share earns
2.27
-
The year-ago periods' earnings are not comparable because of recapitalization effected Dec.


The Games We Play
LEAD: Are we all just a little mad?


Aircraft Maker Recounts Paying $25,000 to Nofziger for Lobbying
LEAD: Lyn Nofziger's lobbying firm received $25,000 from a military contractor a day before prosecutors say the former White House aide urged government officials to continue production of a warplane, according to testimony today at Mr.
Nofziger's trial.


Time Runs Out at Old Car Plant
LEAD: A sword has been hanging for years over the giant automobile factory here - the oldest operating auto-assembly plant in the country.
The sword fell Wednesday when the Chrysler Corporation announced plans to close most of its Kenosha operations by the end of the 1988 model year.


Bethlehem Profit Spurts
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation has reported that its income more than doubled in the fourth quarter, to $71.5 million, from $34.2 million a year earlier.


Rights Monitors at a Protest By Group of Jews in Moscow
LEAD: More than 100 Soviet Jews seeking exit visas demonstrated in Moscow today in a large and peaceful protest attended by members of an international human rights group.


Two Yale Unions Ratify 4-Year Pacts
LEAD: Two unions representing 3,600 Yale University employees yesterday approved a four-year contract with annual salary increases of six percent.


On Stage
LEAD:  Ibsen, via Bergman, in Brooklyn


Delaware Takeover Curb Near
LEAD: Delaware will soon have a new law that makes hostile takeovers of corporations more difficult.


Gretzky Expected Back
LEAD: Wayne Gretzky says he is ready to play again and expects to be in the Edmonton Oiler lineup for the game tonight against the first-place Calgary Flames.
Gretzky, who hasn't played since suffering a severely strained ligament in his right knee Dec. 30, said the knee was greatly improved. ''The knee feels strong, the range of motion is solid,'' he said.


Blood Banks Plan No Testing For 2d Variety of AIDS Virus
LEAD: The American Red Cross said today that it would not test blood donors for signs of infection with a second variety of AIDS virus that has just been detected in this country.


AVERY INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AVERY INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
387,072,000
329,639,000
Net loss
6,920,000
b13,443,000
Share earns
-
.34
Yr sales
1,465,536,000
1,131,204,000
Net inc
34,731,000
48,634,000
Share earns
.81
1.23
Shares outst
42,665,000
39,779,000


Devils Win One For New Coach
LEAD: It took Jim Schoenfeld only six and a half minutes into his first game as head coach of the Devils to make his first major decision.


College Basketball; Wake Forest Stuns Tar Heels by 83-80
LEAD: David Carlyle led a second-half comeback that was capped by Sam Ivy's two free throws with three seconds remaining as Wake Forest upset third-ranked North Carolina, 83-80, tonight.


Dining Out Guide: With Music
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
AMBASSADOR GRILL, 1 United Nations Plaza, First Avenue at 44th Street (355-3400) - *(Oct. 3, 1986) Music soothes the savage beast and might make digestion easier as well.


DRUG DEALER SAYS HE GAVE NORIEGA 'MILLIONS' IN BRIBES
LEAD: A convicted American drug smuggler told Senate investigators today that he gave ''millions of dollars'' in cash and kickbacks to Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the army commander of Panama, for his help in drug deals and illegal money laundering.


BAY STATE GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAY STATE GAS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
80,593,000
86,349,000
Net inc
7,764,000
7,304,000
Share earns
1.28
1.20
Shares outst
6,002,000
5,950,000
Yr rev
285,154,000
277,672,000
Net inc
15,314,000
15,361,000
Share earns
2.50
2.45
Shares outst
5,982,000
5,942,000


A Weinberger Memoir
LEAD: Warner Books will publish Caspar Weinberger's first-hand account of his years as Secretary of Defense, from 1980 to 1987.
Mr.
Weinberger will personally write the book, which has no title yet, according to the publisher, which acquired it at auction for a reported high six figures.
It is scheduled for publication next year.


Wolf-Ferrari Works
LEAD: Two orchestral works by Ermanno Wolf-Ferrari will be played for the first time in the United States tonight at 8 o'clock at the Manhattan School of Music, Broadway at 122d Street.


AMERICAN SAVINGS BANK OF NY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN SAVINGS BANK OF NY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b8,447,000
c11,505,000
Per share
1.19
1.70
Yr net inc
b45,750,000
c40,570,000
Per share
6.75
6.11
b-Includes tax credits of $5,613,000 for the quarter and $24,358,000 for the year.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Recalling Mingus


AFFILIATED BANK CORPORATION-WYOING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AFFILIATED BANK CORPORATION-WYOING (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b281,000
cd6,569,000
Per share
.24
-
Yr net loss
b867,000
c17,980,000
b-After provision for loan losses of $628,000 for the quarter and $2,486,000 for the year.


Colombians Are Skeptical Over Drug Crackdown
LEAD: As death threats against local journalists and officials increased, the Government struggled today to convince Colombians of its new determination to combat the country's billionaire cocaine traffickers.


Lindsay Undergoes Heart-Valve Surgery
LEAD: Former New York City Mayor John V. Lindsay underwent surgery Wednesday to repair a leaky heart valve and was in critical but stable condition yesterday, officials at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center said.


MEAD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEAD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,063,000,000
929,200,000
Net inc
b33,200,000
c46,200,000
Share earns
.53
-
Yr sales
4,208,800,000
3,217,700,000
Net loss
b216,700,000
36,300,000
Share earns
3.45
.58


The Impact In Westchester
LEAD: For residents of Westchester County, where I.B.M. is a dominant corporate presence, yesterday's restructuring announcement came after two years of retrenchment.


Givenchy Blossoms
LEAD: Hubert de Givenchy found still another way to deploy the flowers that are blooming freely all over spring and summer fashions.
He uses, of course, the popular flower prints, which suggest Monet's garden at Giverny at the height of the season.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
from '86
Allegis Corp.
$209,900,000
*-
Consolidated Rail Corp.
79,000,000
+33.9
Control Data Corp.
10,800,000
*-
Delta Air Lines Inc.
88,300,000
-29.6
Dow Chemical Co.


AIDS TEST SOUGHT FOR U.S. COLLEGE
LEAD: American health officials hope to screen every student at a major university this spring to help determine the incidence of infection with the AIDS virus among young adults, C. Everett Koop, Surgeon General of the United States, said today.


Counterpoints to Catch the Fancy
LEAD: Clients at couture houses, where prices this season generally run to five figures, usually have a good collection of precious jewelry to complement their clothes.
Still, designers pay attention to the accessories they choose at their openings to carry out the mood of their clothes.
This season some of the accessories are memorable.


Income Up Only 1.2% Last Year
LEAD: Americans' after-tax incomes grew a sluggish 1.2 percent last year, the poorest showing since the last recession, while their savings rate in 1987 fell to a 40-year low, the Government reported today.


GATX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GATX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
146,000,000
147,900,000
Net inc
8,100,000
9,700,000
Share earns
.87
1.01
Yr rev
547,800,000
533,100,000
Net inc
34,700,000
b28,700,000
Share earns
3.64
2.40
Shares outst
9,803,000
11,918,000


A Broad Decentralization at I.B.M.
LEAD: In a sweeping restructuring intended to reverse three years of disappointing performance, the International Business Machines Corporation yesterday created five new, highly autonomous organizations that will be responsible for all of the company's innovation, design and manufacturing.


Art: 2 Gallery Shows On Marsden Hartley
LEAD: AMONG the early American modernists who were a part of Alfred Stieglitz's circle, Marsden Hartley has attracted an especially healthy dose of attention in recent years.
He was the subject of a major retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art in 1980 and of several smaller shows since, including two now.


CRONKITE TESTIFIES AT TRIAL
LEAD: Walter Cronkite, a retired anchor for CBS news, who is an avid yachtsman, testified today in the trial of an alleged leader of cocaine smuggling network that he was once shooed away from a Bahamiam island that prosecutors say was used as a way station by the smugglers.
He testified that he often visited Norman's Cay on his Christmas vacations.


Challenger Memorial
LEAD: June Scobee, whose husband, Dick, was one of seven crew members killed in the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger, with students at a ceremony yesterday at Arlington National Cemetery on the second anniversary of the disaster.
The students represented schools that raised $45,000 for a Challenger Center in an effort led by Mrs.


At the Movies
LEAD:  Turning '50'


NATIONAL STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL STEEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
640,600,000
593,000,000
Net inc
b22,600,000
c2,800,000
Yr sales
2,416,500,000
2,127,800,000
Net inc
b47,800,000
d59,800,000
b-Includes a $2 million tax credit and a $400,000 gain from the liquidation of LIFO inventories for both periods.


Schering-Plough To Get Cooper Unit
LEAD: The Schering-Plough Corporation said it had signed a letter to acquire the worldwide contact lens operations of the Cooper Companies for about $150 million.
Cooper, based in Palo Alto, Calif., has received approval from the Food and Drug Administration to begin marketing the first ultraviolet light-blocking contact lens in the United States.


Despite It All, Poland Rocks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Welfare 'Rights' vs. Children's Rights
LEAD: Supporters of welfare rights assail as ''punitive'' child support provisions in Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's constructive welfare reform bill.
The criticism is shortsighted.
The support provisions are essential to a plan that could put unemployed fathers to work and help repair broken families.


Music: The Cleveland
LEAD: AT age 74, Witold Lutoslawski remains the most consistently interesting of the band of avant-gardists who emerged from the social and political upheavals of Poland after World War II.
Like many composers of his generation from whatever country, he likes music made of angular lines, off-center rhythms, systematic atonality and structural formulas.


EQUIFAX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EQUIFAX INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
176,372,000
161,389,000
Net inc
8,811,000
4,633,000
Share earns
.41
.22
Yr rev
670,007,000
635,076,000
Net inc
30,556,000
25,611,000
Share earns
1.43
1.20


900 Age Cases Died Wrongly, Agency Chief Says
LEAD: The chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission admitted today that his agency deserves ''harsh criticism'' for allowing 900 age discrimination cases to expire before victims had a chance to gain relief.


2 Film Companies Set Stock Merger
LEAD: The New Century Entertainment Corporation, a publicly owned film company that had losses of $6 million in the first nine months of 1987, said it had agreed to a stock merger with New Vision Inc., a private, independent production company responsible for ''La Bamba'' and other films.


IU Rejects Bid; Offers Alternative
LEAD: The IU International Corporation has rejected as inadequate a hostile $520 million bid from Neoax Inc. and has offered shareholders an alternative restructuring plan.
IU, a trucking and waste management company, offered $14 in cash and a new share of its common stock for each of its 27.4 million common shares outstanding, or a total of about $383 million in cash.


Antonin Himl, Czechoslovak Politician, 54
LEAD: Sports Minister Antonin Himl, a member of the Communist Party Central Committee, died of a stroke in Beijing on Wednesday while visiting China with a sports delegation.
He was 54 years old.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: HORSE RACING  Nice Core Wins by a Neck: Nice Core raced near the leaders early, went to the front once into the stretch and held on gamely to win by a neck in the $31,000 allowance feature yesterday at Aqueduct.
Special Message, one of the outsiders in the field of 12, was the runner-up.
Nice Core carried 112 pounds under Carlos Correa for a mile and an eighth on the fast but dull racing strip in 1:54 to win his first race this year.


British Back Guilt of 6, Upsetting Irish
LEAD: After one of Britain's most politically sensitive judicial reviews, a three-judge court today upheld the convictions of six men for the murder of 21 people in the bombing of a Birmingham pub in 1974.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: Guy F. Atkinson Co., South San Francisco, Calif., which is involved in construction, steel fabrication and makes pumps and heavy machinery, appointed Robert D. Langford senior vice president, chief legal officer and corporate secretary.
Mr.
Langford succeeds Bryant K. Zimmerman, who becomes senior legal counsel, in anticipation of his retirement.


Merc-Comex Link Delayed
LEAD: The twisted route to a possible merger between New York's two largest futures exchanges took another turn yesterday, when the Commodity Exchange said it had been informed by the New York Mercantile Exchange that the Merc would be unable to respond to the merger proposal by Feb. 1, as previously agreed.


Film: 'Anguish,' Horror From Bigas Luna
LEAD: BIRDS fly around the room, and a little old lady with her hair in a bun croaks murderous orders at her son.
John always does what Mama says, so he leaves the house, kills a couple of people and gouges out their eyes.
He is, however, well raised enough to rinse off the eyeballs neatly in the victims' bathroom sinks.


DELTA AIR LINES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELTA AIR LINES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,700,000,000
1,197,000,000
Net inc
88,318,000
b125,510,000
Share earns
1.82
3.02
Shares outst
48,647,677
41,517,901
6mo rev
3,331,691,000
2,299,056,000
Net inc
147,423,000
b178,531,000
Share earns
3.03
4.37
Shares outst
48,644,869
40,817,724


GREATER NEW YORK SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREATER NEW YORK SAVINGS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,852,000
c7,693,000
Per share
.46
-
Yr net
bd23,449,000
c32,537,000
Per share
-
-
b-Includes tax credits of $2,279,000 for the quarter and $9,657,000 for the year.


City Council Wakes Up but Still Lags
LEAD: Mayor Koch assembled the news media one afternoon last May to propose the elimination of two business taxes on energy use.
The ceremony, like similar occasions in City Hall, ran a predictable course, until Councilman Jerome X. O'Donovan marched to the podium to offer his support.


'Replacement' Label Hard to Remove
LEAD: When do they stop being replacement players?


'Eyes on the Prize' Tops DuPont-Columbia Awards
LEAD: ''Eyes on the Prize,'' a public television documentary series about the American civil rights movement, won two top honors last night in the annual Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University awards for broadcast journalism.


Spinks-Tyson Called Unlikely
LEAD: Shelly Finkel, the fight manager who this week joined the negotiations for a Mike Tyson-Michael Spinks bout, said yesterday that he was not optimistic that the match would take place.


Meese to Make F.B.I. Inquiry
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d said today that he would review allegations of harassment in the Federal Bureau of Investigation's surveillance of opponents of the Reagan Administration's Central America policy.


MCDONALD'S CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCDONALD'S CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,265,797,000
1,088,229,000
Net inc
129,600,000
113,556,000
Share earns
.68
.59
Yr rev
4,893,538,000
4,240,166,000
Net inc
b596,462,000
479,725,000
Share earns
3.14
2.48


Plan for Highway Through Amish Region Is Killed in Pennsylvania
LEAD: Declaring that the life and traditions of Pennsylvania's Amish ''should not be destroyed or dislocated or interrupted,'' Gov.
Robert P. Casey has killed a proposal to build a superhighway through the heart of the Amish country in Lancaster County.


Theater: Pearl Troupe In Sophocles' 'Electra'
LEAD: WHATEVER else one may say about the Pearl Theater Company, which has taken on the classics since its beginnings in 1984, it does not do things by halves.
This season, it has already come to grips with Shakespeare (''Macbeth''), Moliere (''The Imaginary Invalid'') and Shaw (''Candida'') and is readying itself for Chekhov (''Uncle Vanya'').


Omni Ensemble
LEAD: The Omni Ensemble, a New York chamber-music group, will play Messiaen's ''Quartet for the End of Time,'' Elliott Carter's ''Esprit Rude/Esprit Doux'' for flute and clarinet, Weber's Trio for Flute, Cello and Piano, and Edward Smaldone's Double Duo for Flute, Clarinet, Violin and Cello, Sunday at 3 P.M.


Photo one of 30 autographed Mark Twain items to be auctioned Monday by Christie's Auctions
LEAD:  Twain's Typewriter


Mitchell House Given A Reprieve in Atlanta
LEAD: The stucco Victorian-style apartment building here where Margaret Mitchell began and finished the first draft of her novel ''Gone With the Wind'' has received a reprieve from the wrecker's ball, with Mayor Andrew Young turning down a developer's permit to demolish it.


Dr. John D. Lewis, 82, Teacher of Government
LEAD: Dr.
John D. Lewis, a professor of government at Oberlin College for 37 years, died of cardiac arrest Saturday at a nursing home in Oberlin, Ohio.
He was 82 years old.


Pop: Earth, Wind And Fire
LEAD: EARTH, WIND AND FIRE needs to work some bugs out of the elaborate show that opened a sold-out five-night stand Wednesday at Radio City Music Hall.
Reconstituted after a four-year hiatus, with seven sidemen bolstering five longtime band members, Earth, Wind and Fire had to force the buoyancy that made the band so popular a decade ago.


Strike Issues Still Unresolved
LEAD: Gene Upshaw, the executive director of the National Football League Players Association, said today that he was willing to resume negotiations at any time to achieve a new collective bargaining agreement.


Council Backs Housing Order In Yonkers
LEAD: After nearly five hours of being denounced by residents as wimps, liars, snakes and ''masters of deceit,'' the City Council voted early this morning to obey a Federal court order to build low-income housing in predominantly white neighborhoods.


New York's Three-Musician Limit For Clubs Is Held Unconstitutional
LEAD: A New York City law that sets a limit of three musicians on stage at a time in many of the city's clubs and cabarets is unconstitutional because it abridges the First Amendment rights of composers and performers, a judge in Manhattan ruled yesterday.


REEBOK INTERNATIONAL LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REEBOK INTERNATIONAL LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
340,219,000
240,252,000
Net inc
34,198,000
29,280,000
Share earns
.30
.27
Shares outst
113,531,000
106,852,000
Yr sales
1,389,196,000
919,401,000
Net inc
165,200,000
132,134,000
Share earns
1.49
1.27
Shares outst
111,234,000
103,784,000


Retin-A's Impact On Johnson Stock
LEAD: AN old product with new and potentially profitable applications can excite investors, especially when the maker of the product is an established company that has not had anything new and hot in some time.


What Is George Bush Hiding?
LEAD: As long as Vice President Bush offers his experience in world affairs as a qualification for his Presidential candidacy, the questions he refuses to answer about the Iran-contra affair will haunt him.
Unless he says more, voters are left to judge him by the known record.
It presents three possibilities, each disquieting - or worse.


Photographs That Reflect and Confront Cultural Icons
LEAD: JUDGED by its first month, 1988 promises to be an energetic, expansive and sometimes controversial year for photography.
On a weekend's excursion to museums and galleries currently exhibiting photographs, one can sense a ferment that compensates for the often uninviting chill of winter streets and sidewalks.


Piano-Bass Duo
LEAD: The duo of Jack Wilson on piano and Santi DeBriano on bass will perform tonight and tomorrow at Bradley's, 70 University Place (228-6440).
Music begins at 9:45; there is no cover charge or minimum.


ARMS ADVISER ASSERTS U.S. CAN DETECT HIDDEN SOVIET MISSILES
LEAD: Paul H. Nitze, the senior arms control adviser to Secretary of State George P. Shultz, today defended the American ability to monitor the new missile treaty against charges that the treaty cannot be verified effectively.


Amtrak Train Derails South of Philadelphia
LEAD: An Amtrak train carrying about 130 people derailed 15 miles south of Philadelphia early this morning, causing some injuries.


Democracy Is Far In South Korea
LEAD: To the Editor:


People
LEAD: *
Clark Hine, formerly of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Chicago, joining Quaker Oats U.S.
Grocery Products as vice president, advertising.


Earnings Jump At Time Inc.
LEAD: Time Inc.'s net income more than quadrupled in the fourth quarter, to $52 million, or 88 cents a share, from $12 million, or 20 cents a share, a year earlier.
The company took a charge of $63 million, or 55 cents a share, in 1986's fourth quarter to cover the cost of staff cuts.
Revenues rose 9.7 percent, to $1.14 billion, from $1.03 billion a year earlier.


Simon Takes Off Gloves But Puts Them Back On
LEAD: Throughout last fall, after jumping to the front of the polls in Iowa and finding an unmistakable link with many of its voters, Senator Paul Simon of Illinois campaigned as the different politician.


Indictment in Asbestos Dumping
LEAD: A Staten Island construction company and one of its employees were indicted yesterday on charges that they used unsafe methods to remove asbestos from a Sanitation Department garage and dumped the debris outside a Bronx apartment house.


G.M. Rebate Plan
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it had added the Chevrolet Nova to its buyer-incentive programs by offering a $1,200 cash rebate to buyers who own an imported car and a $600 rebate to others.
The Nova is made by New United Motor Manufacturing Industries of Fremont, Calif., a G.M. venture with the Toyota Motor Corporation.


PENNZOIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNZOIL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
498,673,000
496,935,000
Net inc
b22,037,000
c46,523,000
Share earns
.44
1.03
Yr rev
1,836,302,000
1,921,223,000
Net inc
b44,256,000
c45,443,000
Share earns
.69
.72


Metropolitan Soloists
LEAD: The Metropolitan Soloists, a Manhattan-based wind chamber group, will play an all-French concert tomorrow afternoon at 3 o'clock at the Lincoln Center Performing Arts Library.
The group will play works by d'Indy, Milhaud, Eugene Goossens, Francois-Joseph Gossec and F. H. J. Castile-Blaze.
Admission is free.


Cuomo Proposals Will Simplify Rent-Regulation Procedures
LEAD: To the Editor:


Film: 'The Tree We Hurt'
LEAD: IT'S summer 1960, in the picturesque Greek town of Chios, where people get around by donkey.
School is ending, and a present-day narrator is calling up memories of the idyllic weeks he spent between fourth and fifth grades.
They compose ''The Tree We Hurt,'' an unassuming Greek movie that opens today at the Public


Sisters of Charity Hospital Offering
LEAD: Sisters of Charity Health Care Systems yesterday offered $190 million of refunding revenue bonds for five hospitals in Colorado and Ohio through underwriters led by Dillon, Read &amp; Company.
All of the bonds are insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corporation and are rated triple-A by both Moody's Investors Service and Standard &amp;


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  HAMPTON HEAT.
By Irving Weinman. 225 pages.
Atheneum. $17.95  LOVER AND THIEF.
By Arthur Maling. 230 pages.
Harper &amp; Row. $15.95.
A PARAMOUNT KILL.
By Gaylord Larsen. 211 pages.
E.
P.
Dutton. $16.95.


U.S. and Egypt to Press Israel on Palestinians
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak with President Reagan at welcoming ceremony for the Egyptian leader at the White House.
The two agreed to call for a six-month cooling-off period between Israel and the Palestinians living in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Page A8. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


HERITAGE-NIS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HERITAGE-NIS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,631,000
bc3,258,000
Per share
.38
-
Yr net inc
9,475,000
b7,929,000
Per share
1.40
-
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $845,000.
c-Restated to conform with general accounting principles.


Dance: Limon Troupe's New 'Traitor'
LEAD: HAVING started out on the right foot, the Limon Dance Company was off and running by the second program of its current season Wednesday night.
There is a new cohesiveness to the troupe, not entirely remote from the equally new and stronger male dancing that has now come to the fore.


Stop and Shop Bid
LEAD: The Stop and Shop Companies said its board had rejected the Dart Group's $30-a-share takeover offer.
The board decided that it was in the best interest of the company to remain independent, Stop and Shop said.
The retailer's shares fell 37.5 cents today, to close at $31.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Albany Split as It Tries To Solve Garbage Crisis
LEAD: Stressing the need for quick action, the Governor, the State Assembly and the State Senate have each drawn up comprehensive legislation to deal with New York State's garbage crisis.
But the proposals indicate that so far the only point the three parties agree on is the urgency of the problem.


Face to Face for Sandinistas and Rebels
LEAD: Officials of the Nicaraguan Government and anti-Sandinista guerrillas met for their first face-to-face negotiations here this afternoon and agreed to hold further talks Friday morning.


On the Lines, Strength Meets Finesse
LEAD: The Washington Redskins' defensive line is big and strong, and the Denver Broncos' offensive line is relatively small and quick.


Anyone Here Wish to Be a Tree?
LEAD: IF you were a tree, what kind of tree would you be?


APOLLO COMPUTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APOLLO COMPUTER INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
162,985,000
120,874,000
Net inc
10,517,000
5,275,000
Share earns
.29
.19
Yr sales
553,660,000
391,685,000
Net inc
21,692,000
9,331,000
Share earns
.60
.27


ALEXANDER &amp; BALDWIN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALEXANDER &amp; BALDWIN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
167,924,000
146,653,000
Net inc
22,753,000
21,651,000
Share earns
.92
.77
Shares outst
25,172,000
28,045,000
Yr rev
655,276,000
536,668,000
Net inc
120,353,000
92,380,000
Share earns
4.59
3.30
Shares outst
26,222,000
27,995,000


Grey Said to Be Agency For Olympic Coins
LEAD: The word around the street is that Grey Advertising, which knows a thing or two about the marketing of gold and silver, has been selected by the Treasury to promote its Olympic Coins, which will be available in both precious metals.
Reports also have it that the billings will be $20 million.


Letter Linked to North Describes Witness Plan
LEAD: A document found in Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's safe shows that participants in the White House-directed efforts to supply the contras sought to silence at least one witness who was helping Congress investigate the secret operation.


Don't Be Bullied by School Custodians
LEAD: New York City's public school custodians wield such excessive power that it warps administration of the whole school system.
The custodians have reigned unchallenged for so long that cutting them down to size won't be easy.
Yet that task remains essential to meaningful school reform.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: Allentown Cement Co., Allentown, Pa., has been purchased by Euroc A.B. for about $83 million.


GLENN CLOSE IN 'STONES FOR IBARRA'
LEAD: GENTLY and intelligently, ''Stones for Ibarra,'' the ''Hallmark Hall of Fame'' presentation on CBS tonight at 9 o'clock, takes chances and ends up succeeding wonderfully.
There is an entrenched mechanism in television drama, with roots in the 19th-century novel, that forces writers into a naturalistic mode, a straighforward chronological unfolding of a story.


SENATE, TO OVERRIDE COURT, VOTES A BILL EXTENDING ANTI-BIAS LAWS
LEAD: The Senate tonight passed a civil rights bill that would reverse the impact of a 1984 Supreme Court decision that significantly limited the reach of Federal laws against discrimination.


Jersey Man Is Killed By Fumes From Car
LEAD: A man who left his car running in a closed garage while polishing it was killed by carbon monoxide from the exhaust fumes, the police said.


Tennis Anyone? Not After Dark In This Suburb
LEAD: For years the Alpine zoning board has tried to insure that residents don't ruin this suburb by building too many tennis courts in their yards. ''Tennis courts take up most of the board's time,'' said John Langan, the zoning board's attorney. ''And swimming pools.''


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Detroit Tigers have offered Kirk Gibson a one-year contract extension with a no-trade clause, according to Greg Shea, a team spokesman, who refused to specify details of the offer.
Gibson, one of seven players declared a free agent until March 1 by an arbitrator last week, is being pursued by the Los Angeles Dodgers and is entering the final year of a contract with Detroit that will pay him $1.3 million in 1988.


Bush's Role in Iran Affair: Questions and Answers
LEAD: If Vice President Bush benefited from his televised confrontation with Dan Rather on Monday night, he also paid a price.


Cabaret: 'Call Me Ethel'
LEAD: ''COLE PORTER used to say, 'You can hear Merman's voice all the way to the last row of the balcony,' and that's before I start singing,'' trumpets Rita McKenzie at the beginning of ''Call Me Ethel,'' her one-woman salute to the Broadway legend Ethel Merman.


E-SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*E-SYSTEMS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
315,555,000
300,985,000
Net inc
17,719,000
14,895,000
Share earns
.57
.48
Yr sales
1,227,237,000
1,135,072,000
Net inc
60,400,000
61,553,000
Share earns
1.95
2.00


DU PONT DE NEMOURS, E I &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DU PONT DE NEMOURS, E I &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,941,000,000
6,677,000,000
Net inc
439,000,000
335,000,000
Share earns
1.82
1.38
Yr sales
30,468,000,000
27,148,000,000
Net inc
1,786,000,000
1,538,000,000
Share earns
7.39
6.35


CENVILL DEVELOPMENT CORP reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENVILL DEVELOPMENT CORP (AMEX)
Year to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
202,837,000
177,521,000
Net inc
15,748,000
8,933,000
Share earns
1.09
.62
The latest year includes revenue of $8,917,000 and net income of $5,620,000, or 39 cents a share, from the sale of an 80 percent subsidiary, Communications &amp; Cable Inc., and certain interest in recreation leases to Communications &amp; Cable.


MIDDLE SOUTH UTILITIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDDLE SOUTH UTILITIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
778,504,000
796,908,000
Net inc
50,613,000
61,827,000
Share earns
.25
.30
Yr rev
3,454,820,000
3,485,912,000
Net inc
429,504,000
454,465,000
Share earns
2.10
2.22


GREAT LAKES CHEMICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT LAKES CHEMICAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
141,898,000
79,139,000
Net inc
17,558,000
b6,956,000
Share earns
1.01
.46
Yr rev
501,010,000
305,703,000
Net inc
55,536,000
b26,817,000
Share earns
3.34
1.79


CHITTENDEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHITTENDEN CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,110,000
2,363,000
Per share
.42
.48
Yr net inc
b4,243,000
7,246,000
Per share
.79
1.53
b-Includes a $5.4 million provision for loan losses made during the second quarter.


Style and Guile at Redskins' Practice
LEAD: Joe Bugel, an assistant coach, putting players through an offensive drill.
Wally Kleine, far right, and a much shorter Craig McEwen donned their pads as Art Monk, below, worked out in Terry Orr's jersey.
Players wear different numbers to confuse spies. (AP)


Robert K. Enders, Professor, 88
LEAD: Robert K. Enders, chairman emeritus of the biology department at Swarthmore College, died Monday at his home in Swarthmore, Pa.
He was 88 years old.


NEW HAMPSHIRE SAVINGS BANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW HAMPSHIRE SAVINGS BANK CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,067,000
2,332,000
Per share
.45
.51
Yr net inc
7,257,000
11,273,000
Per share
1.57
2.44
b-After an after-tax loss of $2,333,000 from mortgage banking operations.


PHILLIPS PETROLEUM CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILLIPS PETROLEUM CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,932,000,000
2,376,000,000
Net inc
b33,000,000
c11,000,000
Share earns
.12
.02
Yr rev
10,917,000,000
10,018,000,000
Net inc
b35,000,000
c228,000,000
Share earns
.06
.89


King Helps Bullets Romp Past Knicks
LEAD: Remember Bernard King, the free agent the Knicks did not want and then lost without receiving compensation?


Film: 'You Can't Hurry Love'


A-Bomb Spy Dies at 76
LEAD: Klaus Fuchs was jailed in Britain in the 1950's after being convicted of passing nuclear secrets to the Soviet Union.
Page B5. (Agence France-Presse)


Ocean Spray Company Indicted as a Polluter
LEAD: In the first felony indictment of a company under the Clean Water Act, Ocean Spray Cranberries Inc. was charged today with polluting the sewer system of a Massachusetts town and a nearby river.


COURT IN CANADA RULES ON ABORTION
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that Canada's restrictive abortion law unconstitutionally interferes with a woman's right to control her own body.


XEROX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XEROX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,200,000,000
3,700,000,000
Net inc
155,000,000
bd87,000,000
Share earns
1.43
.77
Yr rev
14,900,000,000
12,900,000,000
Net inc
578,000,000
cd465,000,000
Share earns
5.35
4.28


Contras and Sandinistas Begin Talks
LEAD: Members of the Nicaraguan rebel delegation arriving yesterday in San Jose, Costa Rica, for the opening session of the first face-to-face negotiations between the contras and the Sandinista Government.
The two sides offered widely differing peace proposals.
Page A3. (Reuters)


Minor Candidate Gets U.S. Funds; Decision on LaRouche Is Delayed
LEAD: The Federal Election Commission today grappled with whether to grant public matching funds to Presidential campaigns of two minor candidates who received donations from people who the commission feared might not have realized they were contributing to a political campaign.


Streak Haunts Islanders
LEAD: Led by a coach whose face was still drawn the morning after their surprising defeat here, the Islanders went through their practice paces and then, still a subdued bunch, filed onto a flight to Buffalo.
There, on Friday, they will have a chance to repair an 11-game streak on the road without a victory.


Roger DeKoven Dies; Diverse Actor Was 81
LEAD: Roger DeKoven, an actor who appeared in roles as diverse as Edmund, in Erwin Piscator's modern staging of ''King Lear,'' and Florenz Ziegfeld Jr., in the Broadway musical ''Funny Girl,'' died of cancer yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.


Love Ahead by 3 Shots
LEAD: The only thing Davis Love 3d may enjoy doing on a golf course more than letting out shaft on his big drives is sinking those pesky little putts that so often elude the best golfers.


Nanne Quits Stars
LEAD: Citing the effects the continuing stress of working with the team may have on his health, Lou Nanne, the Minnesota North Stars' general manager, resigned yesterday after more than 20 years with the team as a player, coach and executive. ''I couldn't divorce myself during the game from the stress of winning and losing,'' said Nanne, who is 46 years old.


Koch Panel to Offer Project Design Guidelines
LEAD: Mayor Koch has formed a committee to recommend design guidelines for publicly sponsored development projects.


Sugar Prices Fall Sharply In Advance of New Report
LEAD: World sugar futures prices broke a monthlong upward trend and plunged below 10 cents a pound yesterday on indications that a tight supply situation was easing, analysts said.


Accounts
LEAD: * Warnaco to Wells, Rich, Greene for Valentino Intimo intimate apparel.


ONE BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONE BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,920,000
c2,242,000
Per share
.48
.62
Yr net inc
b19,577,000
17,734,000
Per share
2.42
2.22
Shares outst
8,091,060
7,569,534
b-Includes a tax credit of $508,000 for the quarter and $1,983,000 for the year.


About Real Estate; Greenwich Project Offers a Victorian Mansion Look
LEAD: Although Greenwich, Conn., has a reputation as a patrician community of fine estates and mansions, it is nevertheless a place where condominiums are gaining fast.
Unlike most suburban condominiums, these tend to resemble luxurious, generously landscaped private houses.


Vote Set on Judge Kennedy
LEAD: The Senate will vote next Wednesday on Judge Anthony M. Kennedy, President Reagan's nominee to the Supreme Court, the office of Senator Robert C. Byrd, the majority leader, announced today.
The vote will follow about one hour of floor speeches.
Judge Kennedy received unanimous approval from the Senate Judiciary Committee on Wednesday.


Haitian Music
LEAD: System Band will play Haitian music tonight at Sounds of Brazil, 204 Varick Street (243-4940).
Sets begin at 11 P.M., 1 and 2:30 A.M.; there is a $15 cover and a two-drink minimum.


BARNES GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARNES GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
114,807,000
104,791,000
Net inc
4,469,000
3,045,000
Share earns
.74
.47
Yr sales
458,016,000
439,727,000
Net inc
17,840,000
16,603,000
Share earns
2.80
2.57


Nuggets' Natt Arrested
LEAD: Calvin Natt of the Denver Nuggets was one of about 60 people arrested in a police ''sting'' operation in Aurora, Colo., that used an escort service to draw sexual solicitations, the police said yesterday.
Natt, 31 years old, was arrested Jan. 15, according to Mary Schumacher, a spokeswoman for the Aurora police.


Patterson's Board Drops Its Case Against Clark, but Orders Inquiry
LEAD: The Paterson Board of Education tonight voided its insubordination proceedings against Joe Clark, the principal of Eastside High School, but directed two schools officials to investigate the expulsion of 66 students by Mr.
Clark last month and to recommend what action, if any, to take against him.


POTLATCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POTLATCH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
252,724,000
243,256,000
Net inc
24,916,000
20,132,000
Share earns
.89
.72
Yr sales
992,077,000
976,373,000
Net inc
87,623,000
69,943,000
Share earns
3.13
2.49


CLARK EQUIPMENT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLARK EQUIPMENT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
286,400,000
236,400,000
Net loss
b5,200,000
c19,900,000
Yr sales
1,048,200,000
954,000,000
Net loss
b16,600,000
c60,600,000
b-Included a loss of $2,588,000 for the quarter from discontinued finance operations and a loss of $83,000 from discontinued operations for the year.


Bridge: Jersey Sectional Tournament Takes Idea From Magazine
LEAD: New ideas in tournament planning are none too common, but one will surface today at the New Jersey Bridge League's Winter Sectional at 33 South 21st Street in Kenilworth, N.J.


Film: 'You Can't Hurry Love'
''YOU Can't Hurry Love,'' opening today at the Gemini and other theaters, is a very dim comedy about how funny and peculiar sunny Los Angeles is supposed to be to a square young man from Akron.
It's the first feature written and directed by Richard Martini, who apparently has connections.
Appearing in throwaway cameos are Charles Grodin, Sally Kellerman and Kristy McNichol.


L.F. Rothschild Sells Brokerage
LEAD: L. F. Rothschild &amp; Company said yesterday that it had sold its New York brokerage operations to Oppenheimer &amp; Company, marking the latest step in Rothschild's retrenchment after the October stock market plunge.


CONTROL DATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTROL DATA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
927,500,000
903,600,000
Net inc
b10,800,000
c226,200,000
Share earns
.26
-
Yr rev
3,366,500,000
3,346,700,000
Net inc
b19,300,000
c264,500,000
Share earns
.45
-


HITK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HITK CORP
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Net loss
b3,653,000
c3,821,700
Share earns
-
1.20
9mo net loss
b3,955,500
c5,553,400
Share earns
-
1.74
b-Includes realized investment losses of $1,633,800 for the quarter and $1,230,300 for the 9 months.


TV: 'Wonder Years,' A New Series on ABC
LEAD: Super Bowl Sunday has spawned a tradition.
Immediately after the game, while the network still might retain access to one of the year's biggest audiences, a new series is previewed to take advantage of the ''sampling'' opportunity.
Getting viewers to see your product is considered a crucial aspect of the programming game.


BCE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BCE INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,840,000,000
3,920,000,000
Net inc
340,000,000
258,000,000
Share earns
1.22
.94
Yr rev
14,650,000,000
13,930,000,000
Net inc
1,090,000,000
1,020,000,000
Share earns
3.91
3.83
Shares outst
269,400,000
257,600,000


GENERAL BUILDING PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL BUILDING PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 25
1987
1986
Sales
18,038,112
16,057,278
Net inc
390,374
698,462
Share earns
.10
.23
Shares ourst
4,016,750
3,000,000
Yr sales
67,568,474
57,371,891
Net inc
2,149,801
2,007,929
Share earns
.58
.67
Shares outst
3,772,214
3,000,000


Music: Parley of Instruments
LEAD: The Parley of Instruments, a London early-music group founded in 1979, appeared Wednesday night at the Metropolitan Museum of Art with two American soloists in an all-Vivaldi program.
It was an evening of attractive, high-level music-making, genuinely appealing without standing out in any really sterling way.


Pistons Top Celtics Before 61,983 Fans
LEAD: Joe Dumars scored 6 of his 20 points in a crucial third-quarter run as the Detroit Pistons beat the Boston Celtics, 125-108, tonight before 61,983 fans, a National Basketball Association record.


HEALTH CARE PROPERTY INVESORS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTH CARE PROPERTY INVESORS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,444,000
9,352,000
Net inc
3,782,000
3,762,000
Share earns
.46
.46
Yr rev
39,559,000
28,821,000
Net inc
14,208,000
12,969,000
Share earns
1.74
1.79


BEGLEY COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEGLEY COMPANY
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,047,000
20,828,000
Net inc
302,000
627,000
Share earns
.48
1.13
Shares outst
628,360
554,443
9mo rev
57,646,000
55,945,000
Net inc
27,000
652,000
Share earns
.05
1.18


FALCONBRIDGE LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FALCONBRIDGE LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
434,000,000
284,000,000
Net inc
43,200,000
6,100,000
Share earns
.62
.10
Yr rev
1,300,000,000
1,100,000,000
Net inc
b73,100,000
b70,300,000
Share earns
1.03
1.21


Peak Japan Jobless Rate
LEAD: The unemployment rate in Japan, seasonally adjusted, averaged 2.8 percent in 1987, the worst on record, the Statistics Bureau reported today.
In December, the rate stood at 2.6 percent of the labor force, down a tenth of a percentage point from November, the bureau said.


For Novice Skaters, Company Is Support
LEAD: Theresa O'Connor, left, Natasha Celstin and Kelly Cerroni, right, held on to each other for balance during an outing yesterday at the Edward J. Murray Memorial Skating Rink in Yonkers. (NYT/Edward Hausner)


VEECO INSTRUMENTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VEECO INSTRUMENTS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Sales
54,296,000
38,830,000
Net inc
b1,841,000
1,318,000
Share earns
.18
.13
b-Includes a gain of $95,000, or 1 cent a share, on extinguishment of debt.
Latest quarter includes results of Lambda Magnapower Inc.


ANDREW CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANDREW CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
54,471,000
48,668,000
Net inc
2,678,000
2,291,000
Share earns
.27
.23
Shares outst
10,017,000
10,082


CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of an an editing error, an article yesterday about questions surrounding Vice President Bush's knowledge of the Iran-contra affair misstated the record on what is known about the involvement of Donald P. Gregg, an aide to Mr.
Bush.
Mr, Gregg was aware of a plan to resupply the contras; there is no evidence that he knew it was financed in part from proceeds of arms sales to


FOODARAMA SUPERMARKETS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOODARAMA SUPERMARKETS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 1
1987
1986
Sales
118,799,000
115,086,000
Net inc
b2,017,000
c99,000
Share earns
1.61
-
Yr sales
482,088,000
471,886,000
Net inc
b4,217,000
1,681,000
Share earns
3.26
1.25
Shares outst
1,294,000
1,341,000


Bond Prices Advance for A Third Day
LEAD: Bond prices advanced for the third consecutive session yesterday as market participants abandoned both their usual pre-weekend caution and the practice of balancing books before a Treasury refunding.


WELLS FARGO MORTGAGE &amp; EQUITY TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WELLS FARGO MORTGAGE &amp; EQUITY TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,440,000
1,760,000
Per share
.22
.27
6mo net inc
b1,983,000
c4,488,000
Per share
.30
.68
b-After a loss of $633,000 from the sale of a property.


What's Behind Strange Tasaday Hoax Charges
LEAD: To the Editor:


Better Off Under Reagan? Mostly, No
LEAD: As we approach another Presidential election and in the aftermath of President Reagan's rosy State of the Union Message it is appropriate to revisit the question that Ronald Reagan used with such effect as a candidate in 1980: ''Are you better off now than you were when this Administration took office?


A MEMO TO MEESE SAID TO ASK CASH FOR ISRAELI PARTY
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d was told in a 1985 memo from a close friend who wanted his help in arranging Government support for a billion-dollar Iraqi oil pipeline that the project would involve payments to the Israeli Labor Party, present and former United States Government officials said today.


CONSUMER'S WORLDCoping/With Restaurant Abuses
LEAD: Your party of four made a reservation for 8 P.M. at an expensive restaurant.
An hour later, you are seated without apology at a table near the kitchen in the path of rushing waiters.
You eventually order four steaks, rare; they eventually arrive, well done.
By that time it's 10:30.
The sentiment is a unanimous ''let's walk out.


Reagan Bars Mention of Abortion At Clinics Receiving U.S. Money
LEAD: In the first formal step of what promises to be a major legal battle, the Reagan Administration today prohibited most of the nation's family planning clinics from providing advice or other assistance that would help women obtain abortions.


Trying to Save Man, Woman Dies in Fire
LEAD: A Queens woman was killed yesterday afternoon after running back into her burning house to rescue an elderly invalid trapped by the flames in a second-story bedroom, the Fire Department said.
The invalid and another man also perished.


Comments on Paterno
LEAD: One person who seems unlikely to apply for membership in the Joe Paterno Fan Club is Darin Roberts, who in 1984 was a highly publicized and talented quarterback from Franklin High School in Somerset, N.J.
Roberts was heavily recruited, but he chose Paterno and Penn State because ''they told me I was going to play quarterback when they recruited me,'' he said.


Seats Are Sought On Ameron Board
LEAD: Industrial Equity (Pacific) Ltd., which holds an 18.7 percent stake in Ameron Inc., has requested two seats on the company's board of directors.
In a letter Thursday to Ameron's board, Industrial Equity said its holdings in the contruction concern, based in Monterey Park, Calif., were ''nearly two times the next largest shareholder.


The Battle Against Fraudulent Ads
LEAD: ''Just take Dream Away before going to bed,'' said the advertisement printed in newspapers and shown on television last year. ''You will wake up the next morning slimmer, trimmer and looking better than you did before.''


PUERTO RICAN CEMENT CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUERTO RICAN CEMENT CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,310,000
16,603,000
Net inc
2,776,000
2,526,000
Share earns
1.41
1.28
Yr rev
74,343,000
64,000,000
Net inc
10,670,000
6,708,000
Share earns
5.40
3.39


F.B.I. FACES REVIEW OVER SURVEILLANCE OF FOES OF POLICY
LEAD: President Reagan has ordered an internal review of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's surveillance of domestic groups opposed to his Central American policy, the White House said today.


OAKWOOD HOMES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OAKWOOD HOMES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
13,398,000
15,796,000
Net inc
841,000
1,131,000


AMERICAN LEARNING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN LEARNING
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,321,000
2,757,000
Net loss
627,000
336,000


GEPHARDT HOPEFUL ON IOWA CAUCUSES
LEAD: Representative Richard A. Gephardt heads toward the first round of the 1988 Democratic Presidential competition with cautious optimism that he can surge ahead of the field and win the Iowa caucuses.


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, JANUARY 30, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 2-5, 28  Edwin Meese was told of payments to be made to the Israeli Labor Party for help in arranging a billion-dollar Iraqi oil pipeline, present and former Government officials said.
Page 1  Special trade preferences will be cut for Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong and Singapore, the Reagan Administration announced in advance of critical negotiations with Congress.


ZIONS BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZIONS BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
6,706,000
b3,599,000
Per share
-
.63
Yr net loss
14,363,000
b19,735,000
Per share
-
3.45
b-Net income.


MAXUS ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAXUS ENERGY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
154,200,000
152,500,000
Net loss
55,100,000
c42,200,000
Yr sales
632,000,000
595,700,000
Net loss
b539,600,000
c115,600,000
b-Includes a loss of $52.7 million from discontinued operations and a $380 million charge related to geothermal assets and an Alaskan coal project.


Court Allows Mother's Suit Over Taking of Child's Eyes
LEAD: An appeals court has ruled that a woman may sue Dr.
Shashi Gore, an Orange County assistant medical examiner, who is accused of removing her dead daughter's eyes for transplants against the mother's wishes.


Wave Hill Trio
LEAD: The Wave Hill Trio - Sung-Ju Lee, violinist; Roberta Cooper, cellist, and Marian Hahn, pianist - will play Schubert's Piano Quintet in A (''Trout''), Brahms's Trio in C minor (Op. 101), and Duos for violin and viola by Mozart at 3 P.M. tomorrow in the Armor Hall of Wave Hill, 249th Street and Independence Avenue in the Bronx.


ACME ELECTRIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACME ELECTRIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Sales
21,216,000
16,257,000
Net inc
555,000
175,000
Share earns
.12
.04
6mo sales
42,294,000
30,758,000
Net inc
1,294,000
332,000
Share earns
.29
.07


Super Bowl Notebook; Humphries Expected to Start
LEAD: Stefan Humphries, the Denver starting offensive guard who was injured in practice Thursday, was reported feeling better today.
Coach Dan Reeves said he expected Humphries to start against the Washington Redskins Sunday in Super Bowl XXII.


U.S. Scales Back on Military Aid; Most to Latin Nations Is Dropped
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is cutting back sharply on security assistance to some key allies and is ending military grants to all of Latin America with the exception of three Central American countries, the State Department announced today.


AIDS and Headlong Headlines
LEAD: Much news about AIDS is grim, but the isolation of a new form of AIDS virus, known as HIV-2, from a woman in Newark is no particular reason for panic. ''New AIDS Bug Perils Blood Banks,'' gasped the hasty tabloid headline.
That's just what the virus doesn't do.


Prices Paid To Farmers Up by 2.4%
LEAD: The prices that farmers received for raw products this month rose an average 2.4 percent from last month's level and were 7.4 percent above prices last January, the Agriculture Department said today.


Britain and France Stay at Odds On Economic and Defense Policy
LEAD: The leaders of France and Britain failed to narrow their differences on economic and defense policy in talks here today, but they left the way open for further discussions on military cooperation.


Seabrook Filing Stirs Fears on Rates
LEAD: Who will set electricity rates for the customers of the Public Service Company of New Hampshire and whether the utility's assets will be sold emerged as major issues today following the utility's filing for bankruptcy protection.


MONTANA POWER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONTANA POWER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
200,387,000
191,847,000
Net inc
32,218,000
26,809,000
Share earns
1.33
1.13
Yr rev
658,727,000
655,419,000
Net inc
62,427,000
86,264,000
Share earns
2.52
3.65


Harry Avrutin Is Dead; Labor Leader Was 71
LEAD: Harry Avrutin, former secretary of the New York City Central Labor Council, A.F.L.-C.I.O., died of cancer of the liver Saturday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 71 years old and lived in Union, N.J.


COHERENT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COHERENT INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
47,540,000
35,025,000
Net inc
933,000
b812,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
8,608,000
7,959,000
b-Net loss  The fiscal 1987 first quarter results are restated to reflect adoption of FAS No.


NBI INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NBI INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
61,790,000
69,797,000
Net loss
b13,302,000
c3,872,000
6mo rev
125,145,000
141,946,000
Net loss
16,602,000
c4,077,000
b-Includes a pretax provision of $12,468,000.


V.A. Lowers Loan Rate
LEAD: The Veterans Administration said today that it would lower its maximum interest rate for federally backed home mortgages by a percentage point, to 9.5 percent.


AVERY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AVERY INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
146,350,000
99,567,000
Net loss
b42,739,000
6,665,000
b-Included $7 million in losses on securities sales and a $16.3 million valuation allowance to reduce the carrying value of equity securities in the portfolio to market value.


XTRA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XTRA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
73,553,000
51,076,000
Net inc
7,651,000
3,013,000
Share earns
.85
.40


Nurses in Los Angeles Return
LEAD: Nurses returned to work at hospitals in Los Angeles County today after a judge ordered an end to their strike, but pharmacists called in sick and doctors vowed to strike the county's largest medical center.
The doctors, nurses and pharmacists have been working without contracts since September.


COAST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COAST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,698,000
c3,069,000
Share earns
.43
.77
Yr net inc
b8,672,000
c9,504,000
Share earns
2.16
2.36
b-Includes tax credits of $700,000 and $2,900,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Legal Aid Society Pressed on Backlog
LEAD: After years of failing to persuade the Koch administration that it needed major budgetary increases, the Legal Aid Society of New York forced a showdown.
Starting in April 1986, its lawyers, who every year represent thousands of indigent criminal defendants, refused to handle most arraignments.


MIDWEST FINANCIAL GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDWEST FINANCIAL GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,031,181
3,166,040
Per share
.95
.70
Yr net inc
15,526,183
11,611,613
Per share
3.43
2.56


EPSCO INCORPORATED reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EPSCO INCORPORATED (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,269,700
3,977,000
Net inc
256,600
219,000
Share earns
.17
.16
Shares outst
1,454,700
1,344,800
Yr sales
25,640,800
15,016,400
Net inc
766,900
700,200
Share earns
.53
.52
Shares outst
1,454,000
1,343,600


Trade Gain For Bonn And Tokyo
LEAD: West Germany and Japan posted record trade surpluses for 1987, according to reports released today.
But the excesses are expected to ease this year because of their strong currencies and global demands that trade imbalances be cut.


DATASCOPE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATASCOPE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
24,550,000
20,100,000
Net inc
2,254,000
1,014,000
Share earns
.51
.26
Shares outst
4,415,000
3,903,000
6mo sales
45,850,000
37,350,000
Net inc
3,231,000
1,469,000
Share earns
.73
.38
Shares outst
4,425,000
3,873,000


BLACK HILLS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLACK HILLS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
30,818,000
29,551,000
Net inc
5,270,000
4,353,000
Share earns
.56
.46
Yr rev
122,678,000
111,856,000
Net inc
20,350,000
b16,998,000
Share earns
2.18
1.80


Survey Finds Wide AIDS Ignorance
LEAD: A new survey has found widespread misinformation about AIDS, with 26 percent of the respondents thinking they would probably get the disease from giving blood and 36 percent believing they could get AIDS by eating at a restaurant where the cook has it.


U.S. and Brazil at Odds Over Arms for Libya
LEAD: American and Brazilian officials have been locked in a sharp dispute this week over Brazil's intention to sell a large quantity of arms to Libya.


Bush Prevails at G.O.P. Parley in Michigan
LEAD: Vice President Bush won the first prize of the 1988 Presidential campaign late tonight when he prevailed over Pat Robertson at a contentious Republican state convention here to capture the biggest share of Michigan's 77 national convention delegates.


Concert: Sinopoli Leads 2 Scriabin Symphonies
LEAD: A conductor who decides to conduct two Scriabin symphonies on one program is unquestionably a brave man, confident of his powers.
What can be questioned, however, is his good sense.
Scriabin's orchestral works, intended as mystical or philosophical revelations, are so much alike in their shapeless meanderings and overheated rhetoric that hearing two of them in an evening can be numbing.


STALEY CONTINENTAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STALEY CONTINENTAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
845,607,000
810,442,000
Net inc
13,031,000
b2,525,000
Share earns
.33
.05
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $253,000 and a $7,268,000 loss from the early redemption of debt.


CNB BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CNB BANCSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,716,000
2,245,000
Per share
.54
.45
Yr net inc
10,460,000
8,787,000
Per share
2.09
1.90


LACLEDE GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LACLEDE GAS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
125,225,000
126,957,000
Net inc
7,632,000
7,732,000
Share earns
.96
.97


BURRITT INTERFINANCIAL BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURRITT INTERFINANCIAL BANCORPORATION
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,000,200
953,200
Per share
.33
.31
Yr net inc
4,011,900
b3,405,900
Per share
1.33
1.14
b-After a charge of $181,600 for a prepayment penalty on a Federal Home Loan Bank advance.


FACET ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FACET ENTERPRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
80,867,000
38,934,000
Net inc
b1,084,000
180,000
Share earns
.22
.06
Shares outst
5,005,000
3,076,000
b-Includes a tax loss carryforward of $234,000 and reflects the acquisition of Purolator Products Inc.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Skiing  Zurbriggen Atop Standing: Pirmin Zurbriggen of Switzerland won his second downhill race of the season and vaulted into first place in the overall World Cup standing yesterday, ahead of Alberto Tomba of Italy.
Zurbriggen swept down a dangerous course in Schladming, Austria, in 1 minute 59.28 seconds.


ACME STEEL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACME STEEL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
91,954,000
64,741,000
Net inc
b3,392,000
c9,760,000
Share earns
.58
-
Yr sales
335,488,000
240,314,000
Net inc
b12,983,000
c21,103,000
Share earns
2.22
-


G.E. Seen In the Lead For Ward
LEAD: The General Electric Company has emerged as the leading candidate to buy Montgomery Ward or lead a leveraged buyout of the revitalized, 315-store chain, investment bankers said yesterday.


NEW ENGLAND ELECTRIC SYSEM reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW ENGLAND ELECTRIC SYSEM (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
340,336,000
344,344,000
Net inc
40,908,000
45,120,000
Share earns
.73
.83
Yr rev
1,448,193,000
1,431,943,000
Net inc
b168,772,000
171,996,000
Share earns
3.05
3.20
Shares outst
55,995,887
54,373,947


South Korea Chief Says He Never Sought Power
LEAD: Although he seized control in a military coup eight years ago, President Chun Doo Hwan insists that he never actively sought power. ''The country was in peril,'' he said today. ''The job was thrust upon me.''


Closing of Nuclear Reactor Is Near, Oregon Senator Says
LEAD: Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, said today he believes the Reagan Administration has decided to permanently close the 25-year-old N Reactor at the Hanford nuclear reservation in Washington state.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If it was cold, that was because it is colder in Rome than in Nicaragua.'' - President Daniel Ortega Saavedra, on his reception at the Vatican.  [ 3:3. ]


Jazz: Jay Hoggard's Quartet Plays at the West End Cafe
LEAD: Jay Hoggard's quartet, which is playing at the West End Cafe, (2911 Broadway, between 113th and 114th Streets) through Sunday, has a free-flowing sense of unity that is the mark of an exceptional jazz group.


Head of New York Urban League Quits, and Regrouping Is Planned
LEAD: Harriet Michel resigned as president of the New York Urban League this week to accept a resident fellowship at Harvard University.


Man Is Held in Death Of a 2-Year-Old Boy
LEAD: A Brooklyn man man has been charged with fatally punching the 2-year-old son of the woman he lived with, the police said.


Sizzler Coach Dismissed
LEAD: John Killilea, who spent 14 years as an assistant coach in the National Basketball Association under Tom Heinsohn in Boston, Don Nelson in Milwaukee and Stan Albeck of the Nets, somewhere along the line developed an explosive temper that may have cost him his job as head coach of the Topeka Sizzlers of the Continental Basketball Association.


Sports of The Times; Tennis Courting a World Stage
LEAD: HERE it is, the final shopping day before Super Bowl Sunday, which has become an undeclared national holiday in this country but, more interestingly, a growing phenomenon in parts of Europe and Asia as well.
If there is a trade imbalance in sports, it appears to favor the Americans, as fascination with football, baseball and basketball continues to spread around the world while soccer - on a professional level, anyway -has been unable to get a foothold in the United


Investor Seeking A Chicken Chain
LEAD: Francis J. Spillman, a Dallas investor, has offered to purchase all of the shares of the Winners Corporation that he does not already control for $4.25 a share in cash, or about $15.4 million.
In a telephone interview, Mr.
Spillman said that he had had ''preliminary discussions with another chicken chain'' about the possible takeover of Winners.


The High Cost of Care For the Frail Elderly
LEAD: To the Editor:


E-II Meets With American Brands
LEAD: Officials of E-II Holdings Inc. and American Brands Inc. met today after E-II rejected an $875 million takeover bid from American Brands, calling it ''grossly inadequate.''


WESTCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,000,000
2,400,000
Per share
.12
.14
Yr net inc
9,700,000
11,100,000
Per share
.59
.77


INSIDE
LEAD:  Postal Cuts in February


BOOKS: China Hand
LEAD:  AGNES SMEDLEY: The Life and Times of an American Radical.
By Janice R. MacKinnon and Stephen R. MacKinnon. 425 pages.
Illustrated.
University of California Press. $25.


Paquito D'Rivera
LEAD: Paquito D'Rivera, an alto saxophonist, is leading a quintet and Hilton Ruiz, a pianist, is leading a group in a Latin-jazz double bill tonight and tomorrow at the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street (475-8592).
Sets begin at 9 and 11:30 P.M. with a 1:30 A.M. show today; there is a $15 cover and a $5 minimum at tables, or a $7.50 charge at the bar.


KEYSTONE HERITAGE GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEYSTONE HERITAGE GROUP INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,005,139
816,663
Per share
.61
.49
Yr net inc
4,050,085
3,414,473
Per share
2.46
2.07


In Jersey, Seeking Faith and Friends
LEAD: The Calvary Episcopal Church has its ''Merry Mixers.'' The Flemington United Methodist Church has started a young-adult fellowship centered around potluck suppers and bowling.


Campaign Trail Hat
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson was ready to hit the trail with a brand-new 10-gallon hat after being made an honorary Texas cowboy at a campaign stop yesterday in Lubbock. (AP)


FPL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FPL GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,090,667,000
979,065,000
Net inc
71,468,000
61,289,000
Share earns
.55
.48
Yr rev
4,429,673,000
4,091,504,000
Net inc
402,873,000
365,411,000
Share earns
3.10
2.90


Nets Provide Treat To Bulls and Crowd
LEAD: If the Chicago Bulls score 120 points or more, the fans at the game are treated to free chicken and biscuits.
If they hold their opponent under 100 points, fans can receive two free hot dogs.


SANTA FE ENERGY PARTNERS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANTA FE ENERGY PARTNERS LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
33,900,000
26,400,000
Net loss
7,100,000
12,300,000
Yr rev
131,200,000
109,800,000
Net loss
13,900,000
125,900,000


Floating Point Names Chief
LEAD: Floating Point Systems Inc., the troubled maker of scientific computer systems based in Beaverton, Ore., has named Howard Thrailkill president, chief executive and a director.
He succeeds Milton R. Smith, a co-founder who was appointed interim chief executive 15 months ago and who will continue as a board member.


Witness Says He Lied on Stand In New York Corruption Trial
LEAD: Federal prosecutors have disclosed that one of their witnesses recently admitted giving some untrue testimony in the corruption trial of Stanley M. Friedman, the former Bronx Democratic leader.


Books of The Times; Dark Adventure
LEAD:  NIGHT SOLDIERS. By Alan Furst. 437 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.


Devils Recover for Victory in Overtime
LEAD: Jan. 29 - Specialty-team play is one area Jim Schoenfeld, the new coach of the Devils, will have to improve if New Jersey is to make the playoffs for the first time in its history.


HARTFORD STEAM BOILER INPECTION &amp; INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARTFORD STEAM BOILER INPECTION &amp; INSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b16,302,000
c13,160,000
Share earns
.80
.62
Yr net inc
b60,644,000
c53,138,000
Share earns
2.96
2.50
b-Includes realized investment gains of $2,788,000 for the quarter and $7,259,000 for the year.


HOGAN SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOGAN SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,097,000
10,919,000
Net inc
b1,864,000
c2,939,000
Share earns
.13
.20
9mo rev
33,868,000
33,812,000
Net inc
b975,000
c6,016,000
Share earns
.07
.41


Layoffs at First Boston Expected to Total 300
LEAD: The First Boston Corporation began a first round of layoffs last week, dismissing about 150 staff members, executives at the investment firm said yesterday.


24 Hurt as Amtrak Train Derails; Key Rail Operator Leaves Scene
LEAD: An Amtrak train bound from Washington to Boston derailed here early today when it struck a piece of maintenance equipment after being switched onto the wrong track, an Amtrak official said.
Twenty-four people were hurt.
The control tower operator responsible for setting the track switches left his post soon after the accident and could not be found, according to the official, John L.


GIBRALTAR FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GIBRALTAR FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,158,000
c14,374,000
Share earns
.06
.70
Yr net loss
b131,068,000
cd49,077,000
Share earns
-
2.66
b-After a gain of $476,000 from the purchase of convertible subordinated debentures for the quarter and after an extraordinary charge for the year.


KLLM TRANSPORT SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KLLM TRANSPORT SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
20,061,000
14,712,000
Net inc
640,000
518,000
Share earns
.26
.20
Yr rev
75,230,000
58,066,000
Net inc
b3,013,000
2,334,000
Share earns
1.18
1.10


BINGHAMPTON SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BINGHAMPTON SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,605,000
2,298,000
Per share
.84
.74
Yr net inc
b9,826,000
503,000
Per share
3.15
.16
b-Includes gains from tax credits of $1,150,000 for the quarter and $3,650,000 for the year.


ESSEF CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESSEF CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
32,589,000
15,505,000
Net inc
1,109,000
228,000
Share earns
.23
.06
Shares outst
4,884,200
3,728,730


Tyson-Spinks 'Very Close'
LEAD: Shelly Finkel, a manager involved with the negotiations for a proposed Mike Tyson-Michael Spinks fight on June 24, said late yesterday that the match seemed ''very close.'' Finkel said that Butch Lewis, Spinks's promoter, is seeking a buyout rather than a guaranteed advance.


Suzanne Farrell's Hard Road Back: From 'Mr. B,' a Little Bit of a Push
LEAD: There was a moment's silence as a slender figure in a white gown moved to the center of the stage, alone, and began to dance.
And then applause broke like a wave about the dancer.
Suzanne Farrell was back, and the roar of acclaim that swept her off the stage at the end suggested that, for a good many New


BELL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELL INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
104,095,000
80,287,000
Net inc
978,000
635,000
Share earns
.15
.10
6mo sales
212,757,000
162,777,000
Net inc
2,709,000
1,585,000
Share earns
.41
.24


Aircraft Talks Falter Again
LEAD: Another round of United States-European talks aimed at settling a dispute over government aid to civil aircraft makers ended today without success.


KAMAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAMAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
188,837,000
163,429,000
Net inc
6,434,000
5,209,000
Share earns
.36
.30
Yr rev
707,539,000
588,412,000
Net inc
24,140,000
20,256,000
Share earns
1.37
1.16


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK- GA.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK- GA.
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
467,000
414,000
Per share
.48
.45
9mo net inc
1,319,000
1,244,000
Per share
1.36
1.34


DBA SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DBA SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,547,229
12,501,417
Net inc
b1,317,023
c1,071,847
Share earns
.45
.33
6mo sales
29,484,049
25,517,206
Net inc
b2,364,196
c2,039,844
Share earns
.78
.59


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.79
6.73
6.28
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.67
5.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.03
6.06
5.62
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.05
8.11
7.00
30-YR.


Koch Urges Commuter Tax Increase
LEAD: Mayor Koch wants the State Legislature to double the income tax on commuters who work in New York City to help close the city's budget gap, he said yesterday.


VICON INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VICON INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
11,039,000
8,827,000
Net inc
334,000
b602,000
Share earns
.13
-
b-Net loss and included a provision for takeover defense costs of $1.1 million, or $629,000 after pro forma tax effect.


AMERICAN PETROFINA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN PETROFINA INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
671,577,000
501,290,000
Net inc
13,608,000
5,032,000
Share earns
1.04
.41
Shares outst
13,191,707
12,273,171
Yr rev
2,484,001,000
1,960,030,000
Net inc
83,284,000
b24,569,000
Share earns
6.32
-


WAVERLY PRESS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WAVERLY PRESS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
20,083,000
17,607,000
Net inc
779,000
895,000
Share earns
.22
.24
Yr sales
76,476,000
68,830,000
Net inc
3,515,000
3,501,000
Share earns
.97
.96


EMERSON RADIO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMERSON RADIO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
200,717,000
217,002,000
Net loss
b102,000
c9,254,000
Share earns
-
.24
9mo sales
599,651,000
617,336,000
Net loss
11,465,000
c24,981,000
Share earns
-
.67


Carteret Bancorp
LEAD: Alpine Associates, a limited partnership based in Cresskill, N.J., has purchased a 5.5 percent stake in Carteret Bancorp Inc.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Alpine said it had acquired the Carteret shares for investment purposes only.
Carteret, a bank holding company based in Morristown, N.J., has until mid-February to find a better offer than its $19 a share, or about $232 million, merger agreement with Home Group Inc.


ROCHESTER COMMUNITY SAVNGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCHESTER COMMUNITY SAVNGS BANK
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,192,000
c5,688,000
Per share
.52
.41
Yr net inc
b26,976,000
cd19,408,000
Per share
1.95
-
b-Includes tax credits of $3,687,000 for the quarter and $11,651,000 for the year.


Dow Gains 28.18 Points, To 1,958.22; Volume Up
LEAD: Stock prices rose yesterday as the market continued its seesaw pattern of recent weeks.


Bronx Arts Ensemble
LEAD: Claude Frank, pianist, and Mareda Gaither-Graves, soprano, will be guest soloists with the Bronx Arts Ensemble at its third chamber-music concert of the season, Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Riverdale Y.M.-Y.W.H.A., 5625 Arlington Avenue, at 256th Street in the Bronx.
On the program are Handel's ''Lucretia'' cantata, three songs by Pizzetti, and the Schumann Quintet in E flat (Op.


COAST SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COAST SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
15,698,000
12,778,000
Share earns
1.19
.97
Yr net inc
57,069,000
50,377,000
Share earns
4.34
3.84


MYLAN LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MYLAN LABORATORIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
22,674,000
23,758,000
Net inc
5,248,000
5,300,000
Share earns
.15
.15
9mo sales
69,279,000
70,952,000
Net inc
17,529,000
17,100,000
Share earns
.49
.47


Bridge:; Some Transfer Themselves Out of Playing Their Hand
LEAD: Many players would like a system that permitted them to play more than their fair share of the hands, either to take advantage of superior skill, or because they have a partner with a headache, or from pure selfishness.


New York Inquiry Is Said to Tape Court Aides Stealing From 'Dead'
LEAD: New York state and city investigators have videotaped court representatives in the act of taking valuables from apartments of people they thought were dead, according to people familiar with the unusual ''sting.''


Peril in the Playroom
LEAD: In 1986 the nation's hospital emergency rooms treated more than 113,000 children for toy-related injuries; 35 died.
Some of these accidents might have been avoided if toy labels were more explicit about potential risks.


For Writers, a Place to Work in Peace
LEAD: There was a time when Mary Pope Osborne was typing in the closet.


Postal Service Set to Impose Cutbacks in Mid-February
LEAD: The United States Postal Service will put new cost-cutting measures into effect in mid-February, including a one-day delay in delivery that will affect most of the first-class letters that are mailed on Sundays.


F.D.A. Petition By Nutrasweet
LEAD: Under pressure from Federal regulators, the Nutrasweet Company said today that it would submit for review its new fat substitute.


MENTOR GRAPHICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MENTOR GRAPHICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
61,420,000
49,328,000
Net inc
6,127,000
3,930,000
Share earns
.36
.24
Yr rev
221,823,000
173,545,000
Net inc
20,325,000
11,000,000
Share earns
1.20
.67


John A. Williams, Executive, 55
LEAD: John A. (Jack) Williams, chairman of Merrill Lynch, Japan, died of kidney cancer Sunday at the clinical center of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.
He was 55 years old and lived in Tokyo and Manhattan.


MCCLAIN INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCCLAIN INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,048,287
6,913,047
Net inc
432,192
335,242
Share earns
.17
.16
Yr sales
26,584,483
23,152,953
Net inc
1,492,206
1,069,047
Share earns
.68
.52


Richard Downing Pope, 87, Dies; Promoter of Florida and Tourism
LEAD: Richard Downing Pope Sr., the flamboyant showman who built Cypress Gardens park and was credited with revitalzing Florida's tourist industry after World War II, died Thursday at his home here.
He was 87 years old.


Super Alternatives
LEAD: Brace yourself, America.
Super Bowl coverage begins at 2:30 A.M. tomorrow, Eastern time, with ESPN's highlights of the first 21 games, and goes on and on until ABC's coverage of the 22d ends around 10 P.M.
Eight of the earlier games rank among television's top ten most watched programs.
Tomorrow's may make it nine.


Abie's English Phantom
LEAD: When the English musical version of ''The Phantom of the Opera'' opened Tuesday night, it was already sold out until the second coming, which makes you wonder why they bothered to open it.


ALLIED SECURITIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIED SECURITIES INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,099,155
15,821,961
Net inc
527,303
260,924
Share earns
1.04
.50
6mo rev
36,734,269
31,220,005
Net inc
871,269
513,877
Share earns
1.72
.98


In China, Wrinkle of Change Or Just a Crumpled Old Suit?
LEAD: ''Something strange is going on, that is certain,'' a Chinese writer said. ''I don't know what it is, but there is something.''


Ohio School Bus Overturns; 9 Students Are Hospitalized
LEAD: A school bus carrying 35 high school students on a field trip slid off a highway and overturned today, the State Highway Patrol said.
Nine students were hospitalized, one in critical condition.


Ho Chi Minh City Journal; A Haunt of Old Saigon Gets New Life
LEAD: Back when Saigon was Saigon, the Hotel Continental had a certain combination of decadence and class that made it a favorite of artists and writers.
The occasional drug dealer roamed its spacious halls; transvestites and other inhabitants of the demimonde were said to gravitate to its neighborhood.


FIRSTFED FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRSTFED FINANCIAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,637,000
5,209,000
Per share
.51
.73
Yr net inc
15,825,000
16,594,000
Per share
2.21
2.33
All per share figures reflect a 3-for-2 split on Sept. 24, 1987.


JEFFERIES GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERIES GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
39,190,000
42,647,000
Net loss
853,000
b4,295,000
Share earns
-
.48
Yr rev
147,448,000
158,648,000
Net inc
6,151,000
13,711,000
Share earns
.79
1.55
Shares outst
7,773,000
10,279,000


Dole Revises Budget Proposals to Eliminate Social Security Freeze
LEAD: For two weeks Bob Dole has focused his Presidential campaign on urging a ''temporary spending freeze'' in 1989 to reduce the Federal deficit.
He said such a politically risky step would affect most Social Security recipients except the needy.


ANDOVER BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANDOVER BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,918,000
c2,725,000
b
r share
.3838.54
Yr net inc
d9,922,000
8,039,000
Per share
1.98
-
b-After a loss of $104,000 on the sale of securities and loans.


LIGGETT GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIGGETT GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
147,249,000
140,119,000
Net inc
10,896,000
10,125,000
Share earns
.46
.43
9mo sales
419,518,000
417,127,000
Net inc
25,347,000
18,946,000
Share earns
1.19
.89


WILLIAMS, A L CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILLIAMS, A L CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
71,209,000
54,326,000
Net inc
10,062,000
8,037,000
Share earns
.41
.33
Yr rev
277,823,000
202,164,000
Net inc
39,038,000
27,324,000
Share earns
1.58
1.11


Clemency Declined by Britain or Six Convicted Irishmen
LEAD: The Government today refused clemency for six Irishmen convicted in a 1974 terrorist bombing after a British court dismissed their appeals.


Pope Gives Ortega a Cool Reception
LEAD: Pope John Paul II offered President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua a markedly cool reception at the Vatican today and then sternly advised the Sandinista leader that respect for human rights and democracy was necessary to achieve peace in Central America, Vatican officials said.


MAI BASIC FOUR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAI BASIC FOUR INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
85,218,000
71,982,000
Net inc
5,621,000
4,603,000
Share earns
.38
.31


Navy Jets Collide Over California
LEAD: A plume of black smoke rising over Independence Thursday after the midair crash of two F-A-18 Hornets.
One pilot, Lieut.
Comdr.
Eric Hitchcock, died, and the other, Lieut.
David Morgan, ejected safely.


Guidepost
LEAD:  Giving Gold  Valentine's Day is approaching, and gold jewelry remains a popular gift.
Beyond the choice of the item, decisions must be made about karats, color and texture.
Gold in its purest state is generally too soft for jewelry and so is mixed with copper, zinc, silver or nickel, which increases its hardness and modifies its color.


DURAKON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DURAKON INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
29,484,000
21,354,000
Net inc
1,176,000
894,000
Share earns
.19
.14
Yr sales
108,019,000
81,386,000
Net inc
5,761,000
4,083,000
Share earns
.93
.71


DETECTION SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DETECTION SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,269,000
3,349,000
Net inc
302,000
234,000
Share earns
.12
.09
9mo sales
12,481,000
9,167,000
Net inc
941,000
374,000
Share earns
.36
.15


FIRST WESTERN FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST WESTERN FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,232,000
2,788,000
Per share
.36
.44
Yr net inc
b5,986,000
11,369,000
Per share
.95
1.89
b-After an extraordinary charge of $146,000 from an FHLB prepayment penalty.


Allegis Begins Offer For 63% of Its Shares
LEAD: The Allegis Corporation said yesterday that it had begun an $80-a-share tender offer for 35.5 million, or 63 percent, of its shares but added that it had still not completed an agreement with its banks that would finance the offer.


LANDMARK SAVINGS ASSOCIATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANDMARK SAVINGS ASSOCIATION (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,529,000
c2,340,000
Per share
1.06
.95
Yr net inc
b7,081,000
c6,182,000
Per share
2.90
2.70
b-Includes tax credits of $1,958,000 for the quarter and $5,022,000 for the year.


COUNTRYWIDE MORTGAGE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COUNTRYWIDE MORTGAGE (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,691,000
4,117,000
Share earns
.22
.54
Yr net inc
9,949,000
14,119,000
Share earns
1.29
2.27
Shares outst
7,742,500
6,229,671
The company said the decline in earnings was due to volatile interest rates that have persisted for the last nine months.


Belgian Group Acts On Company Bid
LEAD: A group of Belgian companies announced it was ready to acquire 34.25 percent of Societe Generale de Belgique in an effort to thwart a bid by Carlo de Benedetti, the Italian financier.
Andre Leysen, chairman of Gevaert, Belgium's photographic material company, said his company and a series of allies had gathered commitments to acquire the stake in Societe Generale, which is


Judgment Delayed In Free-Agency Bid
LEAD: A Federal judge today delayed judgment on a request by the National Football League Players Association to overturn the league's rules restricting free agency.


VOLUNTEER BANCSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VOLUNTEER BANCSHARES INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
691,000
634,000
Per share
.31
.42
Yr net inc
2,550,000
2,503,000
Per share
1.39
1.70


AVNET INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AVNET INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Sales
429,300,000
375,900,000
Net inc
12,900,000
4,600,000
Share earns
.36
.13
6mo sales
870,400,000
739,000,000
Net inc
25,000,000
10,600,000
Share earns
.70
.30


QUANTUM CHEMICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUANTUM CHEMICAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
742,300,000
541,300,000
Net inc
b60,200,000
c33,300,000
Share earns
1.96
1.02
Yr sales
2,566,800,000
1,729,600,000
Net inc
b251,600,000
c75,600,000
Share earns
7.75
2.21


Donors to the Neediest Recall History of Gifts
LEAD: Hortense M. Hirsch, who celebrated her 100th birthday last August with congratulations from wide and far, contributed to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund again, for the 70th year in a row.


What's Behind Strange Tasaday Hoax Charges; Forest Reserve at Stake
LEAD: To the Editor:


George Adams Quartet
LEAD: George Adams, a saxophonist, and Don Pullen, a pianist, are leading a quartet with Cameron Brown on bass and Dannie Richmond on drums tonight and tomorrow at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, below 11th Street (255-4037).
Sets begin at 10 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is a $12 cover and a $6 minimum.


Nofziger Jury Is Told How Wedtech Got Pact
LEAD: The Small Business Administration helped the Wedtech Corporation finance a military contract only because of interest expressed by a top aide to Edwin Meese 3d, the agency's former second-ranking official testified today.


MCDONNELL DOUGLAS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCDONNELL DOUGLAS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,500,300,000
3,477,900,000
Net inc
b92,600,000
92,600,000
Share earns
2.32
2.29
Yr sales
13,146,100,000
12,660,600,000
Net inc
c313,000,000
d277,500,000
Share earns
7.75
6.86
Shares outst
38,716,208
40,568,015


N.F.L.'s Stormy Season Comes Down to a Game
LEAD: This National Football League season of strike, of confrontation, of replacement games - a season of disruption - will end Sunday on a newly seeded grass field that could symbolize a rebirth.


French Decorative Arts Subject of a Symposium
LEAD: Four experts will present slide-illustrated lectures on topics ranging from the landscape architecture of France before the revolution of 1789 to the interiors of private palaces and Parisian town houses.
The four are Baroness Marie-Therese de Willermin, a professor of art history; Princess Laure de Beauvau Craon, an art historian and lecturer; William Howard Adams, an authority on landscape architecture and gardens, and Barbara de


Killer of 2 Policemen Wins Parole in Jersey
LEAD: A man convicted of killing two Bergen County policemen more than 24 years ago will be released from prison March 15 unless the State Parole Board intervenes, a board official said yesterday.


Humbler G.M. Is Now Listening
LEAD: For decades, executives of the General Motors Corporation decided among themselves what kind of cars Americans wanted.
Now, with its market share down sharply executives at G.M. appear to be trying to find out what customers want.


ROCKEFELLER CENTER PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCKEFELLER CENTER PROPERTIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,770,000
26,456,000
Net inc
b15,736,000
11,805,000
Share earns
.42
.31
Yr rev
105,570,000
104,631,000
Net inc
50,074,000
26,456,000
Share earns
1.33
1.26


About New York; Brazilian Niche For an Author And His Fans
LEAD: They had a book-signing party the other night on West 46th Street in a narrow shop brimming with smoked sausages, meat pies, manioc flour, coffee beans, beer, books, cassettes and periodicals, among other items.
Nearly everyone spoke Portuguese, a silky language slipping off certain tongues.
The author, who is famous round the world but not so hot in this republic yet, is Brazilian.


A Treaty Is Not a Christmas Tree
LEAD: Senators will be sorely tempted to put their stamp on the treaty to eliminate medium- and shorter-range missiles.
The itch seemed irresistible as the hearings got under way this week.
But an array of political and military authorities told them the treaty was good for American security as is, and that other issues could be attended to elsewhere.


Protester Crippled by Munitions Train Sues Navy and Crew
LEAD: A protester who lost his legs when he was struck by a train carrying munitions filed a civil rights lawsuit today against Navy officers and the train crew.


Thailand to Turn Back Vietnamese Refugee Boats
LEAD: Seeking to stem a flood of new Vietnamese refugees fleeing their country through Cambodia, Thailand this week officially began turning back refugee boats arriving in eastern Thailand from Cambodian ports.


MEDSTAT SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDSTAT SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,447,000
1,275,000
Net inc
b331,000
b298,000
Share earns
.12
.11
b-Includes a tax credit of $113,000 and $122,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


Response to Carl Lewis
LEAD: John Holt, the general secretary of the International Amateur Athletic Federation, track's governing body, yesterday accused the American track star Carl Lewis of making ''vague and unsubstantiated'' charges concerning drug abuse in the sport.
Holt said Lewis, who won four gold medals at the 1984 Olympics, should come forward and identify anyone he knew to be on drugs instead of ''firing off unfounded allegations.


Man Is Found Shot to Death At His Apartment in Chelsea
LEAD: The body of a man who had been shot in the head was found in a Manhattan apartment yesterday, the police said, and it was unclear how long he had been dead.


ARCO-Tricentrol
LEAD: ARCO slightly raised its stake in Tricentrol P.L.C. and indicated an intent to buy the entire company, an oil exploration and development concern.
ARCO, which swooped into the market Thursday and scooped up 14.6 percent of Tricentrol's shares, said its further purchases brought the total stake to 14.8 percent, or 13.8 million shares.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Angel Cordero, fully recovered from injuries to his chest and back suffered in a spill at Santa Anita Dec. 30, will resume riding at Aqueduct on Feb. 11.
His agent, Kevin Lyons, said Cordero's first stakes engagement would be aboard D. Wayne Lukas's Cougarized in the $75,000 added Whirlaway Stakes at Aqueduct Feb.


The Media Have Wronged Howard Beach
LEAD: Over the past year, ''Howard Beach'' has become the new catch-phrase for racism.


TEXACO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXACO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,400,000,000
7,800,000,000
Net loss
bc4,762,000,000
cd50,000,000
Share earns
-
.21
Yr rev
35,300,000,000
32,600,000,000
Net loss
bc4,407,000,000
cd725,000,000
Share earns
-
3.01


PACCAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACCAR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
668,798,000
497,236,000
Net inc
b35,419,000
25,313,000
Share earns
1.96
1.41
Shares outst
18,091,000
17,930,000
Yr sales
2,423,539,000
1,795,633,000
Net inc
b112,462,000
c54,283,000
Share earns
6.26
3.02
Shares outst
17,970,000
17,972,000


Desperate Financial Steps in '84 Come Back to Haunt Hart's '88 Campaign
LEAD: Out of cash and nearly out of hope, Gary Hart's insurgent 1984 Presidential campaign took desperate financial measures that are now dogging his already battered 1988 candidacy.


U.S. URGING ANGOLA ON CUBAN PULLOUT
LEAD: After seven years of intense but futile diplomatic efforts, the Reagan Administration is making a final attempt to reach an agreement on the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola and independence for South-West Africa.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 13.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article and a drawing on the Health page on Thursday about strokes incorrectly described two arterial systems feeding the brain.
The vertebral-basilar system of arteries is parallel to the carotid arteries in the neck and behind them; the two systems join in the brain.


Brooklyn Navy Yard Thrives, but Not as Shipyard
LEAD: Workers for the American, French and Japanese joint venture called Nemko working on a train locomotive in a warehouse where battleships were once built. (The New York Times/Keith Meyers) Page 31.


City Ballet to Offer Bonus at Intermission
LEAD: Dancers from the New York City Ballet and the School of American Ballet will demonstrate the arts of makeup, costume and dance at the ''Family Matinee'' performance on at 1 P.M. tomorrow at the New York State Theater, Lincoln Center.


Guard Held in Gun Smuggling
LEAD: A New York City Correction officer was arrested yesterday in Brooklyn after law-enforcement officials said he had been videotaped receiving $3,000 for having smuggled a loaded pistol to a prisoner on Rikers Island.


ROBINSON NUGENT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROBINSON NUGENT INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,698,000
9,550,000
Net inc
685,000
b2,913,000
Share earns
.10
-
6mo sales
24,598,000
21,021,000
Net inc
1,283,000
b3,150,000
Share earns
.19
-


Denise Stoklos
LEAD: ''Denise Stoklos Unearths Hamlet in Irati,'' a solo dramatic piece written and performed by Ms.
Stoklos, began performances this weekend at La Mama E.T.C., 74A East Fourth Street.
Several issues are covered in the work, which is based on Shakespeare's ''Hamlet.'' In it, Ms.
Stoklos uses her childhood years in Brazil to examine the issue of independence for third-world countries.


Two Accused Of Extorting From Wedtech
LEAD: Two teamsters' union officials were charged yesterday with receiving at least $465,000 in illegal payoffs from the Wedtech Corporation, a Bronx military contractor, in return for negotiating favorable union contracts and preventing labor unrest at the company's Bronx manufacturing plants.


Critic's Notebook; Unadorned but Complex Chekhov
LEAD: When Peter Brook first staged his production of ''The Cherry Orchard'' in Paris in 1981, he approached the play as, in his words, ''a theatrical movement purely played.'' The idea was ''to avoid sentimentality, a false Chekhovian manner that is not in the text.'' For him, ''The Cherry Orchard'' was not ''gloomy, romantic, long and slow,'' but ''a comic play about real life.


Student's-Eye View
LEAD: To the Editor:


Resurgence of Brooklyn Navy Yard Is Dealt Blow by Company's Rebuff
LEAD: When a ship repair company New York City officials hoped would help revitalize the Brooklyn Navy Yard pulled out of negotiations last week, it dealt a serious blow to plans to continue the yard's tradition as a major ship repair center.


Warner Books to Offer Trump in Paperback
LEAD: In an auction that ended Thursday night, Warner Books bought the paperback rights to ''Trump: The Art of the Deal'' by Donald J. Trump with Tony Schwartz.


FERRO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FERRO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
232,914,000
188,388,000
Net inc
9,369,000
7,493,000
Share earns
.68
.55
Yr sales
871,087,000
725,241,000
Net inc
31,687,000
24,082,000
Share earns
2.30
1.77


GEORGIA FEDERAL BANK FSB reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEORGIA FEDERAL BANK FSB
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
7,200,000
6,500,000
Yr net inc
29,800,000
b29,700,000
b-Includes gains of $11.1 million from the sale of loans and investments.
The company did not report per share figures.


VERSA TECHNOLOGIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERSA TECHNOLOGIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
11,030,000
8,841,000
Net inc
1,402,000
799,000
Share earns
.36
.21
9mo sales
34,671,000
30,463,000
Net inc
4,244,000
2,918,000
Share earns
1.10
.76


COURIER DISPATCH GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COURIER DISPATCH GROUP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,346,592
9,861,736
Net inc
18,739
307,176
Share earns
.01
.12
6mo rev
20,625,904
19,581,359
Net inc
73,745
657,635
Share earns
.03
.25


MEDICAL PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDICAL PROPERTIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,312,000
-
Net inc
498,000
-
Share earns
.21
-
Yr rev
4,382,000
-
Net inc
1,708,000
-
Share earns
.72
-
The calendar, which is on a calendar year, began operations on March 1, 1987; consequently, it is reporting for only 10 months in 1987, and there are no comparable figures from a year ago.


CENTRAL ILLINOIS PUBLIC SERVCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL ILLINOIS PUBLIC SERVCE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
138,184,000
150,756,000
Net inc
11,541,000
11,949,000
Share earns
.29
.30
Yr rev
590,846,000
626,361,000
Net inc
70,296,000
73,747,000
Share earns
1.88
1.96


Greyhound Set To Drop Verex
LEAD: The Greyhound Corporation said today that it would get out of the mortgage insurance business.
As a result, the company will take an after-tax charge of $45 million in the fourth quarter of 1987 to reclassify its Verex Corporation mortgage insurance subsidiary as a discontinued operation.


DEVON GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEVON GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
32,299,000
32,907,000
Net inc
1,979,000
3,592,000
Share earns
.18
.32
9mo sales
107,973,000
100,126,000
Net inc
9,246,000
b10,434,000
Share earns
.82
1.01
Shares outst
11,294,999
10,082,000


Change at Apple Creates New Posts
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. said it would restructure its research and development organization to encourage new products and emphasize products for networking and communications.
The action created positions for two new vice presidents who will report to Jean-Louis Gasse, senior vice president of research and development.


ISRAELIS ACCUSED OF MORE BEATINGS
LEAD: The focus of Palestinian protest shifted to East Jerusalem today as relief workers charged that 50 Palestinians had to be treated for injuries after Israeli police officers swept through a refugee camp in a roundup of male residents.


GOULD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOULD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
242,900,000
227,400,000
Net loss
b106,400,000
cd4,600,000
Share earns
-
.10
Yr rev
933,400,000
908,800,000
Net loss
b95,600,000
d101,800,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $115 million for the quarter and $120.6 million for the year; the quarter also included an extraordinary loss of $100,000 from the reversal of a tax credit.


HUBBELL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUBBELL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
146,763,000
141,616,000
Net inc
17,010,000
15,244,000
Share earns
.65
.59
Yr sales
581,087,000
558,810,000
Net inc
62,529,000
54,468,000
Share earns
2.39
2.12


FIRST FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
91,854,000
24,604,000
Net inc
4,438,000
1,619,000
Share earns
.33
.20
Shares outst
13,470,000
8,067,000
Yr rev
175,095,000
69,694,000
Net inc
11,641,000
5,523,000
Share earns
1.16
.69
Shares outst
9,997,000
7,974,000


Dance: At the World, 'Leonard and Cinciana'
LEAD: The theater was packed when Dennis O'Connor and Ann Papoulis presented ''Leonard and Cinciana'' at the World, at 254 East Second Street, on Thursday.
That was unsurprising, for Mr.
O'Connor is a gifted member of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company and Ms.
Papoulis is a performer of special resonance.


Driver Flees After Car Kills a Girl in Harlem
LEAD: A 9-year-old girl was killed and her two companions were seriously injured in Harlem yesterday when a car went out of control and struck them, the police said.
The driver fled.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 50.


DEMOCRATS SPAR IN SOUTH DAKOTA
LEAD: The Democratic candidates for President brought their much-practiced road show to South Dakota tonight, jabbing at one another's weak spots and, along the way, debating issues from economics to Central America policy.


BULGARIAN REJECTS POLITICAL OPENING
LEAD: A top Communist Party official today defended Bulgaria's lack of eagerness to accompany its program of restructuring economic and administrative life with a parallel emphasis on greater openness.


Museum in Harlem Celebrates 3 Ways
LEAD: A major Harlem cultural institution, the Studio Museum, celebrated its 20th anniversary in decisive fashion recently by announcing a new executive director, opening two new exhibitions and becoming the nation's first black or Hispanic institution accredited by the American Association of Museums, the world's largest organization of museums.


REAGAN ON TV FOR CONTRA AID
LEAD: President Reagan will go on television Tuesday to press his plea to Congress to approve fresh aid for the rebels fighting the Nicaraguan Government, the White House announced today.


Solti Set to Stay at Head of Chicago Symphony
LEAD: Sir Georg Solti said yesterday he would remain music director of the Chichago Symphony '' as long as my orchestra and board want me.''


Bankruptcy Judge Approves Texaco Financial Statement
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge approved Texaco Inc.'s financial disclosure statement today, setting the stage for the oil giant's emergence from Chapter 11 bankruptcy.


A Wide Gap for Sandinistas and Rebels
LEAD: Sandinista and contra negotiators ended their first face-to-face talks here today with a decision to meet again in two weeks in Guatemala, but little other substantive agreement.


LADD FURNITURE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LADD FURNITURE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
97,841,000
99,556,000
Net inc
6,804,000
7,371,000
Share earns
.36
.39
Yr sales
386,876,000
298,238,000
Net inc
27,634,000
22,190,000
Share earns
1.44
1.16


Europeans Assail Bill On Export Sanctions
LEAD: The European Community, in a note to the State Department, has protested a Senate-passed measure imposing sanctions against violators of allied export controls.
It threatened retaliation should European companies be hit by the legislation.


STUDY TURNS UP NO PROTECTION DUE TO ASPIRIN
LEAD: A six-year study involving more than 5,000 British doctors has found no strong evidence that regular use of aspirin reduces the risk of heart attack, but the authors say their data do not necessarily invalidate a similar but much larger American study that showed the rate of heart attacks was cut almost in half.


FEDERAL-MOGUL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL-MOGUL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
268,684,000
220,879,000
Net inc
13,056,000
b22,832,000
Share earns
1.04
-
Yr sales
1,075,425,000
941,612,000
Net inc
41,147,000
c3,606,000
Share earns
3.24
.28


ARKLA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARKLA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
317,080,000
356,999,000
Net inc
31,562,000
26,340,000
Share earns
.51
.46
Yr rev
1,188,064,000
999,560,000
Net inc
78,283,000
64,179,000
Share earns
1.25
1.20


Milton J. Raisbeck, Cardiologist, 99
LEAD: Milton J. Raisbeck, a retired cardiologist, died Tuesday at Children's Hospital in San Francisco.
He was 99 years old.


BURR-BROWN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURR-BROWN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
38,485,000
28,594,000
Net inc
1,685,000
150,000
Share earns
.18
.02
Yr sales
140,484,000
112,788,000
Net inc
4,286,000
3,736,000
Share earns
.44
.39


INTERSTATE POWER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERSTATE POWER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
64,879,000
72,886,000
Net inc
4,408,000
4,776,000
Share earns
.38
.42
Yr rev
262,864,000
294,112,000
Net inc
b11,188,000
23,056,000
Share earns
.84
2.05


Devils Win in Overtime
LEAD: Blackhawks' Dave Manson being pursued by Devils' Patrik Sundstrom in the first period.
Devils won, 3-2.
Page 49. (The New York Times/Ruby Washington)


SECURITY CAPITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SECURITY CAPITAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
57,748,000
64,880,000
Net loss
b18,068,000
3,333,000
b-Reflects about $7 million of gains from sales of loans, loan servicing and real estate.


When the Census Is Precisely Wrong
LEAD: With the 1990 Census still 27 months away, the Commerce Department says it seeks ''the best census ever,'' including a reduction of the perennial undercount.
Yet it has decided, prematurely, that it won't consider adjustments that could smooth the undercount's uneven and unfair impact.
It's a mistake that could be costly for the cities and states that bear the undercount's burden.


CALIFORNIA WATER SERVICE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALIFORNIA WATER SERVICE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
24,759,000
25,790,000
Net inc
2,806,000
3,579,000
Share earns
.49
.63
Yr rev
112,776,000
109,523,000
Net inc
17,197,000
13,678,000
Share earns
3.03
2.41


YELLOW FREIGHT SYSTEM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*YELLOW FREIGHT SYSTEM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
459,321,000
434,743,000
Net inc
11,426,000
b12,943,000
Share earns
.40
.45
Yr rev
1,759,992,000
1,713,731,000
Net inc
41,284,000
b69,719,000
Share earns
1.44
2.44


UNITED WATER RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED WATER RESOURCES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
35,152,000
29,077,000
Net inc
6,606,000
4,270,000
Share earns
.40
.26
Yr rev
127,741,000
117,896,000
Net inc
21,218,000
15,340,000
Share earns
1.28
.99


DIGITECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGITECH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,665,000
1,071,000
Net loss
6,452,000
b2,000
Shares outst
13,504,000
15,956,000
Yr rev
8,615,000
5,392,000
Net loss
4,983,000
b1,882,000
Share earns
-
.13
Shares outst
12,901,000
14,956,000


'Tristan and Iseult,' By Boston Camerata
LEAD: ''Tristan and Iseult,'' a new production by the Boston Camerata, will have its New York premiere on Feb. 18 at 8 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
The drama, which is based on medieval musical scores and texts, chronicles the story of Tristan, Iseult and King Mark.


UNIVERSAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
770,137,000
696,730,000
Net inc
24,511,000
22,958,000
Share earns
1.43
1.33
6mo rev
1,309,894,000
1,114,306,000
Net inc
38,030,000
32,243,000
Share earns
2.22
1.87
Shares outst
17,148,307
17,202,652


Women of Polygamist Clan Arraigned in Utah
LEAD: Vickie Singer, left, widow of a polygamist leader, John Singer, who was killed in 1979, and Charlotte and Heidi Swapp, wives of a wounded leader, Addam Swapp, being transferred from the Federal courthouse to jail after arraignment in Salt Lake City.
Prosecutors are preparing evidence for a grand jury on the long standoff with the polygamist clan that resulted in the death of a police officer and the wounding of Mr.


Prisons Don't Solve The Drug Problem
LEAD: To the Editor:


3 Visual Artists Win $5,000 Film Awards
LEAD: Two film makers and a video artist are the recipients of this year's Maya Deren Awards, sponsored by the American Film Institute.
The three - Bruce Conner, Yvonne Rainer and Bill Viola - will each receive a $5,000 cash award.
J.
Hoberman, a film critic for The Village Voice, is to receive a citation from the institute for contributions to independent film and video.


AEC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AEC INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,915,000
16,597,000
Net loss
906,000
131,000
Yr sales
65,899,000
64,505,000
Net loss
2,334,000
b987,000
Share earns
-
.60
b-Net income


B.P.'s Britoil Stake
LEAD: The British Petroleum Company has completed the purchase of the 24 percent stake in Britoil P.L.C. that had been held by ARCO and in the process gained a majority of the shares of the North Sea oil producer.
But B.P.'s control of the company's board still hinges on a Government decision.
The British Government said it was ready to meet Britoil and B.P.


BALDWIN TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALDWIN TECHNOLOGY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
22,306,000
17,708,000
Net inc
1,429,000
732,000
Share earns
.45
.37
6mo sales
40,757,000
34,138,000
Net inc
2,471,000
1,357,000
Share earns
.78
.68
Shares outst
3,157,500
2,000,000


COMINCO LTD reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMINCO LTD (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,306,100,000
1,327,500,000
Net inc
b172,000,000
c151,600,000
Share earns
2.18
-
b-After special gains of $91.3 million.
c-Net loss and after a net extraordinary charge of $103.4 million.


South Africa Crash Kills 13
LEAD: A bus carrying black policemen on their way to give a gymnastics exhibition plunged off a mountain road today, killing 13 officers and injuring 71, the police said.
The crash occurred at Robinson Pass in Cape Province.


NORWICH SAVINGS SOCIETY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORWICH SAVINGS SOCIETY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,579,000
1,152,000
Per share
.28
-
Yr net inc
6,151,000
3,892,000
Per share
1.07
-
The company converted to stock ownership in November 1986.


SMOKER'S LAWSUIT ENDS IN A MISTRIAL
LEAD: A mistrial was declared here today in a lawsuit against a tobacco company charged with causing a smoker's death by lung cancer.
The jury deadlocked in the case that had been widely viewed as having the best chance of succeeding of any brought by smokers who charged that their illnesses were brought on by cigarettes.


Out With the Bad Air: Dirt and Noise Fighters
LEAD: For city dwellers, winter can mean stuffy rooms and heating pipes that clank through the night.
Often an open window will only yield sooty, malodorous drafts and more noise.


Liggett &amp; Myers Told To Issue Smoking Data
LEAD: A Federal district judge, in a ruling that stemmed from a tobacco liability case, has ordered the release of secret studies on the dangers of cigarette smoking that were conducted for the Liggett &amp; Myers Tobacco Company over the course of 30 years.


U.S. Will Drop 4 Areas in Asia From Trade Aid
LEAD: In a hardening of its trade policy, the Reagan Administration announced today that it would end special trade preferences for four of the most powerful third-world economies: Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong and Singapore.


PARTIES' ROLES REVERSED IN IOWA ADS
LEAD: The battle of the airwaves for the Iowa Presidential caucuses has produced a reversal of the usual party roles: Republicans are violating their own commandment against negative advertising while the Democrats are trying be inspirational without living up to their reputation for bloodying the television landscape.


'Highlights in Jazz' Concert
LEAD: A number of noted jazz musicians, including Tito Puente, Phil Woods, and Jon Faddis, will perform at a ''Highlights in Jazz'' concert on Thursday, at New York University, Loeb Student Center, 566 La Guardia Place.
The concert marks the 15th anniversary of the jazz series.
Also appearing will be John Pizzarelli Jr., Bob Mover, Tony Monte, Kenny Washington and James Williams.


Campeau Seeking Federated Talks
LEAD: Amid speculation that Federated Department Stores Inc. may be planning a restructuring offer that would be sweeter than its $47-a-share takeover bid, the Campeau Corporation said it was willing to negotiate the price with Federated.
In a statement, the Canadian real estate and department store company said it had sent a letter to Federated's chairman, Howard


Gibson Agrees to Sign With the Dodgers
LEAD: One week after a labor arbitrator made him a free agent, Kirk Gibson left the Detroit Tigers late last night and agreed to a three-year, $4.5-million contract with the Los Angeles Dodgers.


Beck Posts 63 For Lead
LEAD: After nine years of coming close, Charles Henry (Chip) Beck has more second-place finishes than any of the other nonwinners on the PGA Tour.


IOWA RESOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IOWA RESOURCES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
76,359,000
82,363,000
Net inc
7,525,000
11,719,000
Share earns
.34
.53
Yr rev
341,519,000
335,470,000
Net inc
40,941,000
43,781,000
Share earns
1.84
1.97


QUAKER STATE OIL REFINING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUAKER STATE OIL REFINING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
195,106,000
208,201,000
Net inc
b3,400,000
10,691,000
Share earns
.13
.40
Yr sales
847,952,000
926,879,000
Net loss
b48,057,000
c50,288,000
Share earns
-
2.01


Islanders End Road Slump
LEAD: The Islanders snapped an 11-game streak without a victory on the road tonight with a 5-2 triumph over the Sabres.


BRITISH LAND OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRITISH LAND OF AMERICA (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,191,000
4,726,000
Net inc
694,000
b298,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
17,978,000
14,288,000
9mo rev
15,758,000
14,720,000
Net inc
1,849,000
b2,676,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
17,975,000
13,650,000


NATO Ships Make Port in London
LEAD: Five ships from NATO's multinational mine-hunting squadron passing under Tower Bridge on the Thames yesterday.
The ships, from West Germany, Belgium, Norway, the Netherlands and Britain, were scheduled to be berthed in London over the weekend. (Reuter)


Skier Sums Up Chances
LEAD: Bill Johnson, the American downhill skier who surprisingly won a gold medal in the 1984 Winter Olympic Games, does not like his chances of gaining a berth on the 1988 United States Olympic Alpine ski team.
In a telephone interview with the Rocky Mountain News from Schladming, Austria, where he in competing this weekend, Johnson said: ''The coaches are trying to get rid of me.


FHP INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FHP INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
116,251,000
90,179,000
Net inc
3,370,000
3,029,000
Share earns
.30
.24
6mo rev
222,577,000
175,580,000
Net inc
6,234,000
5,845,000
Share earns
.50
.47


HOMESTEAD FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOMESTEAD FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
24,651,000
b29,445,000
Share earns
1.96
2.51
b-After a charge of $10,909,000 for prepayment of Federal Home Loan Bank advances.


STORAGE TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STORAGE TECHNOLOGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Revenue
208,237,000
184,304,000
Net inc
5,609,000
c8,288,000
Share earns
.02
.04
Yr rev
750,028,000
696,009,000
Net inc
b26,008,000
c36,180,000
Share earns
.11
.15


Cedar Walton Trio
LEAD: Trios with Cedar Walton on piano, Ron Carter on bass and Billy Higgins on drums are scheduled tonight and tomorrow at Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street (242-1785).
Sets are at 10 and 11:45 P.M. and 1:30 A.M; there is a $12 cover and a $6 minimum.


Japan Confirms It Will Continue U.S. Quota of 2.3 Million Cars
LEAD: Japan's trade minister confirmed today that the nation would continue its quotas on automobile exports to the United States for another year, at the current level of 2.3 million cars.


Concert: Musica Sacra Offers the Old and New
LEAD: Musica Sacra's program at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night was an interesting survey of the old, the recent and the brand new.
There were two Magnificats: one by Luciano Berio marking his postwar transition from respectful apprenticeship to high originality and the other Francesco Durante's example from the


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD:  Atlas Van Lines Inc., Evansville, Ind., which is controlled by affiliates of Wesray Capital Corp., said that a group of Atlas agents were exploring ways to acquire the company.


LOUISVILLE GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOUISVILLE GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
138,632,000
148,660,000
Net inc
8,488,000
8,856,000
Share earns
.30
.33
Yr rev
631,178,000
659,657,000
Net inc
76,161,000
73,267,000
Share earns
3.34
3.26


AMERIWEST FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERIWEST FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,579,000
2,064,000
Per share
.49
.65
6mo net inc
3,147,000
3,468,000
Per share
.98
1.09


Court Bars Legal-Fee Award For Iran-Contra Case Figure
LEAD: The special court that appointed an independent counsel to investigate the Iran-contra affair refused today to award legal fees to a retired Air Force officer who received immunity in the inquiry.


FIRST FINCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FINCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
417,801
470,826
Per share
.18
.19
Yr net inc
2,327,588
1,808,205
Per share
.95
.73


JONES SPACELINK reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JONES SPACELINK
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
9,311,000
9,070,000
Net inc
668,000
854,000
Share earns
.01
.02
6mo rev
17,709,000
15,859,000
Net inc
2,066,000
686,000
Share earns
.04
.01
The year-ago periods include a pre- tax gain of $3,927,000 from the sale of a cable television system.


Kirkpatrick Assails Treaty But Urges Senate Approval
LEAD: Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the former American delegate to the United Nations, said today that the new missile accord was a bad agreement but one the Senate should approve anyway.


LANDMARK BANCSHARES CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANDMARK BANCSHARES CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,093,000
2,227,000
Per share
.20
.48
Yr net inc
4,857,000
8,427,000
Per share
.93
1.90


POGO PRODUCING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POGO PRODUCING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
53,770,000
28,810,000
Net inc
10,569,000
c3,601,000
Share earns
.46
-
Yr rev
140,853,000
150,485,000
Net inc
b16,432,000
c58,296,000
Share earns
.49
-


ALTUS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALTUS BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b6,722,000
c5,092,000
Per share
-
1.05
Yr net inc
d776,000
d18,636,000
Per share
.16
3.84
b-After an extraordinary charge of $659,000.
The company said the loss reflects a provision of $7.1 million for losses on loans and real estate.


Dollar Is Mostly Stronger; Gold Falls by $12.50 in U.S.
LEAD: The dollar jumped higher yesterday against most major currencies, responding to what analysts said were continued signs of mild inflation and a possible improvement in the nation's trade deficit.


Field vs. Fields: A Fight Over a Name
LEAD: Debra Fields, who turned a favorite cookie recipe into a 400-store corporation, and Marshall Field &amp; Company, the department store chain, are battling over names.


Benefits Extended For Jersey Homeless
LEAD: About half of the homeless families living in New Jersey motels will receive an extension of their emergency shelter aid, but their futures remain uncertain after the extensions run out, officials said yesterday.


Precious Metals Prices Fall Amid Fears of a Slowdown
LEAD: Gold and platinum futures prices dropped sharply yesterday after several economic indicators pointed toward slow growth or the possibility of a recession, analysts said.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 30, 1988
LEAD:  International


Tansactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


REXON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REXON INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
29,432,000
22,337,000
Net inc
b2,540,000
b1,640,000
Share earns
.24
.20
Shares outst
10,585,000
8,096,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $732,000 and $557,000 for the latest quarter and year-ago period, respectively.


Five Firefighters Injured in Blaze
LEAD: Smoke and flames billowing from an apartment during a four-alarm fire in building at 360 East 72d Street.
Five firefighters were hurt, none seriously as more than 100 firefighters, using 25 pieces of equipment, fought the blaze for two hours before bringing it under control.
No residents were injured.


OCCUPATIONAL MEDICAL CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OCCUPATIONAL MEDICAL CORP OF AMERICA
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,523,556
1,424,348
Net inc
101,054
229,596
Share earns
.04
.09
6mo rev
3,151,411
2,797,746
Net inc
279,750
b55,696
Share earns
.11
-


Linebackers Show Contrasting Styles
LEAD: Playing linebacker for a Super Bowl team is serious business.


Dutch Actor's Tale Exposes A Nation's Guilt About Jews
LEAD: After an amazing piece of psychopolitical theater Dutch Jews and Christians have found themselves looking anew at a painful past that many of them would prefer to forget.


CALTON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALTON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
72,551,000
58,243,000
Net inc
12,405,000
7,228,000
Share earns
.34
.20
Yr rev
156,910,000
148,144,000
Net inc
22,773,000
13,073,000
Share earns
.61
.39
Shares outst
37,318,800
33,173,000


Minority Groups Are Urged To Focus on Economic Issues
LEAD: Black, Hispanic and Asian groups should make fiscal and employment issues - rather than racial violence -the focus of their lobbying efforts and demonstrations, participants in a conference on minority groups and the New York City budget urged yesterday.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Secret Weapon: Horseradishes


CRIME
LEAD: Don Flynn is a reporter for The Daily News who writes mysteries about Ed Fitzgerald, a reporter for a New York daily that could be no other paper than The News.
The third entry in the series is ORDINARY MURDER (Walker, $16.95), and like its predecessors it is sophisticated, lively and as fast-moving as hurdlers off the starting block -even if Fitzgerald takes time out to quote his favorite author, Marcus


What's Do8ing in Cologne
LEAD: Cologne's age is disputed.
Peg its birthdate to 38 B.C., when it was established as a Roman garrison town by Marcus Vispanius Agrippa, the military genius who orchestrated Augustus Caesar's victory over Antony and Cleopatra, then it is 2,026.


CAN TV BE TAKEN SERIOUSLY?
LEAD: Taking television seriously - the very notion still seems ludicrous to too many people, including a goodly number who work in the medium.


LISA JEAN AMOROSO TO MARRY DAVID E. WALKER IN AUGUST
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene V. Amoroso of Houston have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Jean Amoroso to David Elisha Walker, a son of Mrs.
Bayard Walker of New York and East Hampton, L.I., and the late Mr.
Walker.
The couple plan to marry in August.


THE WISE OLD GRANDMOTHER: FANTASY AND REALITY
LEAD: I USED to create fantasies of how I would be when I reached a certain age.
I even created the appropriate rocking chair and the porch where I would sit and view life passing by; where I would receive my children and tell tales of my past to numerous grandchildren, who would delight in my company; where friends would gather to reminisce happily about our long-ago adventures; where I would feel at peace - wise, loving and loved.


Question Of the Week; WHO WILL WIN THE SUPER BOWL?
LEAD: Who cares?! MARK G. BRENNAN
Jersey City


Loan Fund Turns to Developing Nations as Donors
LEAD: The International Fund for Agricultural Development, known as the ''peasants' banker'' for its innovative loans to the rural poor, sought help this week from the most successful developing nations because oil-producing countries, traditional supporters of the agency, are facing an economic squeeze.


GURNEY'S 'AMERICAN LIFE' REVIVED AT LONG WHARF
LEAD: WITH the current Long Wharf Theater revival of one of A. R. Gurney Jr.'s early works, the 1970 ''Scenes From American Life,'' and the opening Off Broadway of his latest produced play, ''Another Antigone,'' at Playwrights Horizons, chroniclers of Mr.
Gurney's career have a rare chance to see the playwright in perspective, and to contrast his past and present concerns.


JESSE LONDON MARRIED TO FREDA DIANE ADLER
LEAD: The marriage of Freda Diane Adler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Adler of Ridgefield, Conn., to Jesse London, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin London of New York, took place last evening at the Westbury Hotel in Manhattan.
Rabbi Gunter Hirschberg officiated.


The Smothers Brothers Redux: A Bittersweet Reunion at CBS
LEAD: On the surface, at least, the scene is innocuous.


THE AFTERSHOCKS OF AN ACCIDENT REPEAT A LESSON ABOUT SURVIVAL
LEAD: IN April my daughter and I were in a car accident.
We were driving to my parents' house in Pennyslvania; it was rush hour on a three-lane interstate highway.
I was in the right lane.
The 18-wheeler to my left didn't see me.
He pulled abruptly into my lane and hit my car, sending me spinning in front of him, where he hit me a second time.


Question Of the Week; WHO WILL WIN THE SUPER BOWL?
LEAD: Joe Gibbs is arguably the best coach in football.
John Elway is unquestionably the best quarterback in football.
This Super Bowl will be decided by these two men.
In the World Series, the on-field leadership of Don Baylor outmatched the off-field leadership of Whitey Herzog.
Super Bowls, like World Series, are won or lost on the field, not in the locker room.


World Cup Biathlon
LEAD: Stefan Hoeck of West Germany winning 10-kilometer sprint yesterday in Ruhpolding, West Germany. (AP)


Child Sex Abuse Cases Rising in Massachusetts
LEAD: Since a 1983 state law made reporting of child sex abuse cases mandatory, the number of those cases has risen dramatically.


Super Mirror Images
LEAD: ON the Super Bowl sidelines, coaches have always projected a variety of images.
Vince Lombardi, as tough as his tombstone teeth.
Don Shula, as solid as his Mount Rushmore jaw.
Chuck Noll, as cool as his icy eyes.
Tom Landry, as unflappable as his snap-brim hat.
Bill Walsh, as organized as the game plan on his clipboard.


THE SOUL THAT WANDERS
LEAD:  LOVESONG  Becoming a Jew.
By Julius Lester.
Illustrated. 248 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $17.95.


HELEN F. MICHALIS IS MARRIED
LEAD: Helen Fahnestock Michalis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence Fahnestock Michalis of Locust Valley, L.I., was married there yesterday to Michael Hayden Bonebrake, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Bonebrake of Cleveland Heights, Ohio.
The Rev.
Charles G. Newbery performed the ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal


PLANNING EARLY FOR RETIREMENT IS URGED
LEAD: THE ideal time to start preparing for retirement is ''the day you begin working,'' the experts say, yet this advice almost always goes unheeded. ''Most people fear retirement emotionally and psychologically,'' observed Jean Carlson, a retirement consultant. ''Especially Americans, who derive a sense of self from the job.


DONNA ELLIS TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph L. Ellis of New York City and Southampton, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Donna Louise Ellis to Mitchell Freeman Senft, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Senft of Flushing, Queens.
Ms.
Ellis, an associate in the law office of Monroe J. Korn in New York, graduated from Boston University and the Touro College School of Law.


FLORIO SITES 'IRONY' IN CITING OF KEAN
LEAD: REPRESENTATIVE James J. Florio of Runnemede, who lost to Thomas H. Kean in the 1981 gubernatorial election - and who has indicated he may run again next year -said that President Reagan's praise in his State of the Union speech for Mr.
Kean's education efforts was ironic.


PROVIDENCE UPSETS VILLANOVA, 82-76
LEAD: Eric Murdock's 3-point basket snapped a tie with 1 minute 21 seconds left in overtime as Providence broke a five-game losing streak with an 82-76 upset victory over Villanova in a Big East Conference game tonight.


EVENTS MARK BLACK HISTORY MONTH
LEAD: BLACK HISTORY Month in New Jersey promises a wide variety of events, from lectures and art exhibitions to theater and musical programs. (Yolanda King, eldest daughter of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., will narrate ''New Morning for the World'' with the Cathederal Symphony Orchestra in Newark. Page 17.) Most events focus on the theme of black heritage as an integral part of American society and its culture and the pride instilled by Dr.


PARIS ARIANE CARLIN TO BE WED MARCH 5
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Carlin of Bryn Mawr, Pa., of the engagement of their daughter Paris Ariane Carlin to Johan H. W. Christofferson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lars H. Christofferson of Greenwich, Conn.


HARPER HELPS CAVALIERS DEFEAT BULLETS
LEAD: Ron Harper, whose short bank shot with 1 second left in regulation forced overtime, made a 10-foot jumper in the lane with 10 seconds to go in the extra period tonight as the Cleveland Cavaliers defeated the Washington Bullets, 128-126.


Newspapers' Chains Assailed
LEAD: Independently owned newspapers are fading and big chains are elbowing their way into domination of American journalism, according to Charles K. McClatchy, editor and chairman of the board of McClatchy Newspapers.
He said several chains paid more attention to profits than quality journalism.


HE WHO HASN'T GOT MAY NEVER GET
LEAD:  DOLLARS AND DREAMS  The Changing American Income Distribution.
By Frank Levy.
Charts. 259 pp.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation/Basic Books. $27.50.


The Spell of the Rain Forest
LEAD: SO sudden is the change as one steps off the Tamborine Mountain Road (outside Brisbane, Australia) and into the pocket of subtropical rain forest that I feel like those children in ''The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe'' by C. S. Lewis; they stepped through a doorway in the back of a closet and abruptly entered a room that was another world.


Question Of the Week; WHO WILL WIN THE SUPER BOWL?
LEAD: Should Super Bowl XXII be a contest worthy of its title (unlike most of the previous 21) then the fans, regardless of rooting interest, will be the winners.
NORM LEVISON  New York


An Ex-Contra Is in Managua Under Amnesty
LEAD: A former contra leader has returned to Nicaragua under a Government amnesty, the official newspaper Barricada said today.


The Editorial Notebook; Challenge to the Church on Race
LEAD: On a late summer Sunday in 1954, the pastor of the only Catholic church in Ashland, Ky., mounted the pulpit and made an important announcement to his parishioners.
That fall, he said, there would be a ''colored'' family in the parish for the first time - ''colored'' was the polite term for blacks in those days - and ''colored'' children in the parish school.


Salvador Supreme Court Judge Shot to Death
LEAD: A Salvadoran Supreme Court judge was seized outside his home and killed by unidentified men, the police said today.


GOLF TOURNAMENTS IN DISTANT PORTS
LEAD: WHEN Maurie Fisher and June Breton Fisher organized their first ''floating golf tournament'' five years ago, it prompted a lot of tongue-in-cheek questions.


FICTION
LEAD:  OUT ON THE RIM.
By Ross Thomas. (Mysterious Press, $17.95.) Here's one solution to that panicky, last-ditch scramble at the airport for the perfect book to read on the plane.
Ross Thomas's nimble international thriller will get you to Washington, Malibu, Manila, Hong Kong and even - with a few backup books like his earlier ''Briarpatch'' and ''Cold War Swap'' - to the Philippines.


For Arabs and Israelis, Maybe It Never Ends
LEAD: SOME three years ago, two Israeli college students were out on a hike on a sunny weekend morning near a monastery outside Bethlehem.
An angry Palestinian youth, who had somehow got hold of a gun, ran into them on the trail and decided on the spur of the moment to tie them to a tree and murder them for nationalist reasons.


HEADSTRONG
LEAD: PUTTING ON A HAT CAN BE A ceremonious act, an elegant gesture in the ritual of dressing.
That's no news to the spruce


JONAH WAS CLAUSTROPHOBIC
LEAD:  THE STRANGE NATION OF RAFAEL MENDES  By Moacyr Scliar.
Translated by Eloah F. Giacomelli. 309 pp.
New York: Harmony Books/Crown Publishers. $19.95.


Sandinista's Ease Up on Their Opponents at Home
LEAD: In an effort to persuade Congress to defeat President Reagan's request for new aid to the contras, the Sandinista Government has mounted a campaign of good deeds.


Film: 'Melo,' a Drama From Resnais
LEAD: ''Melo'' was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times October 5, 1987.
The film opens today at the Lincoln Plaza, Broadway at 63d Street.


Players, Plans and Statistics: How They Match Up: Redskins
LEAD:
Regular Season
Redskins
Opponents
First downs
301
296
Third-downs:made/att
84-210
77-226
Rushing yards per game
140.1
111.9
Passings yards per game
233.0
222.9
Yards penalized
691
801
Fumbles lost
19
11
Touchdowns
47
33
Points
379
285
Conversions
43-47
30-33
Field goals
18/29
19/28


PISTONS ARE LISTLESS AND NETS CAPITALIZE
LEAD: The Detroit Pistons, who had the league's fifth-best record, came to New Jersey today thinking they would beat the Nets.
Even though the Nets led by 10, then by 13, and then by 16, it was clear that the Pistons were waiting until the fourth quarter to beat the team with the worst record in the National Basketball


POSTINGS: Georgetown Conversion; Mixed-Use Complex in a Historic Mill
LEAD: When Georgetown, Conn., was placed on the National Register of Historic Places last March, it was recommended as ''a community which today resembles the rural industrial village of 19th-century Utopian ideology.'' The mill of the Gilbert and Bennett Company, founded in 1818, forms the center of the unincorporated village near Norwalk.


TOUGHER RULES ARE URGED AT FIRST RECYCLING HEARING
LEAD: THE state's new recycling law is a step in the right direction, but more needs to be done to reduce the amount of trash that is burned or buried in Connecticut, according to Russell C. Beisiegel, the First Selectman of Franklin.


Headliners; Ending in Colombia
LEAD: Drug traffickers in Colombia demonstrated a new level of ruthless audacity last week with the kidnapping and murder of Carlos Hoyos, Colombia's Attorney General.
American law-enforcement authorities considered Mr.
Hoyos an important ally in the campaign to prosecute the Colombian drug kingpins believed to be responsible for 80 percent of the cocaine entering the United States.


OUT ON A LIMB, SHOUTING
LEAD: Sinead O'Connor sings sweetly on her debut album, ''The Lion and the Cobra'' (Chrysalis 41612; LP, cassette and CD).
But not very often.
She's more likely to howl or snarl, to make her voice rasp or crack, to summon the gnarled embellishments of Celtic songs or the open-throated wail of arena-rock.


Marbled Paper
LEAD: To the Editor: Readers interested in Susan Lumsden's article ''Marbled Paper From Florence'' (Travel, Dec. 13) have an opportunity to learn of the process as applied to another material - slate.
The first exhibit dealing with this process as used on slate is on view at the Vermont Historical Society Museum in Montpelier through April 30.


Opera: Bernstein's 'Trouble in Tahiti'
LEAD: LEONARD BERNSTEIN'S ''Trouble in Tahiti'' has raised its public profile the past few years, but encased within the composer's newer, altogether grimmer opera ''A Quiet Place.'' It was nice on Friday to see this lovely, touching, delicately put-together treatise on love in the suburbs (the original is from 1952) floating free of its more recently acquired burdens.


IN SOUTH, BUSH HAS COMMANDING LEAD
LEAD: Vice President Bush holds a commanding lead in the South in the race for the Republican Presidential nomination while the Democratic contest is unsettled, according to a poll released yesterday.


Deerfield Will Admit Girls in Fall of 1989
LEAD: Deerfield Academy, one of the largest all-male preparatory schools, announced today that it would begin admitting girls next year.


COLD-WEATHER CRISIS: RESTARTING THE FURNACE
LEAD: WHEN the furnace shuts down or will not start, puzzled homeowners often panic.
But you will be doing yourself and utility personnel a favor, particularly in storms or cold snaps when service crews are strained, by trying to restart the furnace yourself.


F.B.I. Director Defends Spying on Political Groups
LEAD: William Sessions, the new Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, defended today the F.B.I.'s spying on groups opposed to the Reagan's Administration's policies in Central America.


POSTINGS: Coming Attraction; 9 Bronx Stores
LEAD: A former RKO movie theater is being converted into nine storefronts on Broadway at 232d Street in the Kingsbridge section of the Bronx.
The 14,500-square-foot building, which David Magier purchased last August for $1.4 million, was built in the 1920's and for the past 20 years has been used as a bingo parlor.


Right on Time
LEAD: To the Editor:


James Killian, 83, Science Adviser, Dies
LEAD: James R. Killian Jr., the first Presidential assistant for science and technology, an architect of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and a president of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died Friday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 83 years old.


Defer the Contra Decision
LEAD: Yes or no: Continue aid to the contra rebels in Nicaragua, or finally cut them off?
For the last seven years, the Reagan Administration has by hook and, almost literally, crook, kept the aid flowing.
This week Congress will vote on the newest proposal, for $36 million in aid, including $3.6 million in military aid.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I have a chair whose frame is made of white plastic that has discolored to an uneven beige.
Yet a painted metal brace is still white.
Is there any way to clean or bleach the plastic, or is there a white paint I can apply?


L.I. SOUND COUNTIES FORM COALITION
LEAD: REACHING beyond the political and geographic boundaries that divide them, leaders of three counties and two of the cities bordering Long Island Sound recently formed a coalition to resolve their mutual and increasingly difficult environmental problems.


LUNDINE TRIES TO BUILD A JOB AND A NAME
LEAD: SHORTLY before Stan Lundine took office as Lieutenant Governor of New York in January 1987, he consulted the man who had held the job longer than anyone else: Malcolm Wilson, No. 2 to Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller for 15 years.
Surprisingly, Mr.
Wilson's advice was exactly the opposite of what Mr.
Lundine had hoped for.


The Beer and The Boycott
LEAD: LAURENCE GOLD, THE A.F.L.-C.I.O.'S GEN-eral counsel, was up to his elbows in work one day in November 1984 when his phone rang.


OUR BIG HITS: OUT OF THIS WORLD
LEAD: IT ALL DEPENDS ON WHERE YOU'RE sitting.
Some women argue that ''Fatal Attraction'' does the unmarried career woman a disservice in its lubricious exploitation of the character played by Glenn Close.
The film, they say, is reactionary.


Wilderness Caesars and Their Wives
LEAD: To the Editor:


PREPAID PROGRAMS FOR HEALTH CARE ENCOUNTER SNAGS
LEAD: After 15 years of spectacular growth in which health maintenance organizations have enrolled nearly 30 million Americans, there are signs that consumers are losing their enthusiasm for the plans, which offer comprehensive medical care for a set fee.


Death Sentence Imposed for '73 Georgia Killings
LEAD: A jury today sentenced Carl Isaacs to die in the electric chair for the 1973 murders of six members of a family.


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  Investment Boom?


Key Matchups For Redskins
LEAD: Darrell Green, Redskins' cornerback, vs.
Ricky Nattiel, Broncos' wide receiver - Green is one of the two or three best cornerbacks in the league, with exceptional speed and an ability to be physical despite his small size.
Nattiel, a 5-foot-9-inch, 180-pound rookie, caught 31 passes for an average 20.3 yards during the season.


Cable TV
LEAD: Definitely a notch above the norm are the two films making their cable debut this week - the 1986 box-office smash ''Crocodile Dundee'' and the 1987 thriller ''Black Widow.''


INTELLECTUAL SEDUCTION
LEAD: I am an admirer of Joyce Carol Oates and of Henry A. Kissinger, and also of Mikhail Baryshnikov, Alexander Solzhenitsyn, Yevgeny Yevtushenko.
Imagine if an American leader and spouse were to give a dinner in the Soviet Union for their favorite Russian intellectuals.
The Soviet Government would have to pull many of them from Gorky, from Siberia, from phony psychiatric facilities, from exile, from defection.


L.I. SOUND NEIGHBORS FORM A COALITION
LEAD: REACHING beyond the political and geographic boundaries that divide them, government leaders of the areas bordering Long Island Sound have agreed to form a coalition to resolve environmental problems. ''We've got a lot of clout down here,'' Suffolk County Executive Patrick G. Halpin, a Democrat, said.


WHAT THEY'RE WEARING
LEAD: NOW, THE PAPARAZZI'S cameras catch them, though at the turn of the century it would have been the brush of a portrait painter.


Theater
LEAD: Last winter, Artificial Intelligence, an audaciously imaginative 22-member troupe of comic actors led by Nancy Cassaro, invaded the Ballroom, a normally staid Chelsea cabaret to put on a mock TV special, ''Vicki's Valentine Thing,'' which satirically recreated the sound and style of a 1967 family variety show.


U.S. PROMISE TO STUDY THE SOUND WAS RELUCTANT
LEAD: THE spending bill Congress passed last month included $2.2 million to continue environmental studies of Long Island Sound and the surrounding shoreline.


Reservoir Bursts in Soviet
LEAD: A sewage reservoir burst in Soviet Kazakhstan on Friday, releasing a towering wave of stagnant water and gravel that destroyed two bridges and caused deaths, the Communist Party newspaper Pravda reported today.
Without giving a casualty toll, Pravda said people were killed when the mud slide destroyed a bridge on the road between Kapchagai and Alma-Ata, capital of the Soviet republic in Central Asia.


Kean to Propose a $11.8 Billion Budget
LEAD: Governor Kean will recommend a state budget of $11.8 billion Tuesday that includes money to raise minimum starting salaries of teachers and to create a new state division to deal with AIDS.


Breaking the Stalemate
LEAD: President Mubarak of Egypt has been here this week urging the Reagan Administration to get actively involved in the search for Arab-Israeli peace.
He had a central message, delivered with passion.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.51
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.59
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.82
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
11.07
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


Bavarian Premier Assailed for South Africa Visit
LEAD: Premier Franz Josef Strauss of Bavaria said today that the South African Government promised to free 14 jailed blacks within a week and review the cases of more than 100 more.


This One Might Truly Be Super
LEAD: Year after year, Super Bowl football games have been anything but super.
In the last five years, in order, the Washington Redskins have won by 10 points, the Los Angeles Raiders by 29, the San Francisco 49ers by 22, the Chicago Bears by 36 and the Giants by 19.


DATA BANK: January 31, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
IV Q'87
III Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,870.0
$3,835.9
$3,702.4
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.2
4.3
1.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$141.9
$134.5
$130.2


NEW CYCLE BEGINS AT ST. JAMES
LEAD: A SERIES of concerts organized last winter at the historic St.
James Episcopal Church in North Salem drew such an enthusiastic response that a new cycle of ''Music at St.
James'' has been arranged for the final Sundays of January, February and March - with the first concert beginning this afternoon.


Islanders Cannot Keep Rolling
LEAD: All the repairs the Islanders made Friday were conspicuous by their absence tonight.
The team seemed to suddenly lose its sense of direction, and found itself humbled, 6-2, by the Montreal Canadiens.


Oral Record of a Loquacious Mayor Strains Storage Space
LEAD: In a high-ceilinged room in a 110-year-old building near City Hall, the ubiquitous sight and sound of Edward I. Koch is filling file cabinets at the rate of more than a drawer a month.


Settling Suits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: Because of a transcription error, a review of Primo Levi's book ''The Drowned and the Saved'' on Jan. 10 misstated the year in which Levi joined a group of anti-Fascist Italian partisans.
It was 1943.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, JANUARY 31, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-19


SUPER BOWL XXII
LEAD:  That Game Is Today


LOVE POSTS 66 TO REGAIN LEAD IN PHOENIX
LEAD: Fred Couples opened today's third round of the Phoenix Open with an eagle 2 on the first hole, then sank a 40-foot birdie putt on the second.
That was a strong enough start to get the attention of Davis Love 3d.


MUMBLING TO THE COMPUTER
LEAD: I would like to add to William Safire's collection of ''summative dribble-offs'' such as et cetera, blah, blah, blah and whatever (On Language: ''I am Appalled,'' Dec. 20).
Among folks who work in computer science, artificial intelligence and cognitive science, the term mumble has become a mildly self-deprecatory way to terminate a thought that has gotten beyond the control of its thinker.


Industry and River Form a Gulf Between 2 States
LEAD: As the Pigeon River winds through the Great Smoky Mountains in North Carolina, its waters are clear and filled with bass and trout.
But about 40 miles before crossing into Tennessee, the river turns the color of coffee, and the only fish found in it are bottom dwellers like carp and bullhead.


In Hot Pursuit of a Wonder Drug
LEAD: Over lunch at Danny's Restaurant here six years ago, a brilliant medical researcher from Johns Hopkins University and two brash New York brothers who fancied themselves company founders batted around ideas for creating a drug company.


DON'T CAST SHADOW ON ANIMAL SHELTER
LEAD: It was with great delight that I read your article on the progress of the plans to open a new Central Westchester Humane Society shelter  [ Westchester Journal, Dec. 6 ] .
It was with great disgust that I read Nancy Johnson's letter  [ Letters to the Westchester Editor, Jan. 10 ]  faulting the spending of monies for the shelter instead of for the human homeless and the use of an architectural firm for the planning.


MISS MATHESON WEDS W. H. SAWYER 3D
LEAD: At the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York, Marie Matheson, a daughter of Gladys May Matheson of Townsville, Queensland, Australia, and the late Donald Duncan Matheson, was married yesterday to Willits Herbert Sawyer 3d of New York and New Haven.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Case Sawyer of Zanesville, Ohio.


Q and A
LEAD:  Empty Apartments


LEO'S HALL OF FAME: HITS AND ERRORS
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A Travel Advisory report on Jan. 3 reversed the dimensions of the screen at the Max-Linder movie theater in Paris.
It is about 28 feet high and 54 feet wide.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  THE STARS AT NOON, by Denis Johnson. (Vintage, $5.95.) A young American woman seeking ''the exact dimensions of Hell'' goes to Nicaragua in this story by the author of ''Fiskadoro.'' ''It is daring, this political novel that disdains politics, this philosophical work that rejects all philosophies,'' Caryn James said here in 1986.


Players, Plans and Statistics: How They Match Up: Broncos
LEAD:
Regular Season
Broncos
Opponents
First downs
331
277
Third-downs:made/att
106-244
64-183
Rushing yards per game
131.3
134.5
Passings yards per game
243.6
186.4
Yards penalized
812
785
Fumbles lost
17
19
Touchdowns
45
35
Points
379
288
Conversions
44-45
32-35
Field goals
21/29
14/21


A Bergman Star Savors Chekhov
LEAD: When Erland Josephson enters as Gaev, brother of Lyubov, in Peter Brook's current production of ''The Cherry Orchard'' at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Majestic Theater, American audiences may experience a Scandinavian-accented sense of deja vu.
A familiar face from nearly a dozen Ingmar Bergman films, including the director's most recent work, ''Fanny and Alexander,'' Mr.


EVELYN H. SEELER, LAWYER, TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Seeler of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter Evelyn Harrison Seeler to John F. McKay 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McKay Jr. of Hempstead, L.I.
The wedding is to be in September.
Miss Seeler, an associate in the New York law firm of Rosenberg &amp; Estis, graduated from the Kew-Forest School and cum laude from the University of Richmond.


GARDEN OF HIS OWN
LEAD: Jim Davidson is looking forward to cultivating his own garden this summer.
Mr.
Davidson, the president of Handleman's Garden Center, a White Plains landmark, has been selling plants and telling customers how to grow them for 32 years.


Correction
LEAD: A chart on page 9 of the Travel section today about airports around the nation locates Kennedy International Airport incorrectly.
It is southeast of midtown Manhattan, not southwest.


U.S. Envoy in Austria Would 'Set Aside' Rift
LEAD: The new United States Ambassador to Austria, Henry Anatole Grunwald, says it would be in the best interest of both Washington and Vienna to set aside the Waldheim affair, a magazine reported today.


TALKING: Home Office; The New Outlook On Taxes
LEAD: PEOPLE who run an office out of a home may no longer find it worthwhile to take allowable deductions on the office when preparing income tax returns this spring.


ALEXIS EFTHIMIOU TO WED IN APRIL
LEAD: The engagement of Alexis Efthimiou to Scott Livington Probasco 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Probasco Jr. of Lookout Mountain, Tenn., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
George B. Efthimiou of Garden City, L.I.
An April wedding is planned.


Where Dance Is Heading
LEAD: Is the party over?
Has American dance, re-cently perceived as the pride of American creativity, actually become estranged from the culture around it?


Gretzky Returns
LEAD: IT was his first day back at work after the longest layoff of his career, and for Wayne Gretzky it was a busy, if ultimately unsatisfying, night Friday in Edmonton.
He set up all four Oiler goals in a game against Calgary, but the Flames got five, spoiling Gretzky's return after a 13-game absence.


A California Inn for Romance
LEAD: DRIVING north from San Francisco toward Little River, (a three-hour ride on Route 101, six hours on Route 1) you can get so involved in the spectacular scenery along California's northern coastline with its rocky promontories, green hills and awesome vistas of the Pacific that you can easily miss the sign for the turnoff for Heritage House.


A WINTER'S TALE OF FIRE ISLAND, BETWEEN ICE AND OPEN OCEAN
LEAD: IT'S cold, and it's going to be a rough day on the beach.
I can tell as soon as I look out the window.
The snow is blowing so hard that I can scarcely see the crest of the dunes, 100 yards away.
A lone deer walks stiffly through the beach grass, and a marsh hawk fights the winds.
Nine mourning doves line up on my porch railing; with feathers fluffed up to trap air and preserve heat, they look like tiny hens.


JANE PENZINER TO WED DANIEL DAUSCH IN JULY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Penziner of White Plains have announced the engagement of their daughter Jane Laura Penziner to Daniel George Dausch, a son of Kathryn Dausch and George Edward Dausch, both of Easthampton, Mass.
A July wedding is planned.


A Million Taiwanese Mourn as Leader is Buried
LEAD: Weeping women, in traditional mourning robes, kneeling along the funeral route of the late President Chiang Ching-kuo.
The body of the 77-year-old leader, who died on Jan. 13, was taken to his country estate outside Taipei.
The remains of his father, Gen.
Chaing Kai-shek, are in a mausoleum nearby.


To Expel Troublesome Students or Keep Them in School
LEAD: To the Editor:


FOOTBALL FANTASIA COMES TO POWER TOWN
LEAD: THERE will be a curfew in Washington this evening.
It is self-imposed and will begin at approximately 5 P.M.
The streets will be deserted, the delicatessen shelves emptied and most restaurants, drugstore and supermarket chains shuttered early.


Statistics on Black Poor Don't Tell the Story
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHITE HOUSE TOLD OF KEY MEESE ROLE IN PIPELINE PLAN
LEAD: The special prosecutor investigating Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d told senior White House aides Friday morning that Mr.
Meese had played an important and sustained role in 1985 in promoting an oil pipeline project in which Mr.
Meese's close friend had a financial interest, according to Administration officials.


THE PHANTOM'S MANY FACES OVER THE YEARS


LEO'S HALL OF FAME: HITS AND ERRORS
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Australia
LEAD: To the Editor: One thing travel agents and travel articles fail to mention is that the Alice Springs and Ayers Rock areas in central Australia are ''the fly capitals of the world.'' Seeking moisture, they attack the mouth and eyes.


MISS STERN WEDS MARTIN R. KRAVET
LEAD: Susan Leslie Stern, the publicity director for Saks Fifth Avenue in New York, and Martin Ross Kravet, the vice president of the Royal Abstract Corporation, a New York title insurance agency, were married last night at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik officiated.


THE MANY WAYS OF USING VERSATILE NUTS
LEAD: RECORD crops of nuts, especially walnuts and almonds, were harvested this fall in California, according to the Department of Agriculture.
This volume is good news for consumers.
Wholesale prices for walnuts are below last year's levels and almond production was more than double last year with prices also lower.


THE ANATOMY OF KNOWING
LEAD:  How do we know what we know?
In THE RING OF TRUTH: An Inquiry Into How We Know What We Know (Random House, $24.95), an immensely pretty book crafted as a companion volume to a public television series of that name on scientific inquiry, Philip and Phylis Morrison, master teachers both - he at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, she in classrooms for all ages - go a long way toward telling us.


The 'Kiddie' Tax
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Looks Into Deal Involving Ex-Dole Aide
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation has joined a Government inquiry into a $260 million no-bid Federal contract involving a former aide to Senator Bob Dole of Kansas.


Players, Plans and Statistics: How They Match Up: Team Comparison
LEAD:
Regular Season
OFFENSE
Den.
Wash.
Won-lost-tied
10-4-1
11-4-0
First downs
331
301
Rushing
132
119
Passing
173
153
Penalty
26
29
Yards
5,624
5,597
Avg. per game
374.9
373.1
Rushing
1,970
2,102
Avg. per game
131.3
140.1
Rushes
510
500


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I have a chair whose frame is made of white plastic that has discolored to an uneven beige.
Yet a painted metal brace is still white.
Is there any way to clean or bleach the plastic, or is there a white paint I can apply?


APPEAL ON GROUP HOME LOSES
LEAD: STATE efforts to bring more group homes to Westchester communities provoked new controversy this month as Larchmont lost an appeal, the town of Mamaroneck initiated an appeal and Hastings-on-Hudson began reviewing a proposal.
The Larchmont community residence will serve nine mentally disabled men, while both the Mamaroneck and


AN AMERICAN HABIT: SHUNNING THE BALLOT BOX
LEAD: ONLY the very brave or the very foolish are making predictions about the voters' choices this year.
But one prediction can be made with confidence: Of Americans eligible to go to the polls, the largest group will shun all the candidates.
They will not vote.


In Search of Clare Boothe Luce
LEAD: LATE IN THE FALL OF 1980, ARCHIE AND Selwa Roosevelt called me in New York and invited me to dinner in Washington.
It seemed a long way to go for a party, until Selwa casually said, ''Clare Luce is coming.''


Plague Years In the Imagery Of Those Who Endured Them
LEAD: Banzhen is a goddess who travels through China spreading smallpox, accompanied by two young attendants called Elder Brother Smallpox and Elder Sister Smallpox.
Mariyamman is a goddess who scatters smallpox among the Tamils of South India and Sri Lanka whenever she is angered.
Shopona is a god who uses smallpox to punish members of the Yoruba people of


Before You Start Gulping Those Aspirins for Your Heart ...
LEAD: SINCE he had a heart attack, says the former tennis player Arthur Ashe in Bristol-Myers's new commercial, a daily Bufferin tablet gives him peace of mind.


Rethinking Needs Some Thought
LEAD: I recall reading in an old book that the world was rushed into production in six days, after which a complete rest was felt to be necessary.
Presumably, the work was considered perfect at the time.
Or maybe the result fell so short of expectation that the whole show was simply allowed to stand, flaws and all, to be rethought another day.


Guide to the Sights of World Expo '88
LEAD: Six-Month Event


Dance: Balanchine's 'Stravinsky Violin Concerto'
LEAD: THE program note for George Balanchine's ballet ''Stravinsky Violin Concerto'' remarks that the choreographer used the same score in 1941 for an earlier ballet, ''under the title 'Balustrade,' with beautiful costumes and scenery by the late Pavel Tchelitchev.''


JADE HUNTER WINS DONN; CRYPTOCLEARANCE 2D
LEAD: Jade Hunter benefited from an uncontested early lead and an 11-pound swing in the weights to hold off Cryptoclearance by a length and win the $200,000 Donn Handicap today at Gulfstream Park.


No Clear Favorite, According to Poll
LEAD: Americans are almost evenly split over whom they want to win the Super Bowl, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
But even more say they don't care or don't know whom they want to win.


Conversions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Maryland Politician Convicted
LEAD: A jury in Federal District Court on Friday found Clarence Mitchell 3d, a former State Senator, guilty of conspiracy and obstructing a grand jury investigation into his connection with a convicted Baltimore drug dealer.


POSTINGS: Five-Story Rehab; 21 New Co-ops In Fort Greene
LEAD: The five-story building at 147 South Oxford Street in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn cost Louis Perlman $700,000.
To that he added a $1.3 million gut rehab, and dividing his investment by the 21,000 square feet of space he created among 21 cooperative apartments, he found that he had developed unsubsidized housing for under $100 a square foot.


MUSIC, POSSESSION AND POLITICS
LEAD:  MAKEBA  My Story.
By Miriam Makeba with James Hall.
Illustrated. 249 pp.
New York: NAL Books/New American Library. $18.95.


Excerpts From the Budget Message to Be Delivered by Kean
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the budget message Governor Kean will deliver to the Legislature on Tuesday:


Music: Foss Series On Moderns
LEAD: LUKAS FOSS's now 15-year-old Meet the Moderns series is changing.
In recent years offered in pairs of programs, one at the Brooklyn Philharmonic's home base of the Brooklyn Academy of Music and the other at Cooper Union, the series - this season, at least - has abandoned Brooklyn and now consists of five single concerts in Manhattan, three at Cooper Union, one at Town Hall and one at Merkin Concert


Jonah D. Kosovsky; Physician, 61
LEAD: Dr.
Jonah D. Kosovsky, an assistant attending physician in Mount Sinai Medical Center's department of medicine, died of cancer last Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old.


F.A.A. Shuts Down Alaska Commuter Airline
LEAD: Alaska's largest commuter airline has been temporarily shut down by the Federal Aviation Administration because of safety problems.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  PHOTOGRAPHY AND TRUTH


Minority Students Still Lag, A Survey of Schools Shows
LEAD: Minority students were more likely than whites to be suspended or placed in classes for the handicapped and were less likely to graduate from the public schools in the 1986-87 school year, according to a survey whose results were issued Friday by the Department of Education.


Senator Nunn's Questionable Defense
LEAD: Senator Sam Nunn went to dinner at the Arms Control Association last week to receive a peace award, and dropped a bombshell in his hosts' laps.
Being honored for his efforts to restrict the scope of ''Star Wars'' research, he startled his audience by suggesting that America should consider deployment of a land-based mini-''Star


Rebel Threats in Philippines
LEAD: A rebel band based here warned today that it may try to kill the United States Ambassador and other foreigners said to be supporting the Government's war against Communist guerrillas.
A rebel spokesman told an Australian journalist that guerrillas were considering an assassination attempt against the Ambassador, Nicholas Platt.


FOSTER PARENTING AND AIDS
LEAD: STEVE, 10 months old, pushed Emily, 14 months old, across the living-room floor on her three-wheeler.
Ricky, 9 months old, played with a hat.
Their foster mother sat on the floor, occasionally reaching out to hug or pat one of the children. ''A house full of kids - just what I always wanted,'' she said, laughing as Ricky hid behind the hat.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  CAPTIVES OF TIME  By Malcolm Bosse. 268 pp.
New York: Delacorte Press. $14.95. (Ages 14 and up)


Beginning in Britain
LEAD: Sometimes it seems that the British press has found a foolproof way to cover the news of royal pregnancies:


SHAPELY SKIRTS
LEAD: POUFS ARE FAST BECOMING passe for evening, but the bouncy or puffed skirt is beginning to be big news for day.
Some of the most forward of the new spring styles, while fairly simple above the waist, wind up in skirts that look as though a passing breeze could tilt them this way and that.
Sometimes, the effect is achieved with a petticoat or two propping up a fullish skirt.


MARTHA WOLFE, LAWYER, TO MARRY
LEAD: Judge and Mrs.
Sheldon J. Wolfe of McLean, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Martha Louise Wolfe, to James Phillip Verscaj, a son of Catherine Verscaj of Los Angeles and the late John J. Verscaj.
A June wedding is planned.


NEWARK OF THE 40'S LIVES AGAIN IN FILM THAT PREMIERES THURSDAY
LEAD: THERE'LL be a bit of Hollywood in Montclair next Thursday night - searchlights, actors, music and a reception at the venerable Wellmont Theater.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: THE only rookie in the National Basketball Association's slam-dunk championship in Chicago on Feb. 6. has had to withdraw because of injury, but another rookie will be taking his place.
Greg Anderson, a first-year San Antonio Spur, was named to replace Scottie Pippen, a Bulls rookie who is nursing a back injury.


From California, a Helper for Mother Teresa
LEAD: The former Governor of California, Edmund G. Brown Jr., is spending three to four weeks in this impoverished city working with patients at Mother Teresa's Home for Dying Destitutes.


STILL HAUNTED BY COVENANT
LEAD:  THE PENGUIN BOOK OF MODERN YIDDISH VERSE  Edited by Irving Howe, Ruth R. Wisse and Khone Shmeruk.
Bilingual. 719 pp.
New York: Viking. $29.95.
AMERICAN YIDDISH POETRY  A Bilingual Anthology.
Edited by Benjamin and Barbara Harshav.
Illustrated. 813 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press.


Glittering Crystal From Portugal
LEAD: LIKE some ancient ritual fire dance, shadowy figures dart hither and yon, bearing blazing torches.
One man jabs the air with a great glob of fire; another rolls a flaming mass in rapid swirls; still others breathe life into their burning bubbles.


VERBATIM: WHOSE PARTY?
LEAD: 'Anybody that suggests aboriginal people have a lot to celebrate this year as a result of the last 200 years hasn't taken much note of history.' - Gerry Hand, Australia's Minister for Abroriginal Affairs, announcing that he would boycott the bicentennial festivities.


Nuclear Agency Said to Lag in Seeking Out Crime
LEAD: Three years ago former workers at a nuclear plant here told the Nuclear Regulatory Commission that plant managers repeatedly falsified radiation readings, thus hiding evidence of problems that would otherwise have forced an expensive shutdown.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  The Dog in the Poet
When he was almost 40 and severely depressed, the poet Rilke fell in love with a young concert pianist.
The lifting of his spirits prompted some almost hysterically enthusiastic love letters, like this one from ''Rilke and Benvenuta: An Intimate Correspondence'' (Fromm).


BETH JOY SCHLEGEL WED TO JAY S. RAND ON L.I.
LEAD: Beth Joy Schlegel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Schlegel of Woodmere, L.I., and Jay Samuel Rand, the son of Earl Joseph Rand of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Naomi Ruth Rand, were married last evening.
Rabbis Morris Pickholz and Mordecai Waxman officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.


MOTHER'S NETWORK: FEMINISM AT AGE 40
LEAD: IN my small suburban town, a group of children are shared freely by a group of mothers who happen to be friends.
The friendships began with the children, but they have grown more quickly than the toddlers who used to crawl on our laps and upset coffee cups when we were full-time mothers.
All of us have jobs outside our homes now, with a variety of titles, hours, responsibilities and pressures.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  PERLMAN IN MONTCLAIR


DR. FLORENCE HOUN, AN INTERNIST, TO WED
LEAD: Dr.
Florence Houn, an internist in Baltimore, and Dr.
Mark Jay Goldberger, an attending physician at the Presbyterian Hospital in New York, are planning a summer wedding, the parents of the bride-to-be, Prof.
Franklin Wu Houn of Amherst, Mass., and Frances Lu Houn of Cambridge, Mass., have announced.


INDIANA ENDS PURDUE'S STREAK
LEAD: Dean Garrett scored a career-high 31 points and got the winning basket with 5 seconds left as Indiana ended Purdue's 16-game winning streak with an 82-79 upset in Big Ten Conference play today.


Boys and Girls on Same Team
LEAD: The Louisiana High School Athletic Association has decided that girls may play competitive contact sports with boys if there are no comparable girls' teams.


TRUE CONFESSIONS OF A TREND SETTER
LEAD: I LIKED TV even before it became trendy.
For a long time this meant guilt.
I was reared on Praire Public Television in Fargo, N.D., as a sort of intellectual irrigation -without it, cultural death - and was disdainful of commercial entertainment.


DONNA GAIL JONAS TO WED IN AUGUST
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Sterling Jonas of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Donna Gail Jonas, to Harry Isadore Goldberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Goldberg of Savannah, Ga.
An August wedding is planned.


The Many Sounds of Joyce
LEAD: James Joyce loved coinci-dences - especially about his own birthday - so he certainly would love his birthday celebration at Merkin Concert Hall tomorrow night, were he around to take part in it, which he will be, in a manner of speaking.


ORCHESTRA EVENTS AND 1689 OPERA AMONG WEEK'S HIGHLIGHTS
LEAD: ORCHESTRAL concerts will be bountiful this week, beginning Tuesday evening when the noted Soviet emigre maestro, Rudolf Barshai, will be the guest conductor for the Hartford Symphony.


Question Of the Week; WHO WILL WIN THE SUPER BOWL?
LEAD: Denver will win.
No team besides the Minnesota Vikings has ever lost two Super Bowls in a row, and the Vikes aren't in this one.
LARRY COHEN  New York


Jersey Episcopalians Offer A Blessing for Homosexuals
LEAD: Representatives of 125 Episcopal parishes in northern New Jersey voted today to give their blessing to homosexual relationships and to unmarried couples.


Homeowners on Cape Cod Battle Sea and Town
LEAD: Pointing to a spot on his map where Holway Street reaches Chatham's eastern shoreline, Doug Wells, chairman of this town's conservation commission, said that the sea had come up to that point before, in 1875.


Gibson Tells Why He Left Tigers
LEAD: Kirk Gibson's three-year, $4.5 million contract with the Los Angeles Dodgers may be a landmark in baseball's owner-player relations, but the former Detroit Tigers' left fielder said he wished it had never come to this.


Philadelphia Group Sees Homeless Study As Help to Officials
LEAD: A coalition for the homeless is banking on a survey of Pennsylvania's homeless to give officials a better idea of who needs help and what help is needed.


AS NORMAL AS IT EVER WAS
LEAD:  DOMESTIC REVOLUTIONS  A Social History of American Family Life.
By Steven Mintz and Susan Kellogg.
Illustrated. 316 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.50.


Strategies for Harried Air Travelers
LEAD: WHILE storm clouds and spare parts still cause most flight delays, a growing number of late planes are the result of crowded airports.
Yet avoiding airport congestion can be as simple as bypassing congested airports.
Most major American cities have mid-sized airports in and around them that are served by major airlines but are less busy than the city's main facility.


Music
LEAD: Increasingly, classical music lovers are finding some of their deepest satisfactions before and after the ''standard repertory,'' which means mostly music composed between the late 18th and early 20th centuries.
This week, there are piquant events both old and new to be heard.


NANCY L. CLARK TO WED RICHARD JOHN ANGERER
LEAD: Nancy Lawrence Clark and Richard John Angerer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Angerer of Lansing, N.Y., plan to marry in August, the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Francis A. Clark of Cooperstown, N.Y., and St.
Simons Island, Ga., have announced.


THE BEAUTY - AND MYSTERY - OF GLASS
LEAD: A WHILE ago, a friend at odds with his colleagues told of a dream in which they were feeding him glass.
This writer, at an offbeat exhibition recently, recalled her visceral reaction to his story when she confronted a pile of broken glass contained within a circular rim.
Glass at its rawest -jagged, brittle, uncivilized by shaping and capable of hurting - rarely shows up in galleries where glass is the theme.


Question Of the Week; WHO WILL WIN THE SUPER BOWL?
LEAD: The Broncos will, 34-17.  EDWARD RANDALL
New York


How American Business Helps Create Deficits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Recalling Tet, the Attack That Began the End
LEAD: Col.
Do Tan Phong remembers Jan. 31, 1968, in vivid detail.
Before dawn on the second day of Tet, the Lunar New Year, five small units of Vietcong commandos struck Saigon.


Classical Music: What Next?
LEAD: The date is Jan 31, 2038.
At 8 o'clock tonight, Carnegie Hall will be the scene of a special concert of rediscovered music - music that has not been played for three decades.
There will, however, be no orchestra - not enough people play the violin, or the cello, or the oboe, anymore.
All of the instruments will be played on a new computer, programmed for the occasion: the Bach 9000, which sounds more like an old-fashioned symphony orchestra than the real thing.


Racism in Sports
LEAD: To the Editor:


Marbled Paper
LEAD: To the Editor: Miss Lumsden asserts that ''marbled paper-making survives today almost exclusively in Florence.'' This is most certainly not true.
Neither can Italy, nor France, whose firm of Michel Duval is referred to in the article, be said to be the only Western countries in which the marbling tradition continues.


RANDI EILEEN NOSKIN WEDS RUSSEL L. MIRON
LEAD: Randi Eileen Noskin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald M. Noskin of Glencoe, Ill., and Russel Leeds Miron, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Lane Miron of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., were married last evening at the Ritz Carlton in Chicago.
Rabbi Herbert Bronstein performed the ceremony.


EMPHASIS ON INFORMAL ITALIAN
LEAD: ''SCUSI'' means ''excuse me'' in Italian, but a restaurant as good as the recently opened Scoozzi Trattoria and Wine Bar in New Haven, which takes its name from a playful spelling of the Italian, has no need to be apologetic.


THE MEANS TO WAR
LEAD:  THE ARMS CONTROL DELUSION  By Malcolm Wallop and Angelo Codevilla. 220 pp.
San Francisco: ICS Press/Institute for Contemporary Studies. $16.95


Fossilization Evolves Into a Modern Metaphor
LEAD: One of the stranger and more revealing aspects of art this season has been the number of works suggesting fossilization.
In some sculptures, human beings and plants seem embedded in earth or frozen in stone.
In others, industrial objects resembling plants and bones lie on the floor like prize findings of a dig.


Golf's Busy Day
LEAD: THERE'S something about meeting in the nation's capital that gets the legislative juices flowing, and for those at the United States Golf Association's 94th annual meeting, it was a gavel-filled day in Washington yesterday.
Among other things, the organization elected a new president, William C. Battie of Ivy, Va.; selected the United States team for the 1988 Curtis Cup, and issued four international exemptions and one expatriate exemption for qualifying for the United States


Family Ties And Bindings At a Ski Resort
LEAD: WINTER vacation: a time for family to sit together by the fire.
My 63-year-old husband wants to learn to ski.
I want to do some cross-country skiing.
My stepson-in-law wants to ski.
My stepdaughter, four months pregnant, wants to ski; the obstetrician says don't go down hill.
My 17-year-old wants to ski.


COLD-WEATHER CRISIS: RESTARTING THE FURNACE
LEAD: WHEN the furnace shuts down or will not start, puzzled homeowners often panic.
But you will be doing yourself and utility personnel a favor, particularly in storms or cold snaps when service crews are strained, by trying to restart the furnace yourself.


E. STACY CREAMER TO MARRY IN JUNE
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Shane Creamer of Blue Bell, Pa., of the engagement of their daughter E. Stacy Creamer to C. Roger Finney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clement Seymour Finney of Victoria, British Columbia.


Ex-Cheerleader Wages Lonely Fight at Ohio State
LEAD: It was a familiar sight at Ohio State University basketball games last season: The cheerleading squad back-flipping into formation as a lone black cheerleader, shunned by the others, did cartwheels near the bench.


An Exile-Observer of the Blizzard of '88
LEAD: To the Editor; May I add to your colorful Jan. 14 article on the ''The Blizzard of 1888'' exhibition at the New-York Historical Society?
The Latin American press back then carried a front-page article headlined, ''New York Under the Snow'' by Jose Marti, the Cuban revolutionary poet, educator, writer of children's stories, art and literary critic, and journalist.


Recalling Moment With Ali
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


GROUPS SEEK TO CURB TEEN-AGE SUICIDE
LEAD: AS an aftermath to the suicides involving four teen-agers in Bergen County last year that touched off a rash of what some police officials termed ''copycat'' suicides, a consortium of New Jersey nonprofit organizations has started a campaign to educate the public on spotting and helping teen-agers with suicidal tendencies.


ELIZABETH MEHREN AND FOX BUTTERFIELD, NEWSPAPER REPORTERS, MARRY IN UTAH
LEAD: Elizabeth Mehren, a reporter in New York for The Los Angeles Times, and Fox Butterfield, a reporter for The New York Times, were married yesterday in Park City, Utah.
Hal Taylor, the Mayor of Park City, officiated at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas G. Mathews.


WHEN A TOWN BECOMES THE TOWN DUMP
LEAD: The ''Garbage Crisis'' has been in the headlines for the past year, and it now appears possible that this unsolved problem will eventually ruin the natural beauty of Westchester County.


IT WAS TRAFFIC, NOT PEDIGREE
LEAD: We wish to take exception to several of the comments made by Dr.
William G. Sharwell, the president of Pace University, in the article ''Town and Gown: How Friendly Is the Relationship?''  [ Jan. 3. ]  In that article, Dr.
Sharwell stated that when Pace took over Briarcliff College ''it was a classy finishing school for young women and Pace taking it over didn't please everyone in the community.


The Redskins' Owner Relishes His Role
LEAD: NOW hear this.
Jack Kent Cooke is speaking, and no greater love has anyone else for the sound of his own voice.


COURTS PREPARE FOR CAMERAS
LEAD: EIGHT years after legislation was first proposed, Long Island, along with the rest of New York State, is embarking on an 18-month trial that will permit audiovisual equipment in courtrooms.
Beginning tomorrow, at the crophones will be allowed in criminal and civil court proceedings, including trials that the press wishes to cover.


Clarification at the Fogg
LEAD: To the Editor:


JENNIFER SLINGLUFF ENGAGED TO WED PATRICK ROBINSON
LEAD: The engagement of Jennifer Grant Slingluff to Patrick Malone Robinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Miller Robinson Jr. of Nashville, has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Haines Slingluff Jr. of Rumson, N.J., parents of the bride-to-be.
The couple plan to marry in May.


Americans Are Unlikely to Head Off a Slide in Success
LEAD: NIGHT was descending in the Alps.


Some Thoughts On Racism
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  East Setauket  $138,000  11 Rack Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 22-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,500.
Great River  $312,000  7 Redwood Drive  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 26-year-old farm ranch; new kitchen, basement, pool; taxes $5,500.


Arthur J. Raporte; Executive, 70
LEAD: Arthur J. Raporte, a former vice president in charge of real estate for the Loews Corporation, died of respiratory failure Wednesday at his home in Rye, N.Y.
He was 70 years old.


10 ARABS WOUNDED BY ISRAELI GUNFIRE
LEAD: The Israeli Army opened fire today on Palestinian demonstrators in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, wounding at least 10 people.


The Era of Palms and Ferns
LEAD: TAKE a walk down Main Street of any town born a century or more ago and you will find evidence of the fascination for house plants during the Victorian era.
Horticultural hobbies were such an intrinsic part of 19th-century life that the architecture reflected this penchant for plants.


Copeland's Interest in 'Our Town'
LEAD: To the Editor:


AS THE ROOM TURNS
LEAD: THE HISTORY OF A ROOM IS A scrapbook of lives; the evolution of its decor, a record of evolving tastes and fashions.
The room shown here was originally the newspaper publisher Joseph Pulitzer's bedroom.
Tucked away on the upper floor of an old New York house, Pulitzer's private quarters were grand, his bedroom measuring 32 by 36 feet, with 16-foot-high ceilings.


WHAT HE SAW IN BONWIT TELLER
LEAD:  A WOMAN RUN MAD  By John L'Heureux. 258 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


U.S. Envoy Sees Hussein on Mideast
LEAD: In a new effort to get Arab-Israeli peace talks under way, President Reagan has sent Philip C. Habib, his former special Middle East envoy, to Jordan to meet this weekend with King Hussein, American officials said today.


Stopping Start
LEAD: To demonstrate more than a dime's worth of policy difference between himself and George Bush, Bob Dole must find an issue on which he can take a more hawkish stance - without appearing to be disloyal to Ronald Reagan.


Jesse Helms: The Arms Treaty Is Only His Latest Target
LEAD: It is not as if anyone on Capitol Hill expected hearings on the new treaty banning medium- and shorter-range nuclear weapons to produce riveting television or scintillating news stories.
But the members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee had hoped at least for a dignified showing as they set out to advise, consent and perhaps even improve on the first major arms agreement with the Soviet


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Skiing  Nierlich Leads Austrian Sweep: Rudi Nierlich, a 21-year-old from Austria, scored his first World Cup victory yesterday and led Austria to a sweep of the top four places in a World Cup giant slalom at Schladming, Austria.
Nierlich was timed in 2 minutes 45.54 seconds for the two runs down the course which dropped 396 meters and had 57 gates.


VALERIE KINDRED TO WED SCOTT WALKER
LEAD: Valerie Prescott Kindred, a geologist for Shell Oil in Houston, and Scott Cameron Walker, a telecommunications analyst for International Business Machines in Boulder, Colo., plan to be married in April.
Their engagement has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Estabrook Kindred of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Skytop, Pa.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday about a ceremony honoring Rosa L. Parks reversed the identities of the two men with her.
The Rev.
Herbert Daughtry was at far left and next to him was Assemblyman Roger L. Green.


Cynthia Shelton, Business Student, Is Wed in Atlanta
LEAD: At St.
Anne's Episcopal Church in Atlanta, Cynthia Anne Shelton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Shelton of Atlanta, was married yesterday to Nassim Taleb, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Nagib Taleb of Beirut, Lebanon.
The Rev.
William W. Shelton, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony.


A Lyrical Pianist Who Had Everything
LEAD: Benno Moiseiwitsch (1890-1963) started recording in 1916, and thus he lived through several revolutions in the recording industry, from acoustic to electric, to LP, to stereo.
He was, along with Paderewski, Schnabel, Friedman, Gabrilowitsch and many other headliners of the day, a pupil of Theodor Leschetizky, who produced as many great pianists as Liszt.


ANDREW LERMAN ENGAGED TO JULIA MCKAY VAN RODEN
LEAD: The engagement of Julia McKay van Roden to Andrew Howard Lerman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max R. Lerman of East Falls, Pa., has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mary McKay Biddle of Jamestown, R.I., and Donald van Roden of Wyomissing, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.


Link to Meese Brings Fame and Allegations
LEAD: As investigators have looked into the role of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d in the Wedtech affair and in a never-built Iraqi pipeline project that now appears to involve hints of bribery, the name E. Robert Wallach has come up repeatedly.


Robert Lowell and Randall Jarrell
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOLY CROSS BEATS FORDHAM, 97-85
LEAD: Holy Cross, which had lost seven straight games on the road, spoiled Fordham's Homecoming Day by defeating the Rams, 97-85, in a Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference game yesterday at Rose Hill Gymnasium in the Bronx.


Is the Upper East Side Moving North?
LEAD: ON the east side of Manhattan, from 96th Street north, empty lots still outnumber condominiums, boarded-up windows are more common than ''For Sale'' signs and trash far exceeds brass.
Nonetheless, people who live there are worried that the neighborhood is getting trendy.


CHERI ANNE DELAY WEDS A. F. VENEZIANO JR., LAWYER
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y., Cheri Anne DeLay, the daughter of Mrs.
Wayne T. DeLay of Nashville and the late Mr.
DeLay, was married yesterday to Anthony Francis Veneziano Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Veneziano of Harrison, N.Y.
The Rev.
Leslie Ivers officiated.


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Loft Conversions; When Renting Out Pays More Than Manufacturing
LEAD: VICTOR TRAGER expected to build a career within the company his grandfather founded more than a half-century ago.
But last summer the company, Herman I. Zacharia &amp; Son, a lingerie manufacturer, went out of business and Mr.
Trager began converting the former plant in lower Manhattan into an office building.


7 Finalists In Hall Voting
LEAD: Fred Biletnikoff, Mike Ditka, Bob Griese, Jack Ham, Alan Page and Art Shell emerged today as the finalists on this year's Pro Football Hall of Fame selection committee list along with Lou Rymkus, the old-timers committee nominee.
The result of the secret


U.S. Seeks Iraqi Payment for Kin of Dead Sailors
LEAD: After an eight-month interagency inquiry, the United States has decided to ask Iraq for tens of millions of dollars to compensate the families of those killed in the Iraqi attack on the guided missile frigate Stark, State Department and Pentagon officials say.


RACIAL REPORT ON SCHOOLS: THE FALLOUT
LEAD: NATIONAL Black History Month begins tomorrow, and to Education Commissioner Gerald N. Tirozzi, the way it is being observed in Connecticut's schools is an indication of the need for more racial balance.


BALLROOM DANCING MAKES A COMEBACK
LEAD: WHENEVER a band struck up a fox trot, waltz or any other number associated with ballroom dancing, Karen Gross of Stamford would remain seated.


Behind Super-VHS
LEAD: Those who worry about the innovative acumen of American industry have some reassuring news.


Bush Responds in Writing To Queries on Iran Affair
LEAD: Vice President Bush said today that he had ''no precise recollection'' of when he learned of the sales of United States arms to Iran but that he did not oppose the policy when he was told about it.


Forger Who Killed 2 Must Spend Life in Prison, Board Rules
LEAD: A man who killed two people to cover up his forgeries of historical documents must spend the rest of his life in prison, the Utah Board of Pardons decided Friday.


JENNIFER B. KURTZ, LAWYER, TO MARRY
LEAD: Jennifer Barton Kurtz and Aharon Unger, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Robert Unger of Spartanburg, S.C., plan to marry in April, the parents of the future bride, Margery G. Kurtz of New York and Dr.
Anthony D. Kurtz of Teaneck, N.J., have announced.


Gandhi Dissolves State Rule After Assembly Brawl
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi today dissolved the government of the southern state of Tamil Nadu, acting two days after violent brawling on the floor of the State Assembly had to be broken up by the police.


Kean Seeks AIDS Agency
LEAD: A new state agency to deal with the AIDS crisis in New Jersey will be urged by Governor Kean in his proposed $11.8 billion budget.
Page 36.


Correction
LEAD: An item in Sports People last Sunday misidentified the former University of Michigan All-America running back who will be inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame next December.
He is Bob Chappuis.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  BLACK HISTORY MONTH  The Greenburgh Library's celebration of Black History Month begins this week with a talk by Terrie M. Williams, who grew up in Mount Vernon and is now a vice president of Essence Magazine Inc.
She will speak about ''Making It to the Top: A Black Woman's Journey'' at 7:45 P.M.


20 ARE SEIZED IN GAMBLING RAIDS
LEAD: An illegal gambling ring that handled about $500 million in bets on sporting events was the target of raids on seven apartments in Manhattan last night that resulted in the arrests of 20 people, the police reported.


Mail Fraud Conviction Of Blanton Dismissed
LEAD: A Federal judge, relying on a Supreme Court ruling last year, has thrown out the mail fraud charges on which former Gov.
Ray Blanton of Tennessee was convicted and served two years in prison.


Take Heart, Fiction Lovers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Photography
LEAD: Only a few months ago, at the Museum of Modern Art, Henri Cartier-Bresson was shown to us as a photographer rooted in the styles and ideology of Surrealism.
Now, with ''Henri Cartier-Bresson in India,'' a show of some 100 of his prints at the International Center of Photography (1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th


INTELLECTUAL SEDUCTION
LEAD: It is apparent that Mikhail S. Gorbachev is, indeed, ''an actor creating his own ideal image'' (''Intellectual Seduction,'' by Joyce Carol Oates, Jan. 3).
I hope that President Reagan equally will plan to create his own ideal image during his visit to the Soviet Union later this year.
I hope that Mr.


Fighting Words
LEAD: THE dollar difference between the Mike Tyson and Michael Spinks camps over a guarantee for Spinks to fight the heavyweight champion seems to have narrowed a bit.


ELIZABETH KARNES ENGAGED TO GARY MEYERS, PROFESSOR
LEAD: Elizabeth Helen Karnes, the executive assistant to the president of Middlebury College, and Gary Griffith Meyers, an assistant professor of political science at Middlebury, plan to marry this summer.


LINKING OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE
LEAD: I read, with great interest, the article on ''A Private Owner for Public Housing''  [ Jan. 10 ] .
Although I think that private ownership of public housing has possibilities, I would have preferred to see public housing sold to tenants of the buildings rather than to a private company.


A New State Song For Old Virginia?
LEAD: YES, critics agreed, ''Carry Me Back to Old Virginia'' - Virginia's official state song - is indeed steeped in sentiment and history.
But in today's world, they argued, it is basically a slur on blacks and an unwelcome reminder of slavery.


The Santa Fe Opera Announces '88 Season
LEAD: The Santa Fe Opera will present the United States premiere of Krzystof Penderecki's opera ''The Black Mask'' during its 1988 season, which begins July 1 and ends Aug. 27, the company's director, John Crosby, has announced.
The opera is one of six that will be given during the 37-performance series.


When Bonds Lose Their Convertibility
LEAD: WHILE takeovers and restructurings may enrich common stockholders, owners of corporate bonds in many cases are left reeling from losses.
That has been particularly true in recent months for holders of debt convertible into corporate shares.
These bonds are generally sold at lower than prevailing interest rates because investors get a kicker: a chance to share in any appreciation of the common stock.


Food Giant CPC Is Big In Everything but Name
LEAD: If American Express did corporate ''Do you know me?'' ads, CPC International Inc. would be a natural choice.
Most everyone knows Mazola corn oil, Hellmann's mayonnaise, Skippy peanut butter, Thomas's English muffins and its other products.
But CPC itself?
It seemed to have made a high science of keeping a low profile.


Safety Issues Test Europe's Faith in Nuclear Power
LEAD: ALTHOUGH much of Europe remains committed to nuclear energy, the European nuclear power industry, which many American experts envy because of its safety record, has been suffering blow after blow.


A HARDY SHRUB FOR WINTERTIME
LEAD: RECENT ice/wind storms may have broken limbs or branches; check yews, hemlocks, rhododendrons, junipers, birches, dogwoods and magnolias; if damage is found, saw or prune back to main trunk or strong wood.
If trees and shrubs are not broken, but bent over, they should right themselves naturally in time.


COLD-WEATHER CRISIS: RESTARTING THE FURNACE
LEAD: WHEN the furnace shuts down or will not start, puzzled homeowners often panic.
But you will be doing yourself and utility personnel a favor, particularly in storms or cold snaps when service crews are strained, by trying to restart the furnace yourself.


ENGLAND REDISCOVERS IT AGE OF CHIVALRY
LEAD: To what extent can an ex-hibition sum up an entire civilization?
Every generation has its own answer to that, but some of the answers haven't worn too well.
Once upon a time the huge, baggy, ''comprehensive,'' all-star national survey was in high favor.
Governments loved them, and in a time of relative inactivity in the museum world the public often loved them, too.


Sunday Observer; Super Supernumerary
LEAD: THE XXIst CENTURY was still in knee pants in the year MMXVI, but the Super Bowl had grown long in the tooth.
To be precise, that year was the Lth anniversary of the stupendous sporting event, and the public's loss of interest in it was pronounced, as well as galling to advertisers, or Super Splurgers as they were called out of respect for their willingness to pay Super Sums for XV-second Super


German's Release Is Sought
LEAD: Syria's military intelligence chief in Lebanon was in West Beirut today to seek the release of a West German who was kidnapped Wednesday, a Syrian close to events said.
Brig.
Gen.
Ghazi Kenaan reportedly drove from Syria Friday and made it known that ''Syria wants Schray released, the sooner the better.


Question Of the Week; WHO WILL WIN THE SUPER BOWL?
LEAD: John Elway is capable of winning the game almost by himself, and with Denver's running game he may have to.
Washington will find a way to contain Elway somewhat.
Final score: Washington 37, Denver 24.
ROBERT FABRIKANT  New York


Final Exam for Seniors Could Be for Sobriety
LEAD: The principal of Trumbull High School wants seniors to make their final exam a sobriety test.


Question Of the Week; WHO WILL WIN THE SUPER BOWL?
LEAD: In the end, the Broncos will win, because of their superiority in both the offensive and defensive departments, and also because they are returning after being routed by the Giants last year.
THEODORE A. PAULY  Radnor, Pa.


75 Years Late, Pennsylvania Honors 2 Civil War Heroes
LEAD: PHILADELPHIA, Jan. 29 -


British Antics in 'Noises Off'
LEAD: ''NOISES OFF'' is a knee-slappingly funny comedy about the behind-scenes doings of a live theatrical production called ''Nothing On.'' At Theater Three, where this delightful show by the British playwright Michael Frayn is currently playing, ''Noises Off'' is productions this theater has come up with in several seasons.


CAR RENTALS: THE UNADVERTISED EXTRAS
LEAD: RENTING a car can be a frenzied experience.
Initial here, sign there, grab the keys and be gone.


FIRST AMENDMENT: IS IT JUST FOR ADULTS?
LEAD: AS an editor of a high school newspaper I am enraged by the Supreme Court's Hazelwood v.
Kuhlmeier decision.


LAFAYETTE RELIES ON CLASSIC FRENCH
LEAD: A Frenchman on the street in Lafayette's day would have found the menu at Lafayette restaurant in Smithtown very familiar.
All the French golden oldies are there: pate, escargots, coquilles St.-Jacques, duckling a l'orange, entrecote au poivre, rack of lamb, Chateaubriand, frog legs Provencal and crepes suzette.


'PHOTOGRAPHY MASTERS OF THE 30'S' AT THE PELHAM ART CENTER
LEAD: COLOR in photography has become the equivalent of sugar in the diet and is every bit as addictive.
This may explain not only the fad for colorizing old movies but also the jolt that comes from seeing those that have escaped the treatment.


THE MANY WAYS OF USING VERSATILE NUTS
LEAD: RECORD crops of nuts, especially walnuts and almonds, were harvested this fall in California, according to the Department of Agriculture.
This volume is good news for consumers.
Wholesale prices for walnuts are below last year's levels and almond production was more than double last year with prices also lower.


SICK THINKING
LEAD: It is an excellent idea to take your spouse or another person to the doctor with you, especially if surgery is on the agenda.
The subtle mental dysfunction discussed in Morton Hunt's article must not cloud what lawyers and physicians recognize as informed consent to undergo a surgical procedure.
Relevant questions should be asked and note should be made of the risks of the intervention, possible complications and the expected benefits.


Hotels
LEAD: To the Editor:


On the Costly, But Open Road
LEAD: EVER since the concept of personal mobility dawned on me, I had dreamed of renting a motor home and traveling cross-country.
What a convenient, entertaining and inexpensive way to go, I thought.
Well, two out of three, as they say, aren't bad.


'CONNECTICUT IS THE ENVY OF THE COUNTRY'
LEAD: KENNETH O. DECKO has been president of the Connecticut Business and Industry Association, the largest business group in the state, for 17 years.


IN ASSEMBLY, THE THEME IS FISCAL
LEAD: PROPERTY-TAX relief, low-income housing and a new school-aid formula are expected to top the agenda when the General Assembly convenes Wednesday.


Average Women and Love
LEAD: To the Editor:


REPORT FAULTS EMPLOYMENT OUTLOOK
LEAD: THE New Jersey Council of Churches has taken a hard look behind the state's low unemployment figures and found disquieting evidence that putting people to work is no longer enough to make the American Dream a reality for many citizens.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  RED ON RED.
By Red Holzman and Harvey Frommer. (Bantam, $17.95.) When they want to feel good, fans of the New York Knickerbockers remember the years 1968 to 1975.
While Knick teams of the 80's play bad basketball to a lot of empty seats, great Knick teams of not so long ago treated sellout Madison Square Garden crowds to the playoffs every year.


Accord Is Reached in Talks For New Miners' Contract
LEAD: The United Mine Workers and the Bituminous Coal Operators Association reached agreement today on a new 40-month contract one day before a strike deadline.


FOR PRESERVATION OF THE GAS STATIONS
LEAD: After reading your article  [ Westchester Journal, Jan. 3 ] , I was disturbed at the proposed demise of the four abandoned gas stations on the Saw Mill and Taconic Parkways.


Riding A Ghost Train To New York
LEAD: THE Montrealer was a classic train.


Hints of Weakness In Growth Report
LEAD: The economy's growth rate for the final quarter of 1987 was deceptively robust.
Gross national product rose at an annual rate of 4.2 percent during the quarter, but most of the increased output piled up as unsold inventory, which is likely to be a drag on the economy in the immediate future.
The economy grew at an inflation-adjusted rate of 3.7 percent for all of 1987, the fifth year of expansion.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''I wouldn't be surprised to see negative growth in this quarter and even in the second quarter.''


Jury Awards Are Too Big
LEAD: IN too many cases, the American legal system treats civil violations as if they were criminal.
There are fundamental differences between criminal and civil offenses, and there are large costs from confounding them.


PERSPECTIVES: Assessments on Offices; A Heavier Load for the 'Second Tier'
LEAD: IN the past, there was a type of investment property that the city's assessors called ''sleepers.'' These were the buildings that the were suspected of being underassessed.
But since there was no recent sale with which to confirm market value, and no income and expense data unless owners cared to protest an assessment they considered too high, assessors could greatly underestimate their true value.


Our War in Nicaragua
LEAD: To the Editor:


AUDREY COHEN IS WED TO DR. R. N. WHARTON
LEAD: Audrey C. Cohen and Dr.
Ralph Nathaniel Wharton were married last evening at the Lotos Club in Manhattan.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel officiated.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD: Bedford, N.Y.  $310,000  Brundage Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old frame raised ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $3,956.
New Rochelle, N.Y.  $143,000  43 Third Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 98-year-old stucco colonial; enclosed porch, 2-car garage; taxes $1,637.


MS. WOODWARD ENGAGED TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Christina Melissa Woodward to Benjamin Ruggles Woodbridge Strong, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Woodbridge Strong of Highland Park, N.J., and Lenox, Mass., has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Rittenhouse Woodward 3d of Shaker Heights, Ohio, parents of the bride-to-be.
The couple plan to marry Sept.


Porsches Leading After Three Hours
LEAD: Defending champions Chip Robinson, Al Holbert and Derek Bell, sharing a Porsche 962, led after three hours of the Daytona 24 Hours at Daytona International Speedway today.


'Vladimir's Carrot'
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. FAILURES PROMPT GIFTS FOR NEEDIEST
LEAD: For the first time, Edwin Neff Jr., president of the Computer Equity Corporation of Manhattan, sent a contribution of $1,000 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: EVEN talking about it, Mary Jean Tully gets exceedingly annoyed.
She isn't the self-pitying type, but on certain social occasions, she does wonder, ''Why, oh, why me?'' And it doesn't help much to know that the same thing happens to a lot of other people, and that these people often have the very same thought.


L.I. SOUND GOVERNMENTS JOIN FORCES
LEAD: REACHING beyond the boundaries that divide them, the leaders of Westchester, Nassau and Suffolk Counties in New York have joined with New York City and Stamford to discuss mutual and increasingly difficult environmental problems.


Court Allows Suit Over U.S. Bar to Abortion Aid
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has ruled that the Planned Parenthood Federation of American can proceed with a lawsuit seeking to block a Reagan Administration policy barring family planning aid to private foreign organizations that perform abortions, the organization has said.


Next Week; Are Free Agents Free Again in Baseball?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


JUDY SCAVONE, BANKER, IS WED TO TODD SLOTKIN
LEAD: At Temple Emanu-El in Manhattan, Judy Scavone and Todd Slotkin, vice presidents and senior credit officers of Citicorp, were married last evening by Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel.


Kundera's Shadow Colors 'Lightness'
LEAD: EARLY IN ''THE UNBEARABLE Lightness of Being,'' Daniel Day Lewis stares at women.
Tomas, the character he portrays, is a Czechoslovak brain surgeon whose easeful life will soon be wrenched apart - by undesired love, by the Russian military invasion of Prague in 1968 - but for now he has a look Don Juan might envy.


Who's On First?
LEAD: THERE ARE TIMES WHEN Bordeaux fanatics can really get to you. Even in Bordeaux.


EXAMS FOR POLICE STIR WIDE DEBATE
LEAD: Calvin Ayres wants to be the first black police officer in Lufkin, an East Texas town of 30,000 people about 150 miles from here.
But first he has to pass the police entrance examination, and therein lies a problem.


ISRAELI CONFIRMS BACKING PIPELINE
LEAD: Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres confirmed today that his Government gave the United States assurances in 1985 that Israel would not interfere with the construction of an Iraqi oil pipeline through neighboring Jordan.


U.S. Cautions Doctors On Use of Flu Vaccine
LEAD: The flu vaccine in current use may not give optimal protection against this winter's most prevalent type of influenza, Government scientists say.


JOINT ISSUE CELEBRATES A BICENTENNIAL
LEAD: AUSTRALIA'S bicentennial celebration is underscored by a joint issue.
First day ceremonies were held in Washington, D.C., and Sydney last Tuesday, Australia Day, which marked the first European settlement in Australia.
The 22-cent commemorative issued by United States Postal Service is the 19th cooperative stamp or stationery item released by the Postal


Confident St. John's Catches Seton Hall
LEAD: It's tempting to feel sorry for Coach P. J. Carlesimo and his Seton Hall Pirates.


Trump: Symbol of a Gaudy, Impatient Time
LEAD: Not since the first William Zeckendorf rose to prominence in the 1950's has a real-estate developer loomed so large in the public mind as Donald Trump.
Part of this, of course, is Mr.
Trump's propensity for naming his projects after himself - there is Trump Tower, Trump Plaza, Trump Parc, as well as Trump's Castle and Trump Plaza in Atlantic City - but a great deal of it is the manner in which Mr.


Taking Off From Tucson
LEAD: SOUTHERN ARIZONA.
To an Easterner who had never traveled to this corner of the United States before, the image Tucson and its vicinity brought to mind was of vast, dusty plains, an expanse broken only by the profile of a straggly cactus.
But, in fact, the natural beauty of this section of the Grand Canyon State is startlingly diverse; day trips from Tucson will take the traveler from the lush coolness of a mountain canyon to the raw beauty of a forest of saguaro cactuses.


Specialists
LEAD:  WASHINGTON  Punter: 12 Cox  Kickoffs: 12 Cox  Field-Goal Kicker: 6 Haji-Sheikh  Holder: 10 Schroeder  Punt Returner: 28 Green  Kick Returner: 35 Griffin  DENVER  Punter: 2 Horan  Kickoffs and Field Goals: 3 Karlis  Holder: 8 Kubiak  Punt Returner: 27 Clark  Kick Returner: 35


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Robocop  Starring Peter Weller, Nancy Allen, Daniel O'Herlihy, Ronny Cox.
Directed by Paul Verhoeven. 1987.
Orion Home Video. 103 minutes. $89.98.
Rated R.


SUSAN HENRY TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Susan F. Henry, a senior analyst for Integrated Resources in New York, to Glenn E. Higgins, a senior research analyst for Salomon Brothers in Atlanta, has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Henry of Valley Stream, L.I., parents of the bride-to-be.
Her fiance, a son of Margaret Higgins of Maplewood, N.J., and the late Edward Higgins, graduated from the Virginia Military Institute and received an M.B.A.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the appointment of the jurors for the 1988 Pulitzer Prizes misstated the date the appointments were announced.
It was Jan. 20.


MYOPIC INADEQUACIES OF L.I. HIGHWAYS
LEAD: The Dec. 20 article ''The Expressway: Is a Fourth Lane in Sight?'' imperatively spotlights this massive, myopic example of the highway inadequacies impeding our Long Island economy and life style.


Critics Say 'Privatizing' the Post Office Is Long Overdue
LEAD: Since 1983, postal officials have boasted of machinery that could sort a letter right to a specific carrier - if it bore a nine-digit zip code.
Unfortunately, nearly everybody else thought four extra digits were four too many, so most letters didn't get sorted so quickly after all.


Round-the-World Mark Aids Charity
LEAD: Riding a strong tailwind, a Boeing 747SP on a mission for children's charity smashed the round-the-world speed record today, landing here 36 hours 54 minutes 15 seconds after takeoff.


Nicaragua Frees American Pilot
LEAD: An American jailed and charged with anti-Government activities after his small plane was shot down last month was released to a United States Senate candidate and a group of lawyers today and flown to Los Angeles.


DR. PHYLLIS SCHMIEDEBERG MARRIES SCOTT SHERMAN
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
Phyllis Schmiedeberg to Scott M. Sherman took place yesterday at the Burden Mansion in New York.
Acting Justice Jacqueline W. Silbermann of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, who is also the supervising judge of the Civil Court in Manhattan, officiated.


Pre-Game Hoopla
LEAD: Fireworks exploded over San Diego Marina Friday night and fans crowded vendors' stands outside the stadium yesterday. (NYT/Barton Silverman)


Tet Offensive: Turning Point in Vietnam War
LEAD: At 3 o'clock in the morning of Jan. 31, 1968, North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces launched a wave of simultaneous attacks on South Vietnamese and American forces in major cities, towns and military bases throughout South Vietnam.


Music: Ives's 'Holidays Symphony,' in Focus Series
LEAD: THE Juilliard School ended its weeklong ''Focus'' series, devoted to interactions between American vernacular music and the art music we call ''classical,'' with Charles Ives's ''Holidays Symphony'' Friday evening at Alice Tully Hall.
The performance, under Paul Zukofsky, was worthwhile: a reminder that there is broad music of deep feeling woven throughout this piece, which has been played rather infrequently since its overexposure in the years of the Ives centennial and the nation's bicentennial.


Four Correction Officers Demoted at Sing Sing
LEAD: Four senior correction officers at Sing Sing have been demoted and transferred after an investigation late last year indicated that they were ineffective in stopping drug smuggling by guards, gambling and sex between inmates and female guards, the commissioner of New York State corrections said yesterday.


HANDBAG HEFT: CLUE TO AGE
LEAD: THE size of a woman's purse is directly related to her age.
The same is true of her attitude toward wristwatches.


BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 31, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
13
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom
Wolfe. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.95.) A bond
trader caught in the jungles of New York.
2
2
10
THE TOMMYKNOCKERS, by Stephen King.


TOBIAS 'SCULPTURAL PAINTINGS' IN RUTGERS ZIMMERLI SHOW
LEAD: ABRAHAM Joel Tobias hasn't had a show since the mid-1930's, but he has made several murals.
The earliest, done for the post office in Clarendon, Ark., is dated 1942; the most recent is a fresco, ''History of Science,'' that the artist worked on from 1960 to 1975 but for some reason left incomplete.


FICTION
LEAD:  TITCH.
By Chaim Bermant. (St. Martin's, $13.95.) Chaim Bermant's brief eighth novel closely resembles the oft-told tale of the American Jew who comes of age during World War II, discovering in wartime his Americanness as well as his ambivalence about his Jewish identity.
The differences in ''Titch'' are that its bookish Jewish youth, the repository of his immigrant family's ambitions, is British; that the locale is neither the Bronx, Brooklyn nor Newark but Manchester; and that the forbidden fruits are rashers and the granddaughters of baronets.


INSIDE
LEAD:  James R. Killian Jr. Dies


A Witches' Brew to Create a Clone
LEAD: A COVEN of smaller technology companies announced recently that it had stirred together the silicon equivalent of eye of newt and toe of frog, wool of bat and tongue of dog.
From this brew, it said, would come the makings of a clone of the new Personal System/2 line of computers from I.B.M.


Sihanouk, Citing Feud, Resigns as Coalition Head
LEAD: Prince Norodom Sihanouk resigned today as the nominal head of the three-party coalition of Cambodian guerrilla forces fighting Vietnamese troops occupying Cambodia.


AS THEY LAY DYING
LEAD:  BLOOD LINE  Stories of Fathers and Sons.
By David Quammen. 169 pp.
St.
Paul: Graywolf Press.
Paper, $8.


'GIVE US A SHOT AT SOMETHING'
LEAD: RACHEL AND HER CHILDREN  Homeless Families in America.
By Jonathan Kozol. 261 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $16.95.


Senator Returns Donations From a Contributor to Hart
LEAD: Senator John F. Kerry of Massachusetts has returned campaign contributions that a former employee of the video producer Stuart Karl has alleged were illegally donated, a spokesman for Mr.
Kerry said today.


'FAST GIRLS' IN TEANECK, 'BILOXI' AT THE PAPER MILL
LEAD: ''FAST GIRLS,'' the American Stage Company's new comedy, is about sex and the single woman in the age of AIDS anxiety.


BECKY WEAN TO WED ROBERT STILIN IN APRIL
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond John Wean Jr. of Palm Beach, Fla., and Pittsburgh have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sara Rebecca Wean, to Robert Scott Stilin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Stilin of Mellen, Wis.
An April wedding is planned.


Transactions
LEAD: BASKETBALL


WAR, DISEASE, SLAVERY AND POISONED WELLS
LEAD:  AMAZON FRONTIER  The Defeat of the Brazilian Indians.
By John Hemming. 647 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $29.95.


FINANCIAL FIRMS SHOWING SIGNS OF A SLOWDOWN
LEAD: AFTER some great years, the financial-services industry in the state is showing signs of slowing down.


The Secondary Market for Mortgages
LEAD: WHEN Citicorp recently announced layoffs in its North American investment bank, including many in the mortgage-backed securities department, some people wondered whether the cutbacks signaled an industry contraction that could mean less money for residential mortgages - and ultimately higher rates.


Addicts to Get Needles in Plan To Curb AIDS
LEAD: The Cuomo administration, reversing an earlier stand, will let New York City distribute clean needles to hundreds of drug addicts as part of an experiment to reduce the spread of AIDS, officials familiar with the administration's thinking said today.


Eagle Caught Up In Irish Adventure
LEAD: AN Irish bald eagle?
Hardly.
But how did it get to a field near Killarney, Ireland, where it was found exhausted and almost starved last Nov. 18?


STREETSCAPES: 1020 Madison Avenue; A Lonely Rowhouse Ignored By Two Historic Districts
LEAD: THE five-story house at 1020 Madison Avenue, built in 1913, looks no different from the other rowhouses in its Upper East Side neighborhood.
But it is a sort of orphan, inexplicably marooned just outside the invisible boundaries of the two historic districts that cover most of the area.


New Drug Rules
LEAD: TRACK and field's governing body, the International Amateur Athletic Association, has toughened its anti-drug rules while calling for Americans to ''cure'' their legal barriers to random testing.


Car Stereo: A Turn for the Better
LEAD: Music keeps chang-ing venue.
From church and palace, it moved to the public concert hall as its chief abode.
Then the parlor piano and later the phonograph and radio brought music into the living room.
And now it seems that music is on the move again, in more than one way.
These days, much of it is heard in cars.


JILL B. JEFFERY IS AFFIANCED
LEAD: Mrs.
Carleton Jeffery of Greenwich, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter Jill Burr Jeffery to Mark E. Garvin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Everett Garvin of Groton, Mass.
The couple plan to marry in June.


Sometimes, Fans Go Too Far
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


'A PROCESS SO FRAGILE WE FORGET HOW MIRACULOUS IT IS'
LEAD: AT exactly 3:33 P.M. on Jan. 16, 1987, in the midst of a week punctuated by power outages, cold fronts and a wave of snowstorms, my daughter, Julia, forced her way kicking and screaming into the world.


Johnson, Monk Activated
LEAD: Vance Johnson of the Denver Broncos and Art Monk of the Washington Redskins, two of pro football's best receivers, were activated today for Super Bowl XXII on Sunday.


Maine Couple Pick Up Lives After Nightmare
LEAD: The painting of two blond-haired children on the outside of what was once the Mother Goose Nursery School is faded now.
The small desks and chairs and brightly colored pictures are no longer inside.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: San Diego Trips  Question:I would like to take a cruise of three days or so from San Diego down the coast of Baja California, Mexico.
If there is such a cruise, on a small ship, who administers it? - Z. C. M., New York, N.Y.
Answer:Opportunities for a short cruise of this kind are limited.


Question Of the Week; WHO WILL WIN THE SUPER BOWL?
LEAD: It all comes down to John Elway, the Bronco quarterback , against Doug Williams, Redskin quarterback.
No contest.
The Broncos will win, making the 1988 Super Bowl almost as boring as the last two Super Bowl games.
R.
M.
FETTER  Jenkintown, Pa.


New York State Harvests: A Mixed Picture
LEAD: New York farmers grew more apples, grapes, sour cherries, cabbage and sweet corn in 1987 than the year before, but fewer pears, sweet cherries and onions, according to a series of year-end farm reports issued this week, They also received less money for their fruit and vegetable crops last year, $308 million, compared with $324 million in 1986, a drop of 5 percent, the State Agricultural Statistics Service said.


TESTING THE POWERS OF SPECIAL PROSECUTORS
LEAD: THE challenge by the Reagan Administration and others to the constitutionality of court-appointed special prosecutors will soon come before the Supreme Court.
The Watergate-inspired law provides for independent counsels to investigate possible crimes by high-level officials.
Many conservatives assail the statute as a flagrant invasion of the President's authority to enforce the laws.


Does Rock Merit Subsidy?
LEAD: An article tucked away in a recent Billboard magazine and filed for future reference reports that Australia, which already provided a modest sum (slightly more than $50,000) in such support in 1985, is considering a significant expansion in public subsidies for rock music.
The debate in that country apparently revolves around such questions as who should administer the funds, whether they are better provided for international touring bands or for mid- or entry-level groups, and so forth.


Bearing Witness
LEAD: THREE YEARS ago, when I suggested an article to the editors of this magazine on ''the human cost of AIDS,'' most reporting on the epidemic was scientific in nature and people with AIDS were often portrayed as faceless victims.
By profiling a man with AIDS and his volunteer counselor from Gay Men's Health Crisis, I proposed to show the devastating impact AIDS was having on a few individual lives.


CHERNOBYL LEGACY: RUSSIANS WARY, TOO
LEAD: DESPITE the Chernobyl accident in 1986, in which 31 people died after a reactor exploded, the Soviet Union has clung to its ambitious plans for developing nuclear power.
By the turn of the century, Soviet officials hope to double - to more than 20 percent - the percentage of electricity generated by nuclear reactors.


CONFUSING A CARNIVORE
LEAD: TWO decades ago bridge was a recreation of the capitalist countries, spurned by the communist world as a bourgeois pursuit that promotes gambling.
But times have changed.


COLD-WEATHER CRISIS: RESTARTING THE FURNACE
LEAD: WHEN the furnace shuts down or will not start, puzzled homeowners often panic.
But you will be doing yourself and utility personnel a favor, particularly in storms or cold snaps when service crews are strained, by trying to restart the furnace yourself.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; For Connecticut, Home-Grown Modulars
LEAD: ON Feb. 20, the model of a modular home built in the Victorian style is to be unveiled on Peck's Lane in Newtown, a first step in a new era for prefabricated housing in Connecticut.


DATE WITH A WOLF MAN
LEAD:  THE CONSOLATION OF NATURE  And Other Stories.
By Valerie Martin. 147 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $16.95.


Wilderness Caesars and Their Wives
LEAD: To the Editor:


Arizona Governor Won't Quit; Recall Vote Set
LEAD: Declaring, ''I have broken no laws,'' Gov.
Evan Mecham said today he would not resign but instead will run in a recall election to keep his job.


Winston-Salem
LEAD: To the Editor: As a long-time resident of Winston-Salem, N.C., I was interested in ''Forums for Art and Design in North Carolina'' (Travel, Dec. 13), which mentioned five museums in our city, but I was disappointed that there was no mention of Salem Academy and College, the distinguished institutions for women founded in 1772 by the Moravians and still in existence.


FORD'S ALL-WHEEL DRIVE
LEAD: PLASTIC garbage cans are a boon to those of us who work nights and sleep days.


Giants Look Like Only Repeaters
LEAD: OF last season's four division winners, the St.
Louis Cardinals can't possibly repeat this year because they lost Jack Clark and the Mets have, on Jan. 31 at least, the best team in baseball; the Detroit Tigers will have trouble repeating because they have lost Kirk Gibson and they have Toronto, Milwaukee and the Yankees to contend with, and the Minnesota


WHEN THE WORLD LACKS A LEADER
LEAD: Japan's growing economic strength is gradually dislodging the United States as the dominant economic power of the non-Communist world.
But despite its gains, Japan remains unwilling - and probably unable - to shoulder many of the responsibilities that have traditionally gone with global leadership, according to many economists and historians.


ON BATTERY POWER
LEAD: WAY back when, all photographers ever needed to know about batteries was their size.
There were AA ''penlight'' cells and C- and D-size ''flashlight'' cells.
Those were the days when cameras were mechanical marvels full of gears and springs and flash units looked like potato mashers.


Father Threatens Son's Life For 7 Hours Before Giving Up
LEAD: A domestic dispute turned into a tense standoff in Forest Hills, Queens, yesterday between the police and a distraught father who theatened to jump out of a seventh-floor window with his year-old son.


Opponents of Aid to Contras To Start Broadcast Campaign
LEAD: Opponents of aid to the Nicaraguan rebels will begin airing four television and radio advertisements in 17 targeted Congressional districts represented by House members or Senators who are undecided or wavering in their support of contra assistance.


STATE SUES WATERBURY ON RACIAL BALANCE
LEAD: IN its first court test of a 1969 school desegregation law, the state has filed a suit to force Waterbury to balance the racial enrollments at an elementary school in the city.


A BENEVOLENT AND BRUTAL PATERNALISM
LEAD:  LIKE A FAMILY  The Making of a Southern Cotton Mill World.
By Jacquelyn Dowd Hall, James Leloudis, Robert Korstad, Mary Murphy, Lu Ann Jones and Christopher B. Daly.
Illustrated. 468 pp.
Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.
Cloth, $34.95.
Paper, $12.95.


Rome, Hollywood Style
LEAD:  QUO VADIS  Starring Robert Taylor (in photo), Deborah Kerr, Leo Genn, Peter Ustinov.
Produced by Sam Zimbalist.
Directed by Mervyn LeRoy. 1951.
MGM/UA Home Video. 171 minutes (2 cassettes). $89.95.


TURNPIKE GROWTH IS A PARTNERSHIP
LEAD: LARGE-SCALE construction programs, whther private sector or public, must be planned, designed and implemented in a partnership between need and nature.
Such partnerships must balance the need for the project with sensitivity to its impact on the natural environment.


Harry Reichenbaum; Lawyer, 63
LEAD: Harry Reichenbaum, a lawyer who specialized in negligence and medical malpractice cases, died of a heart attack Monday at Jacobi Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 63 years old and lived in Roslyn, L.I.


BUON APPETITO!
LEAD: FOR THE PAST decade, the most persistent culinary enthusiasm in America has been for Italian food.
Witness the continuing proliferation of Italian restaurants.


The Chinese Hear Why It's O.K. for Some to Get Rich First
LEAD: SOME people are getting rich, while many other Chinese are complaining about rising cabbage prices.
Gambling is on the rise.
And the press is full of reports of extravagant weddings, jealousies over individual successes and soaring divorce rates.
At the same time, the power of petty and not so petty Communist


KAY LIVES WITH FEAR OF ADDICTION
LEAD: In and around the Rocky Mountains, and wherever people wear orange with a passion during the football season, the moment is remembered as the one that changed a Super Bowl.


PORSCHE TEAM ENJOYS LUXURY
LEAD: Karl Durkheimer's new home-built Porsche 911 race car was transported from Portland, Ore., to Florida in an enclosed trailer, towed by a new six-seat truck for the start of the SunBank 24 Hours of Daytona yesterday.


PATRICIA E. HARRIS IS WED TO LAWYER
LEAD: Patricia E. Harris, the executive director of the New York City Art Commission and an assistant to Mayor Koch, and Mark D. Lebow, a lawyer who is the chairman of the City Civil Service Commission, were married last evening at the Pierre in New York.
Rabbi Richard J. Jacobs officiated.


THE MANY WAYS OF USING VERSATILE NUTS
LEAD: RECORD crops of nuts, especially walnuts and almonds, were harvested this fall in California, according to the Department of Agriculture.
This volume is good news for consumers.
Wholesale prices for walnuts are below last year's levels and almond production was more than double last year with prices also lower.


THE SCHOOLS NEED PARENTS IN WAR ON AIDS
LEAD: THE schools are being asked to lead the battle against AIDS, whether fully prepared or not, and to do so hurriedly in a desperate race against worldwide tragedy.


KATHRYN GRINER ENGAGED TO WED G. H. MEHLMAN
LEAD: Kathryn Griner and G. Hamilton Mehlman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Mehlman of Brookline, Mass., plan to marry in August, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Griner 3d of Portola Valley, Calif., have announced.


Unwed Mother In Job Dispute
LEAD: CRYSTAL CHAMBERS was a part-time arts-and-crafts teacher when the Girls Club of Omaha discharged her in 1981 because she was pregnant out of wedlock.
She has been battling her dismissal since.


MAUREEN WALSH TO MARRY MAY 7
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Dr. and Mrs.
Andrew C. Walsh of Cumberland Center, Me., of the engagement of their daughter Maureen Anne Walsh to Jonkheer Ferdinand Folef Hooft Graafland, a son of Lydia Z. Hooft Graafland-Stahl of Wassenaar, the Netherlands, and the late Jonkheer Folef Ferdinand Joan Hooft Graafland.


To Expel Troublesome Students or Keep Them in School
LEAD: To the Editor:


COMPANY BUYOUTS ASSAILED IN STUDY
LEAD: The increased borrowing of large sums of money by managers of publicly owned companies who want to to make the companies private has contributed to excessive levels of corporate debt, a study by the Congressional Research Service says.


Romance of Hats
LEAD: HAVE hats, will travel: that's Laurie Kaye's motto.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I have a chair whose frame is made of white plastic that has discolored to an uneven beige.
Yet a painted metal brace is still white.
Is there any way to clean or bleach the plastic, or is there a white paint I can apply?


Collectors and Curious Buy Marcos Bric-a-brac
LEAD: There were none of the legendary pairs of shoes.
There were none of the cushions with the pithy sayings, such as ''Nouveau riche is better than no riche at all,'' and none of the formal portraits that were actually blown-up photographs, painted over in oils.


SICK THINKING
LEAD: I have earned both a bachelor's degree in communications and a master's degree in journalism while receiving chemotherapy and radiation treatment for leukemia.


INTELLECTUAL SEDUCTION
LEAD: One of Mikhail Gorbachev's more heartening traits is his willingness to break through the barriers of bureaucracy and protocol to reach the people.
The trouble with Joyce Carol Oates's essay on the Soviet Embassy reception for artists and intellectuals is that she was embarrassed by what people were saying - the woman with tears in her voice welcoming Gorbachev with wide-open arms, the man with the scheme to send thousands of Americans to Russia.


MEMORIES OF A TEACHER AND OF A BROTHER
LEAD: Credit is due to Anthony Robinson  [ ''Saying Hello to My Teacher of the 1940's,'' Opinion Page, Jan. 3 ] .
His memories of the good old days at St.
Pascal's brought back my own share of smiles and tears.
In particular, I too have fond memories of Sister Devota Maria, a kind and courageous teacher.


About Men; A Son on His Own
LEAD: SHORTLY AFTER GRADUATING from high school next June, my son will join the Navy.
He announced this decision - which I don't much like - by telephone, just before arriving for one of his holiday visits from the Middle West, where he lives with his mother.


BETS ARE HEDGED IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
LEAD: Call it political inverse proportion, or whatever, but the closer the Feb. 16 New Hampshire Presidential primary gets, the more the voters and campaign workers here seem to hedge their bets.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Turkeys and Then Some  IF it's a gaggle of geese and a flock of sheep, what do you call a group of turkeys? (You can have fun with that one for a while.) Whatever you call them, a whole lot of turkeys are gobbling away at the Connetquot River State Park in Oakdale.
The 3,500-acre park is home to about 50 to 60 wild 20-pound turkeys, although, as a New York State park ranger, Gary Lawton, said, ''These turkeys aren't really so wild - they're somewhat tame because they're so used to seeing people in the park.


Davis Looks Ahead
LEAD: HE has been the National Basketball Association's rookie of the year, he has been an All-Star six times, he has been in drug rehabilitation twice and he is 33 years old, so Walter Davis, the career scoring leader for the Phoenix Suns, figured it was about time to think about the future.
Yesterday, he said he planned to retire after the 1988-89 season and to devote his time to a youth drug-abuse treatment center he is founding in Phoenix.


Peggy Lee at 67: Still in the Swingtime of Her Life
LEAD: As a shy, frightened little girl of 8 growing up in Jamestown, N.D., Peggy Lee had a childhood obsession: aviation.


DATA UPDATE: January 31, 1988
LEAD:
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Dec. 87
Dec. 86
Change
New York
389.0
344.3
13%
New Jersey
293.4
269.4
9%
Connecticut
158.6
134.9
18%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 31, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
(Signet/NAL, $4.50.) A fairy tale, complete with
an aged king, an evil wizard and a mouse.
2
12
WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
(Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.


POSTINGS: New Headquarters in Mahwah; Jaguar to Build on a 20-Acre Site
LEAD: The Jaguar XJ6 has a 195 horsepower, 24 valve, 3.6 liter fuel-injected engine.
The four-door sedan has leather seats, a walnut dashboard and a top speed of 150 miles an hour.
It goes from zero to 60 in 10.5 seconds.
Price: $43,500.


Poland Increasing Food Prices by 40%
LEAD: The Polish Government announced sweeping price increases tonight, including a rise in retail food prices averaging 40 percent.


Amtrak Crash Inquiry Seeks Tower Operator
LEAD: Federal investigators today were still trying to contact an Amtrak control tower operator who fled after a passenger train derailed Friday when it hit a maintenance vehicle on a track that should have been closed.


A CORRECTION
LEAD: The name of the writer of the Focus article on Nebraska farm real estate on Jan. 10 was misspelled.
The correct spelling is Dick Herman.


Michigan G.O.P. Elects Rival Slates
LEAD: The Michigan Republican Party's long and fractious contribution to the process of selecting the next President of the United States ended today in a political production of upstairs, downstairs.


CANDIDATES HAVE BECOME A DEBATING SOCIETY
LEAD: In the midst of an exhausting string of debates, the Presidential candidates are wondering whether they are worth it.


Antiques; French Empire Rules at the Armory
LEAD: Period French chairs and commodes are more visible than they have been for many years at the Winter Antiques Show, which continues through today at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 66th Street.
There is, however, a dramatic difference.
For the first time at the nation's most prestigious antiques show, now in its 34th year, 19th-century styles - Empire through Art Nouveau - upstage those of the 18th century at most of the 11 dealers' booths where


Headliners; Postponing in Florida
LEAD: For the sixth time, Willie Jasper Darden has broken a date with death.
The United States Supreme Court last week blocked the execution of the Florida prison inmate, who was scheduled to be electrocuted this week for the 1973 murder of a Lakeland merchant, pending his latest appeal, which will be heard after the Court reconvenes next month.


New York Says Thanks To 'Ultimate Volunteer'
LEAD: His lyric tenor filling the room, Bishop Joseph M. Sullivan of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn offered a ballad about love.


Iowa Tactic: Shake the Hand That Shook the Hand of . . .
LEAD: Representative Marvin Leath of Texas seemed disappointed.
Here he had come all the way from Waco to persuade Charlie Gross, an Iowa farmer, to support Representative Richard A. Gephardt in next month's Democratic caucus, and Mr.
Gross confessed he was still leaning to Senator Paul Simon.


Tarte Flambee From Alsace
LEAD: IN the dialect spoken in Alsace, flammekueche means ''cooked in the flames''; the French flambee has a similar meaning.
Whatever it's called, tarte flambee is to northern Alsace what pizza is to southern Italy.


GERONIMO AND PRINCESS ALICE AND A WRITER'S CAREER
LEAD: DURING the summer of 1904, my parents, my little brother and I lived in St.
Louis, in one large room, of which we had only the privacy of curtained-off corners.


PIPELINE DEAL: INTRIQUE IN HIGH PLACES
LEAD: Shortly after Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter became national security adviser in December 1985, a predecessor in the job offered him sober advice about a billion dollar Iraqi oil pipeline project that was supported by the National Security Council and by President Reagan.


Hutton's End
LEAD: To the Editor:


DURABLE STRATEGIES HAND ON DESPITE FAILURE
LEAD: PUT a strategy into the mind of the chessplayer and it stays there, embedded, forever.
It may fail miserably, yet that's not enough to expel it.
There are always myriad tactics to explain why the plan failed.
If the idea enjoyed one meager triumph, it might just as well have been hammered into Mount Sinai.


Bistate Team to Help Homeless Is Proposed
LEAD: A bistate crisis team should be formed to deal with the needs of homeless people who have established almost permanent homes in public transportation centers, the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  A TIME FOR GIANTS: Politics of the American High Command in World War II.
By D. Clayton James with Anne Sharp Wells. (Franklin Watts, $19.95.) A distinguished historian and the author of the well-received three-volume biography ''The Years of MacArthur'' here focuses attention on the careers of 18 top American military leaders.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD: Bridgewater  $131,700  178 Leghorn Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; remodeled kitchen, deck, full basement; taxes $1,318.
Denville  $255,000  68 Kitchell Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old ranch; wall-to-wall carpeting, C/A, family room; taxes $2,400.


No Bragging For U.S.F.L.
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


LAURA YORKE, EDITOR, WEDS
LEAD: The marriage of Laura Best Yorke, a daughter of Lane Harvey Yorke of New York and Aaron Jones Yorke 4th of New York and Southampton, L.I., to Thomas Peter Kikis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter T. Kikis of New York and Nassau, the Bahamas, took place yesterday at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.


RANGE OF PROGRAMS SET FOR BLACK HISTORY MONTH
LEAD: ROSA L. PARKS, who refused to relinquish her bus seat to a white man in Montgomery, Ala., in 1955, will be among the speakers visiting the state for celebrations of National Black History Month, which begins tomorrow.


DR. STEINBERG ENGAGED
LEAD: A June wedding is planned by Dr.
Ricki Ellyn Steinberg, a senior resident in pediatrics at Beth Israel Hospital, and Dr.
Dean Cory Mitchell, a senior resident in internal medicine at the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
The couple graduated from the Sackler School of Medicine in Tel Aviv.
Dr.


Social Events
LEAD: A Concert, a Tea, a Cruise  Black History Awards  Feb. 1 - The Associated Black Charities, comprising 59 health and service groups, is holding a Black History Makers Award and Benefit Concert to honor Marian Anderson and other leading figures.
The event opens with a cocktail party from 6 to 7:30 P.M.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''From our point of view, there were five main targets.
The American Embassy was one of them.''
Col. Do Tan Phong,  a Vietcong commander  in the Tet offensive in 1968.  [ 1:2. ]


LAUREN MOLLOY, DESIGNER, TO MARRY MARIO BUCCELLATI
LEAD: Lauren Rebecca Molloy and Mario Buccellati plan to marry in March, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
John Haywood Molloy of Newburgh, N.Y., have announced.


Miss Minnesota-U.S.A. Held On a Charge of Shoplifting
LEAD: Miss Minnesota-U.S.A. was arrested on a gross misdemeanor theft charge after a security guard at a department store here told police she was shoplifting, City Attorney Marsh Halberg said today.


KNICKS ROAD WOES GROW IN OVERTIME
LEAD: Sedale Threatt's basket from the right of the key with 55 seconds remaining in overtime tonight enabled the Chicago Bulls to defeat the Knicks, 97-95.
The loss extended the Knicks' road-game losing streak to 15; they have lost 20 of the last 21 on the road.


READING THE FRIENDLY SKIES
LEAD:  A HISTORY OF WESTERN ASTROLOGY  By S. J. Tester.
Illustrated. 256 pp.
Wolfeboro, N.H.: Boydell &amp; Brewer. $36.


Tensions Grow When the Prize Is the Next Presidency
LEAD: As he briefed reporters before the State of the Union address last Monday night, Howard H. Baker Jr., the White House chief of staff, insisted that President Reagan ''is very mindful of the fact that he was elected for eight years, not seven years.''


NONFICTION
LEAD:  COVENANT HOUSE: Lifeline to the Street.
By Bruce Ritter. (Doubleday, $16.95.) This book is a selection of epistles - monthly newsletters-cum-fundraising appeals - issued from Times Square.
The Rev.
Bruce Ritter is a remarkable Roman Catholic missionary to the runaway, castoff and abused street kids drawn into drugs and prostitution.


RESIDENTIAL RESALES
LEAD:  Closings in the week ending Jan.16  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $150,000  260 West 22d Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 600-sq.-ft. co-op in a renovated prewar building; fireplace, hardwood floors, northern exposure; maintenance $419, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: D.J. Knight Co.)


LEO'S HALL OF FAME: HITS AND ERRORS
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


On New Issues
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: Because of incorrect information provided by WNET, a picture on the first page of The Guide for Jan. 17 misidentified a performer in Benjamin Britten's ''Turn of the Screw.'' The woman pictured is Magdalena Vasaroya, who plays the role of the governess; the character's singing voice is that of Helen Donas.


PUTTING A CONSERVATION PLAN TO WORK
LEAD: THE National Fish and Wildlife Foundation is helping to implement the North American Waterfowl Management Plan, an ambitious and much-needed cooperative agreement that this country and Canada signed in 1986 but for which no funds were allocated.


Key Matchups For Broncos
LEAD: Dave Studdard, Broncos' offensive tackle, versus Dexter Manley, Redskins' defensive end - Manley is coming on after a sluggish season during which he had 8 1/2 sacks.
However, if he keeps his composure, he is the quickest and most dangerous pass rusher in this game, and he can disrupt an offense.
Studdard is not as skilled as Manley.


Bulgaria Planning Value Tax
LEAD: Bulgaria plans to introduce a Western-style value-added tax to accompany major increases in prices, a leading Communist Party official said today.
But the official, Emil Christov, a Central Committee Secretary, promised that wages would keep pace with the price rises.


SMALL-TOWN BENEFITS OF NEIGHBORS OUTWEIGH INCONVENIENCES
LEAD: THE bell rang as I was preparing dinner, and I wiped my hands on my apron and opened the door.
A golden-haired moppet of about 7 piped sweetly, ''Would you like to buy cookies for my Brownie troop?''


CHRISTIE WILLIAMS PLANS TO BE WED TO CATE MOFFETT
LEAD: The engagement of Mary Catherine Moffett to Christie Max Williams, a son of Ann L. Williams of Los Angeles and Robert C. Williams of Spencerville, Ontario, has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Moffett of Mystic, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.


Food Inspection Results
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 32 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


SICK THINKING
LEAD: The mental confusion of hospital patients recovering from surgery should not be surprising; general anesthesia wears off gradually and is known to produce such disorientation, even days afterward (Body and Mind: ''Sick Thinking,'' by Morton Hunt, Jan. 3).
More disturbing is the failure of Morton Hunt, and Dr.


Balsamic Vinegar
LEAD: To the Editor: The article on Balsamic vinegar by Anne Marshall Zwack (Travel, Jan. 3) left out an important bit of information for your readers.


THE MANY WAYS OF USING VERSATILE NUTS
LEAD: RECORD crops of nuts, especially walnuts and almonds, were harvested this fall in California, according to the Department of Agriculture.
This volume is good news for consumers.
Wholesale prices for walnuts are below last year's levels and almond production was more than double last year with prices also lower.


Reagan Presses Case for Aid to Nicaragua Rebels
LEAD: President Reagan said today that while the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua had made limited concessions toward greater democracy, continued military pressure by the contras was necessary to continue that progress.


Noah's Ark: The Sequel
LEAD: IT MAY SEEM WILDLY FUTURISTIC, but the whole idea actually recalls Noah's Ark.
Biosphere II, a completely enclosed, 2.25-acre, self-supporting ecosystem designed to accommodate plant, animal and human life, has been in the works since 1984 near Tucson, Ariz.
Supporters see the project as a hedge against the eventual extinction of life on Earth (aka, Biosphere I), as well as a step toward colonization of the Moon and Mars.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  YOUTH CONCERT


Dubious Tactics: F.B.I. Again Called Lax On Liberties
LEAD: As they pored over newly declassified documents last week, members of civil liberties groups wondered how much of the spirit of J. Edgar Hoover - a spirit that several successors have tried to exorcise since he died in 1972 - survives at the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


IT'S NEVER TOO EARLY TO PROTECT THE SHORE
LEAD: BETWEEN winter storm warnings and people wondering whether they can get one more season out of the brown overcoat, thoughts of the Jersey Shore are scarce.
Except in the State House.


Bernice Franklin; Nursing Supervisor, 79
LEAD: Bernice Franklin, a retired supervisor of pediatric nursing at New York Hospital, died of complications arising from Alzheimer's disease Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 79 years old.
Mrs.
Franklin was associated with New York Hospital for four years, retiring in 1940.
Earlier, she worked for the Nursery and Child's Hospital, which has since closed, on the West Side of


On Language; Grovel, Grovel, Grovel
LEAD: FIRST OFF, I OWE AN apology to Mikhail Gorbachev, author of ''Perestroika,'' whose book tour recently included a stop in Washington. (Why first off? Why not just first? Because I am being determinedly colloquial, and it's better than the awkward firstly.) With a loud ''Ah-hah!'', I quoted an anonymous refusenik catching the Soviet General Secretary using a Russian word that was kind of an insult to President Reagan.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I have a chair whose frame is made of white plastic that has discolored to an uneven beige.
Yet a painted metal brace is still white.
Is there any way to clean or bleach the plastic, or is there a white paint I can apply?


Sports of The Times; The Fabric of the Old-Boy Network
LEAD: SOME in the so-called news media have come to refer to Pete Rozelle's annual Super Bowl news conference - No.
XXII was held here on Friday - as a state of the union address.
That's the last thing it is.
It is, in fact, a state of management address.


SATELLITE MAP CENTER PLANNED
LEAD: RUTGERS UNIVERSITY'S department of environmental resources, which makes maps from satellite photographs for the state, has received a $10 million grant from the university's board of governors and plans to build a state-of-the-art center here on the campus.


WHY WE MUST INTEGRATE OUR SCHOOLS
LEAD: I WOULD like to summarize several points about the State Department of Education report on racial integration in our public schools that was presented to the State Board of Education earlier this month.
The report raises fundamental issues about excellence and equity in education, and a review of the facts helps brings the report and its goals into clear focus.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: Fare Tactics For Visitors To Australia


Question Of the Week; WHO WILL WIN THE SUPER BOWL?
LEAD: The Washington Redskins will triumph.
The tremendous dependence of the Bronco team on John Elway will allow the Redskin defense to focus chiefly on his activities.
This will result in the sharpening of the Redskin play as the game winds down, culminating in an exciting final two minutes, in which the Redskin defense will frustrate the Bronco offense.


At the Trade Talks, America Must Lead
LEAD: NEXT month, the 95 members of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade will reconvene in their Geneva headquarters to begin the second year of negotiations on revisions of world trade rules.
Watched with a good deal of fanfare in the fall of 1986 in Punta del Este, Uruguay, these negotiations are scheduled to end in 1990.


OTHMAN MAKES IT
LEAD:  RESPECTED SIR  By Naguib Mahfouz.
Translated by Rasheed El-Enany. 154 pp.
New York: Quartet Books/ Salem House Publishers. $13.95.


CELEBRITY MATCHMAKER: Marty Blackman Marrying Athletes and Endorsements
LEAD: The advertising agency executive, Marty Blackman recalled, was frantic.
He had just heard a rumor that a former football star serving as a spokesman for his client, a major soft drink company, was gay.
He wanted Mr.
Blackman to find out whether it was true.


LEO'S HALL OF FAME: HITS AND ERRORS
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


PUTTING THE SHELTER INTO PERSPECTIVE
LEAD: In response to ''Homeless Should Live Such a Dog's Life,''  [ Letters to the Westchester Editor, Jan. 10 ] , it is clear to see that the writer is a self-proclaimed animal lover but not a lover of animals.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  FRONTIER ARTISTS


Killings Laid to India Rebels
LEAD: Tribal rebels were blamed for the shooting deaths of 30 people in four attacks in northeastern Tripura state, the United News of India said today.
The authorities said the Tribal National Volunteers, an outlawed group seeking a separate state, was responsible for the killings Friday, the Government-run news agency said.


LEFISTS IN LOVE
LEAD:  THE BOOK AND THE BROTHERHOOD  By Iris Murdoch. 607 pp. New York: Viking. $19.95.


RANGERS EXTEND ROAD STREAK TO 3
LEAD: Playing again with minimum mistakes, the Rangers beat the Bruins, 4-2, today at the Boston Garden where the Bruins had compiled a .640 winning percentage this season.


A HOME AUDIO SYSTEM FINDS BUYERS AT $50,000
LEAD: ''GO ahead and turn the knob all the way to the right, then all the way back,'' said Mark Levinson, as he twirled a burnished aluminum dial.
The soprano voice coming from two sets of stereo speakers shot to singularly clear high-range notes.
He adjusted five other knobs, muting some sounds and bringing life to others.


CHALK UP ANOTHER ONE FOR THE BRITISH
LEAD: THE current fascination with all things British has certainly left its mark on well-dressed Americans.
Take the chalk-striped suit, for instance.
While it has never exactly disappeared from wardrobes on this side of the Atlantic, these days it seems to be asserting itself with a vengeance.


